Mr. Champion's DISCOURSES, On the General FAST, APRIL 18th, 1770.

A BRIEF VIEW OF THE DISTRESSES, HARDSHIPS AND DANGERS OUR ANCESTORS
ENCOUNTERED, IN SETTLING NEW ENGLAND -- THE PRIVILEGES WE ENJOY, AND OUR
OBLIGATIONS THENCE ARISING; WITH MORAL REFLECTIONS THEREUPON.

IN TWO SERMONS, DELIVERED AT LITCHFIELD, ON THE GENERAL FAST, APRIL 18, 1770.

BY JUDAH CHAMPION, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in LITCHFIELD.

Only fear the LORD, and serve him in Truth, and with all your Heart: For
consider how great Things he has done for you. But if ye shall still do
wickedly, ye shall be consumed. SAMUEL. Interque maeren^es amicos.
Egregtus properaret exul.
HORACE. HARTFORD: Printed by GREEN and WATSON, near the Great-Bridge,
M,DCC,LXX.

TO THE READER.
THE few histories of the settling of New England now extant, are very scarce
among the people in genaral; and the rising generation in particular, are very
much unacquainted with the distresses their ancestors encountered, whose zeal
and virtue should not be forgotten. -- It is apprehended a brief view of their
trials, hardships and perils, may not be altogether unprofitable to those few
of them who shall read the following discourses. The historical part is
somewhat more enlarged upon in some few instances here, than it was in the
delivery. As to any fasts, where the author conceived any disputes would arise
in the minds of any persons, he has carefully cited some of those authorities
which support them. Where no dispute in any minds was apprehended, he has been
loss sollicitous. Only a few brief hints could be given in these limited
discourses -- a complete history from some able hand, is ardently wished for.
Were those things related with that energy the importance of the subject calls
for, they could not fail of engaging universal attention. That our privileges,
civil and religious, may be continued inviolate, and that serious, devout,
heavenly spirit, which animated, and so happily distinguished our forefathers
may prevail, to the latest posterity, is the ardent prayer of

THE AUTHOR.

A brief View, etc.
DEUTERONOMY IV, 37, 38, 39, 40. AND because he loved thy Fathers, therefore he
chose their seed after them, and brought the^ out in his sight, with his mighty
power out of Egypt: To drive out nations from before thee, greater and mightier
than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as
it is this day. Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that
the LORD he is GOD in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none
else. Thou shall keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments which I
command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children
after thee; and that thou may prolong thy days upon the earth which the LORD
thy GOD gives thee, for ever.
THESE are some of the words of Moses, the man of GOD, which he spoke to the
children of Israel, the distinguished people of the LORD, not long before he
went from the plains of Moab unto the top of mount Pisgah, where that eminent
servant of the LORD expired. He reminds them of the wonderful things GOD had
done for them -- the statutes and judgments, in special given to them -- their
peculiar obligations faithfully to serve the LORD, and the dreadfully
aggravated doom, which would be the consequence of their neglect* Those things
were faithfully and very carefully to be transmitted to posterity. The rising
generation was to be led to an intimate and particular acquaintance with GOD's
wonderful works, and miraculous operations for that people. When they fas^ed
and humbled themselves before GOD for their sins, under a sense of heavens
frowns, in after generations, we find they took special notice of those
glorious things GOD had done for their fathers. Neh 9 Chap.
By reflecting upon which, they were brought more fully to that humility, which
is necessary to keep a fast to the LORD acceptably. Agreeable hereto, we find
Moses in our context, giving that people, a very solemn exhortation to
repentance and obedience, calling heaven and earth to testify against them,
that they should soon utterly perish from off the land which they were going to
possess, if they departed from the LORD and did evil in his sight. In this
solemn address they are led to consider what astonishing things GOD had done
for and before them; and their peculiar obligations thence arising, to fear and
serve the LORD. In what a grave and solemn, affectionate and striking manner
does Moses rehearse these things to them, from V.32 and onward: ask former ages
even from the days that GOD created man -- look to distant places, even from
one side of heaven to the other, whether there has been any thing known or
beard of, like what GOD has done for you? Did ever any people hear GOD
speaking to them from the midst of fire, as thou have heard and live? The
striking representation and affectionate address, he closes with the words of
our text. And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after
them, etc. Where Observe,

1. As GOD had a peculiar regard to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, so
GOD extended his compassionate regards and the tokens of distinguishing respect
to their offspring. Is not the same applicable to us and our fathers? -- GOD
took Abraham from his father's house, from his kindred and country; -- sent him
to set up GOD's true worship in a strange land. The Almighty took our fathers
from their native land, when the nation was in confusion, and they groaned
under spiritual tyranny, being extremely harrass'd, some cast into prisons,
others beset in their houses for worshipping GOD according to the dictates of
their own consciences, which was then prohibited. Vid. Pr. Chron. of N. E. V.1
P 23. Mort. Mem. P. 1 2.
GOD brought them into this land to set up his worship here. And
notwithstanding the refractoriness of their posterity, yet GOD has made them
his peculiar care. Observe,

2. GOD furnished them with the clearest evidences of his distinguishing
regard, by the wonderful things he had done for and in the midst of them. That
people had ocular demonstration of the most astonishing miracles and a series
of wonderful providence; some of which are enumerated in our text and verses
preceding. The angel of the covenant the LORD JESUS, under the character of
Israel's GOD and lawgiver spoke to them from the burning bush and quaking mount
-- took them by signs and terrors from the midst of another nation -- drove out
from before them nations greater and mightier than they were -- Og King of
Bashan, and Sihon King of Heshbon: giving his chosen their land for a
possession. Since the canon of scripture is full, miracles are not to be
expected: bateing which we shall find that which is very similar to this, in
the conduct of divine providence to our fathers; from before whom GOD has
driven out the nations that dwelt in this land. As they grew ripe for ruin,
filling up the measure of their sins, GOD gave us their land for an
inheritance, as (...) is this day.

3. THE improvement they were to make of these dispensations, in a solemn
manner urged. Consider in thine heart, the LORD he is GOD, and he alone --
supreme governor of all worlds -- infinitely wise, holy, just and good: Him you
are under peculiar advantages to know, and the most inviolable obligations to
obey -- to keep those statutes and commandments GOD had given them. They are
called upon and charged, seriously to consider what a being GOD is; what he had
done for them, and the obligations thence arising -- to transmit the knowledge
of them to future generations, and by holy lives, recommend true religion, the
worship and ordinances of GOD, to their offspring. Thus were they to perpetuate
the knowledge of these things, and that holy religion which GOD commanded, to
future ages. Our obligations are far from being inferior, nor is our duty less
important.

4. HERE are peculiar motives set before them, powerfully to induce and even
constrain them to the conscientious observance, and religious improvement of
these things. That it might go well with them -- that they might enjoy peculiar
comfort in life, having GOD's gracious presence with them -- divine protection
afforded -- see many good days here, enjoying spiritual and temporal blessings
in this world, and a blessed immortality beyond the grave. And that it, might
go well with their children; that they might be blessed in him in whom (it was
promised) all the nations of the earth should be blessed -- transmit to
posterity yet unborn, peculiar blessings and privileges unimpaired -- that
after having prolonged their days in that good land, and come to their graves
like a shock of corn fully ripe; still they, in their seed, might forever, even
to the latest generations dwell and be happy in that good land which the LORD
their GOD had given them by promise, and was now ready to introduce them to the
possession of. By a rich variety of interesting motives, GOD is graciously
pleased, to enforce man's duty. Not barely their own felicity, but the good of
their posterity is brought into the account. As those temporal blessings were
typical of celestial joys, so every thing for themselves, together with those
near and most dear to them, is suggested, to animate them to consider GOD's
works and obey his commands.

FROM the words of our text thus considered, a variety of considerations not
unsuitable to the present solemn occasion, offer themselves to serious
meditation. Particularly, we might consider, the infinite self-moving love and
mercy of GOD to fallen creatures; and how these have been displayed in various
ages. -- How GOD is a covenant keeping GOD, handing down blessings to his
people and their offspring -- what peculiar deliverances GOD grants his people
-- the ways and means, times and occasions of them. -- That it is infinitely
easy with the Almighty to drive out the strongest nations from before the
weaker; causing one to chase a thousand, and two to put ten thousand to flight.
But passing these without particular enlargement; the method proposed, on the
present occasion, is to consider, I. GOD requires (and humanly speaking
expects) his people to perpetuate the memory of his wonderful works. II. HOW
GOD has driven out the nations, the aboriginals, from before our fathers and
those of the present generation, to give us their land for an inheritance, as
it is this day. III. POINT out our peculiar obligations to know this day and
consider that the LORD he is GOD over all, and to keep his statutes and
commandments; that it may go well with us and our children, in the land which
the LORD our GOD has given us. IV. ENUMERATE some of those sins which will (if
indulged) provoke GOD to destroy those who have been distinguished as the
favorites of heaven. To which may be subjoined a brief Application.


I. GOD requires (and humanly speaking expects) his people to perpetuate the
memory of his wonderful works.

WHEN GOD passed before the children of Israel in a wonderful series of the
most astonishing, miraculous operations, he gave this in charge to them, Deuteronomy.
vi, 7-13, diligently to teach their children, etc. Moses Joshua, Samuel and
David, took special care to remind that people, of what GOD had done for them.
The man after GOD's own heart, when exhorting the people to praise and glorify
GOD, calls upon them to show his wonders among the heathen, and declare them
among all the people. Accordingly they showed forth these in the land of Ham.
Pf. ^^c. 3. c^. 27.
Psalms have been indicted to keep in remembrance the wonderful works of the
LORD See the title of lxxth psalm. For this, registers have been kept, as the
LORD commanded Moses, Exodus xvii, 14. -- Places have been named with this in
view. Thus Jacob called the place where he received so much mercy, Bethel, for
GOD was there. Hagar named the place where GOD relieved her Beer-labai-roi, the
well of him that lives and looks upon me. The Jews stamped mercies and
extraordinary works on the names of days. Those, in which GOD delivered them
from the horrid massacre designed by wicked Haman, they called Purim, after the
name Pur, signifying the lot he cast for their lives. -- Recognizing the
wonderful works of GOD was not confined to the former dispensation. When the
face of Stephen appeared as if it had been the face of an angel, how carefully
does ho recapitulate these in the viith chapter of the Acts -- The apostle Paul
speaks of those extraordinary things done, and judgments which heaven inflicted
on that people in 1 Corinthians. x. chapter -- Many other scriptures might be cited,
here in point, evincing it IS GOD's command, has been the practice and is the
duty of his people to perpetuate the memory of his wonderful works. And it is
reasonable, that as GOD commands, so he should, (humanly speaking) expect this.
There is in mankind a general desire of knowing things remarkable among men.
How solicitously then should the wonderful works of GOD be attended unto? When
these are handed down from age to age, they show forth the greatness and glory,
justice, or mercy, goodness or veracity of GOD; and tend to excite men to
consider in their hearts and know that the LORD he is GOD. This being realized,
has a natural tendency to fill the minds of intelligent beings, with a solemn
awe of the Supreme Majesty. Had mankind a proper sense of the infinite
greatness and glory of the Deity, what an happy influence would it have upon
their minds and morals! When they set the LORD before their faces, they will,
in some sense, live in his fear. -- How justly may it then be expected that
dependant, accountable beings should transmit to future generations, the
memorable and peculiarly affecting providence of GOD. This leads,

II. TO CONSIDER how GOD has driven out the nations, the aboriginals, from
before our fathers, and those of the present generation, to give us their land
for an inheritance, as it is this day.

ALL the providence of GOD harmonize, and are overruled for bringing about
the glorious designs of heaven; and so will continue 'till the scene of mutable
things here below, shall terminate in the final consummation of all things.
Some footsteps of divine providence, we may at present, briefly trace; showing
how we were brought to the possession of this good land, which the LORD our GOD
has given us. What future scenes we, (or posterity) may have to pass through,
GOD only knows. Innumerable, and to us inconceivable, were the trials, perils
and hardships, which our ancestors endured, in first settling of New England:
while briefly recollecting some few of which, I rely upon the candor, and hope
for the patience of this auditory; and that the rising generation in special,
(who have had but little opportunity to be acquainted with these things) may
receive some instruction and improve to the noblest purposes, these wonderful
works of the LORD.

OUR forefathers, by sad experience found, they could not peaceably enjoy their
liberty in their native country. Whereupon they resolved to remove into the
Netherlands. After many hindrances and difficulties, (which through the good
hand of GOD upon them they surmounted) they went from England to Holland about
the year 1608. Tarried about a year at Amsterdam -- then removed to Leyden;
where they lived above eleven years, in great love and harmony, both among
themselves and neighbor citizens. Prince's Chron of N. E. P. 26 27. Vol. 1.
But many things were not as they could wish -- the LORD's day was not strictly
observed by those among whom they sojourned -- the manners of the people were
too licentious* by which together with numbers of their children going to sea,
incorporating with that people and the like, they apprehended their posterity
to be greatly endangered. Upon the view or which, after having by fastings,
prayers and many tears, sought direction from the Father of Lights, they
determined for North America, and arrived at Plymouth, in the year A. D. 1620.
Some feeble attempts had been made to settle N. England, but 'till then proved
unsuccessful. Neal's Hist. N. E. Vol. 1. p. 8. 18, 19 Lieut. Gov. Huteh. Hilt.
Mas. V. 1. P. 3. Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Copt. Mason expended twenty thousand
pounds each, in attempts for settlement and each of them thought it advisable
to give over their designs, and sit down with the loss.
Though we live at the small remove of but a century and an half from their
first coming into this land, yet it is impossible for us to relate or fully
conceive the difficulties, perils and hardships they went through. They
exchanged a pleasant land for a howling wilderness. They left their native
country when a valuable part of the nation* groaned under deep felt oppression;
-- which infinite wisdom and goodness overruled, in its consequences, for a
great blessing to the world, a vast addition to the British empire and glory,
and a glorious enlargement of the Redeemer's kingdom on earth. The curse is
turned into a blessing. This is the LORD's doing and mavelous in our eyes. --
How affecting must be their parting from many of their nearest friends, dearest
relations, and native country, without prospect of seeing those dear friends
again 'till at CHRIST's bar. What flowing tears from every eye! What piercing
words from every tongue! What distress and anxiety possessed every heart! So
affectionate was their parting that strangers who were only spectators, could
not refrain from tears. How discouraging the prospect before them! The wide and
boistrous atlantic (which was then very much unknown) to be passed over. This
could not fail of being very trying, especially to tender female minds, while
they heard the cries and groans, and saw the sighings and tears of friends and
children. They were coming to an inhospitable shore, among savage barbarians,
whose tender mercies were cruelty. Dangers, distress and ten thousand
difficulties shared them full in the face. Yet, animated with noble sentiments
of liberty, they came hither. Dec. 31, 1620, being LORD'S day, was the first
sabbath they kept on shore, and in the house of their building; at which time
we may fix the era of the first settlement of N. England. After the
forementioned trials were passed through, they had immediately to encounter
hunger and cold, with great fear and danger, in the prosecution of their
settlement. The severity of the season, in a rigid climate, without any
convenient habitations, where the conveniences of life were all wanting, and
necessaries very scarce, was very dis-distressing. The hardships were too great
for a great part of them. Within two or three months one half of them who
arrived at Plymouth, were landed in eternity. Considering the fatigues of a
tedious voyage, the season when they arrived, the scarcity of their provisions,
and the like, it is a wonder any survived. Inexpressible were the hardships
they endured the first winter. N. Hilt. N. E. P. 95. Vol. 1.
Admire GOD'S hand which supported them. What was their support and comfort
under all these pressing trials and hardships, but this, that GOD was their
covenant GOD, and they were delivered from prelatical tyranny, and might
worship GOD according to the dictates of their own consciences? GOD had indeed
made way in his holy and wise providence, for their taking possession of this
land, by sending desolating sickness among the natives, which swept them away,
as with the besom of destruction. Some say nine tenths of the barbarians were
dead. Some places were almost depopulated. What was called the Massachusetts
tribe, being reduced from thirty thousand to three hundred fighting men; and
that the inhabitants of that place to which the first settlers came all died in
a few years before the English came and settled there -- None remained to claim
that place, or hinder their taking possession. N Hist, V 7. P.96.
This was the LORD's doing. -- That there had been multitudes many ages before,
upon this continent, none dispute. Our forefathers found they had been
numerous, and could give no account of their original, having no records among
them.

THE mortality among the natives, just before the settlement of N*England, was
chiefly near the place where the first planters settled. Probably it was in
mercy they were disappointed of going to Hodson's river, the natives swarming
there at that very time. It was supposed the Captain of their (...) was bribed,
but GOD meant it four good.
GOD laid wonderful restraints upon the heathen, and stopped the rage of those
that survived, to give our fathers a peaceable settlement. -- When they were
but a few men in number, yea very few and strangers -- be suffered no man to do
them wrong, yea be reproved kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm. GOD bro't forth a vine, planted it, made
room for it, defended and protected it. Whose is wise, and will observe these
things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord! As GOD took
care of his people, so within a few years, GOD sent another mortal disease (the
small pox) among the Indians, (in 1533) which destroyed multitudes of them. But
still there were vast numbers of the Natives. Nor was it long after the English
came to Plymouth, before they were alarmed with the news of a general
conspiracy formed by the Indians, entirely to extirpate the English;
notwithstanding all their professions of friendship. This distressing alarm was
when mortal sickness prevailed in the midst of our primogenitors in this land,
and when they were almost destitute of the staff of life, not having provision
for a fortnight. Ad. Fall Disc. P.13. 13.
But GOD sent, as among the Babel-builders of old, confusion and disagreement
among the savages; which was a means, under God, of their not utterly
destroying the first settlements which were generally in a very defenseless
state. What a melancholy scene opened to view, when thousands round them sought
their ruin, and famine among them, threatened their destruction! but the Lord
delivered them. It was but two years after another conspiracy was formed ( viz.
in 1635) by the natives in the eastern parts, to destroy all the English. This
was discovered, and happily prevented. Cardinal Richlieu, attempted their
expulsion the same year, which filled them with fearful apprehensions, and
excited them to provide in the best manner they could for their safety. Hist.
Miss. V. 1. p. 28, etc.
These were very severe and threatening trials to an handful of people, involved
in almost every trouble; while some of their youth were enfeebled by the
hardships they endured, and the infirmities of old age were brought upon those
who had scar^e seen twenty one years.

It is affecting to read, how those who first came to Hartford from Cambridge,
about an hundred in company, some of whom had lived in splendour and delicacy,
under affluent circumstances in England; set out on foot to travel an hundred
and twenty miles or more, with their wives and children, having no pillows but
Jacob's, and no canopy but the heavens, a wilderness to go through without the
least cultivation* in most places no path or guide but the compass; many
hideous swamps and craggy mountains, unavoidably to pass.and several rivers, in
many places unfordable. Add to these their fears and dangers, arising from
those that might lie in wait to destroy them. With incredible resolution and
fortitude they persevered. This year (1636) some towns on Connecticut river
began to be settled. In the beginning of the year ensuing (1637) there was open
war with the natives, called the Pequod war. That tribe lived in this colony,
The chief country of the pequods was probably near the mouth of the riverat
Stonington, toward New London, which in situated at the mouth of what is
properly called Pequod River. Wi^s. A^s. 10 Go^t.
and were the most warlike of all the Indians. They had been contriving the
destruction of the English, and now murdered numbers of them in their fields,
and when going from place to place, to the great terror of the rest. They
attacked Saybrook fort, making bold attempts in the face of danger. Upon this,
the English plantations united their little forces, carried the war into the
enemy's country, and, under the smiles of heaven, presently extirpated the
tribe that had engaged against them. God, in his providence, so ordered it,
that the English came upon and attacked the enemy in their fort, when the
centinal had just gone into one of their dwellings, and the rest were in deep
sleep. They were wonderfully destroyed with only three English slain and
numbers wounded. Notwithstanding victory, the army was distressed, after having
killed or taken seven hundred of their enemies. The morning cold -- they had no
sort of refreshment for their wounded, neither water nor shelter -- many
Indians still in the woods, waylaying to destroy them. In the midst of this
perplexity, GOD, who gathers the winds in his fist, caused their vessels to
appear, and with much difficulty they got their wounded into them. After
another engagement, that tribe was wholly extinguished, which struck so much
terror into others, that they came and sued for peace M. Hist. N. B. P 99. 100
101. G. H, Hist. V. 1. P. 77, 78, 79, 80, N. Hist. N. E. 177, 878, 179, 180.
Vol. 1.
and the land had rest for almost forty years, in general, though not without
some terrible alarms. In 1642, a goneneral design was formed by the natives, to
extirpate the English. This horrid massacre was to be perpetrated, under the
wretched disguise of friendship and commerce. But heaven took care that the
plot should be discovered by some from among themselves, and the execution
prevented; because (as we have abundant reason to believe) God loved our
fathers, and chose their seed, to give them this good land, as it is at this
day.

INFORMATION was again received in 1653 that a confederacy of the Indians was
solicited for the utter destruction of the English, which filled them with no
small consternation. The discovery of which was, probably the means of
preventing their execution of that murderous plan. -- Is it not astonishing,
that in the midst of so many perils, hardships and distresses of every kind,
attending the settlement of a new country, at such a vast distance from any
friends or civilized people, and among numerous tribes of inhuman barbarions,
our fathers should be supported and protected? The GOD of Israel wonderfully
defended and increased them -- Who could have thought, any would come from a
pleasant land, to join them under such gloomy circumstances! Yet, such was the
situation of our nation at home, that notwithstanding all these troubles and
dangers, many flocked to this then howling wilderness: insomuch that there was
a suprizing increase of in habitants, within a few years. Many pious and
learned ministers, and conscientious people sled to the deserts of America.
Above 70 Ministers and 4000 Planters came over in a few years, N's Hist. Vol.
1. p. 213, 14, 15.
While our venerable ancestors (whose memory I honor while mentioning of them)
had to encounter ten thousand difficulties, in the midst of uncivilized,
faithless Indians, they were not destitute of enemies at home as well as in
their own bosom. That great enemy to civil and religious liberty archbishop
Laud, amidst the persecution of good men at home, envied them an asylum, even
in the wilds of America -- sought their ruin and contrived their destruction,
by sending enemies, false brethren who secreted themselves; to obtain and send
home intelligence of every thing that might be improved, (even in those times
and by that administration) to the disadvantage of the first settlers of New
England. A recorder of council was early procured, inhibiting the
transportation of inhabitants to America, without license from the
commissioners. The next day after which, eight ships prepared in the river
thames, to go to New England, were ordered to be stopped. This was a means of
hindering several great men from coming hither; Comp. Hist Eng. Vol. 3. p 83.
Math. B. 1. p 23: Bates Elench. Met. Nup par. p 219. Dudd. View of the troubles
of England, p. 459. Though I would tread lightly on the ashes of the dead; yet
where truth, duty, and justice to the characters of others, require us to
speak, silence is criminal.
The supreme governor of all worlds, reserving them at home for more important
services there. Some of them, not long after being improved as chief
instruments, in producing a notable change at home; while he, viz. A. B. Laud,
who was most active in procuring an inhibition of their transportation came to
an untimely death, and the face of affairs was vastly changed. Whatever
aspersions have, by calumny, been thrown upon the characters of those, who were
chief instruments, in producing those changes; yet after the reproaches of more
than a century, the world acknowledges their greatness, and our nation is
greatly obliged to them for the liberties it now enjoys. -- Numbers flocked to
America while persecution continued; but when this coased, few came over, and
some returned back, who never saw America more. -- At the restorationn of King
CHARLES the second, persecution revived, and N. England increased. After this,
open war again began, in 1675. In each colony, the inhabitants were perplexed,
and in several rencounters the English were overpowered by numbers. Diverse
towns were attacked by the enemy, among which, was Windsor in this colony. This
was called Philip's war; because an Indian Prince of that name began and
carried it on. He precipitated his own nation and allies into the war, before
they were prepared. However the frequent attacks upon different towns, in
different colonies threw the brave, distressed inhabitants into vast confusion.
-- Houses burnt, and numbers of people stain. Capt. Lathrop and all his company
consisting of 80 young men, were stain, excepting 7. or 8.
This war was exceedindly distressing, and endangered the very being of the
colonies: insomuch that their ruin was greatly feared -- seeing these
depredations, united the colonies in an expedition against the enemy, whose
head quarters were in the Narraganset country; where they had fortified
themselves with all the art and strength they were capable of. A thousand men
attacked them, and i^ pleased GOD, so to order it, that they fell upon that
part of the fort, where was the only passage for entrance. After obstinate
resistance they carried it, burning several hundred of the enemies houses, and
in them many men, women and children. The loss on our side was considerable,
about ninety killed and as many more wounded. The Indians confessed they lost
700 fighting men that day, besides 300 more mortally wounded: and the old men,
women and children which perished by the fire, cold and famine cannot be
ascertained -- Our whole army was in utmost danger of perishing in their
retreat, by reason of cold and hunger. It was extreme cold, in the latter end
of December; and they carried their dead and wounded, 15 or 16 miles to the
place of their rendezvous. Hist, Mas. Vol. 1. p. 291. 300.
-- This signal defeat of the savages, was so far from discouraging them, or
disposing them to peace, that on the contrary, it only served to exasperate
them, when almost desperate; hunger and cold pushing them on, Philip
instigating and the governor of Canada encouraging them. The following year
(1676) early in the spring they made several furious attacks, upon diverse
towns, some of which were wholly burnt, and others suffered great loss, as to
lives or substance. -- Fifteen places were attacked the beginning of this year.
Lancaster burnt, Feb. 10, forty persons killed and taken -- Marlborough,
Sudbury. Chelmsford attacked about the same time. Feb. 21, Medfield beset and
about half burnt, 18 persons killed. 25th part of Weymouth was burnt. -- March
was a mouth of singular trouble and perplexity. Northampton Springfield,
Groten, Sudbury, Marlborough, Warwick, Providence and Rehoboth suffered about
the same time. Captain Pierce was ambush'd and slain with fifty English and
some Indians. Capt. Wadsworth and fifty men were cut off when going to relieve
Sudbury, Vid. Hist. pr^.
All things were in confusion. Every face gathered paleness. Destruction upon
destruction was cried. Wherever they looked, behold the smoke of their burning
country ascended as the smoke of a furnace* Houses demolished -- Plantations
deserted -- Families destroyed -- Some lie dead, mangled with savage wounds;
others consumed by outrageous flames -- Some captivated and others live to
lament their butchered or captivated friends -- The savage shouts and yells of
barbarians, and the dying groans of those inhumanly murdered, butchered by
them, mingled their horrors and circulated through the wilderness. This was a
time of fearful expectation -- A day of gloominess and thick darkness. No man
looked upon his life secure -- They were in jeopardy every hour and put on
sackcloth. In the midst of these peculiar fears and multiplied distresses; they
betook themselves to that ancient, laudable duty of fasting and prayer; which
however much despised by the libertines of the present day, has always been
the practice of GOD's people in times of imminent danger, and pleasing to
heaven. Indeed humiliation and prayer always become apostate creatures:
especially, when under the peculiar frowns of heaven. This is recommended not
only by scripture precepts and examples, but also by the general practice of
all nations and ages, as being a dictate of natural reason, or at least,
approving itself thereto, so that the least intimations enforce it.

WELL might our predecessors be very frequent and serious in their attendance
hereupon, when terror spread through every colony. Never did a more threatening
cloud overspread New England. This year the enemies affairs were at the highest
flow and those of the English at the lowest ebb. In this critical juncture of
affairs, the priests, the ministers of the Lord, wept between the porch and the
altar, saying, spare thy people O LORD, and give not thine heritage to
reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say
among the people where is their GOD? If the heathen which environ us round,
should cut off our name from the earth; what wilt then do for thy great name?
Presently after, a sudden change took place, GOD was jealous for his land, and
pitied his people; in the midst of judgment, he remembered mercy. The LORD of
hosts heard and delivered his chosen. Animated with a truly martial spirit, our
troops proved victorious and pursued their enemies to their lurking places. The
enemy were distressed and disheartened; multitudes slain and many captivated.
After which many, upon promise of mercy, surrendered themselves. And not long
after, Philip, their leader, was killed by one of his men, that had deserted
from him. -- Upon which, various tribes begged for peace and the power of the
enemy was very much broken, so as never again to recover. So that within the
space of two years, that bloody and distressing war which threatened the entire
destruction of the English, in New England, was brought to an happy issue. In
this war, fortresses were demolished, bloody battles fought, and numbers slain;
which though small compared with many other wars, in populous countries; ye
these were the struggles of an infant state; who were few in number: from
before whom, GOD drove out nations, greater and mightier than they were.

DURING this bloody war, accounts were transmitted home, yet no assistance was
received. Neither ships, men or money were sent to them, under the intolerable
burden of all those calamities. Yea, the ears of the^ Prince were shut against
their cries and his heart unmoved at all their distresses: but the malevolent
accusations of our venerable prede^essors enemies, readily found access to
their King. There was an infraction upon some of the charters and others were
attacked. How affecting was the condition of our fathers, when engaged in an
exceeding bloody, calamitous war, defending themselves, in a dismal winderness,
and threatened with the loss of those privileges which were dearer to them than
life, and for which they left their native country! Instead of the pity of
their Prince, behold their privileges and charters are sought for -- those
charters which encouraged them to settle in this country, in expectation of
greater civil and religious liberty, than many -- of their fellow subjects, at
that day enjoyed.

A GOVERNOR was sent to Boston, supposed to be a bigoted papist. He made high
professions of regard to the public good and the welfare of the people; but it
is observed, that Nero, who was cruel to a proverb, concealed his tyrannical
disposition more years than this man did months. In time of war, so far as his
power extended, he cruelly forbid and hindered the people from garrisoning their
houses, by which means many lives were lost. Governmental affairs were
transacted by himself, with a low of his creatures. He threatened the people
with the deprivation of their civil and religious privileges. Personal
property, in the hands of such an one became very precarious, and many things
were so conducted, that posterity will be shocked with the account. The people
had no where to cry, but to the sovereign King of Kings, whose dominion is over
all. -- He graciously heard their cries and introduced a glorious revolution,
which dethroned King JAMES, and enthroned a protestant King and Queen; and
thereby in some measures relieved New England, which had been involved in
frequent and very expensive wars and groaned under the weight of an heavy debt.
Our predecessors were inspired with a noble thirst for liberty. This reigns in
every noble breast, and was illustriously manifested by the first planters of
New England. -- They bore the iron rod of despotic power with reluctance; and
were ready to improve the first opportunity to east off the yoke. The first
hints of the revolution animated them -- At Boston they seized the man that had
oppressed them -- Though fatigued, yet not disheartened they sent an army, and
reduced Port Royal; which was seven years after given up at the treaty of
Ryswick. The same year (1690) the reduction of Canada was attempted. From the
year, 1687, there had been war with the eastern savages. Many lives and much
treasure was lost in this undertaking, against Canada nor were the^ ^^le to
perform their enterprise. A series of disappointments at^^^^ed the expedition,
and a thousand brave men are said to have lost their lives therein; the sins of
those Canaanites not being yet full. That war continued for several years, to
the great distress of the first planters, and in its consequences proved
pernicious to posterity. The extreme difficulty the government was reduced to,
occasioned them to issue bills of credit, a paper currency.
In 1697, a large fleet was equipped from France, to take N. England -- at the
news of which, amazement seized the inhabitants. An invasion was every day, for
several weeks together expected. The people put themselves in the best posture
of defense they could. But heaven, not earth, disappointed and frustrated our
enemies. The Indians attacked several places the latter end of this and
beginning of the next year, killing many, among which the Rev. Mr. Whiting of
Lancaster.
GOD determined to give us this land as it is at this day. After long wars,
peace was restored to the land in School. But of how short continuance! Q. Anne's
war with France began 1703, which involved N. England in another long, bloody
and expensive war. Deerfield was taken in 1703-4, by three hundred French and
Indians, on the 29th of February. About forty persons were killed, and about an
hundred carried into captivity, among whom was the Rev. Mr. Williams, their
minister, with his wife and five children, leaving two of his children dead,
and his house in flames. You may read the tragical account, in the short but
affecting history which he himself wrote concerning it. Several other places
were attacked the same year, and almost ruined. The country was kept in a
perpetual alarm. Applicable to them was that of the apostle, 2 Cor. iv. 7, 8.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are peplexed, but not in
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cost down, but not destroyed. Who can
conceive the distress of a people continually alarmed, and every where exposed
to the ravages of cruel barbarians, who exercised themselves in the infernal
art of torture. In 1706, there was intelligence of a threatened invasion from
Canada. Probably they divided their forces; for many places were beset about
one and the same time. An unsuccessful expedition against Port Royal was
undertaken in 1707 -- The year ensuing advice was again received that the
Canadians would attempt the reduction of N. England. The designed invasion was
prevented, by the interposition of divine providence, and their plan
wonderfully disconcerted. This year the enemy killed the Rev. Mr* Rolf, of
Haverhill, and about forty persons, laying great part of the place in ashes,
and captivating several. Notwithstanding the continual fears, and various
distresses of the people, yet upon information from home that another invasion
upon Canada was designed, they cheerfully raised, and for several months kept
in pay, a number of troops to join those forces; till, to their inexpressible
sorrow, they heard the designed expedition was laid aside. Mean while the
Indians kept continually harrassing their frontiers, and attacked Deerfield
just after the Inhabitants had returned from captivity.

In 1710, being assisted by ships from home, they reduced Port Royal again. The
next year, fifteen sail of men of war, forty transports, and seven thousand
troops, sail from Boston (July 30, 1711) to invade Canada; but were miserably
disappointed. Eight or nine of their ships were dashed to pieces on the rocks,
in the river St. Lawrence, and a thousand men drowned. Gov. Hutch. Hist. Mass.
V. 2. P. 193, 194.
This loss and disappointment were exceedingly discouraging to many, who gave
over all thoughts of ever obtaining the conquest of Canada. Repeated
disappointments and blasted attempts were apprehended, to be plain indications,
that heaven did not design, North America should be subject to one crowned
head. -- To add to the misfortunes of this year, considerable part of the town
of Boston was burnt. Fresh attacks were made by the Indians the beginning of
the following year (in 1712.) Those savages mute frequent incursions, killing
and captivating numbers, till peace between the two contending powers in Europe
took place; which was succeeded with a treaty of peace which the natives
entered into, professing themselves the faithful subjects of the crown of
Great Britain, in 1713. For almost forty years there had been a scene of war
and blood shed, with very small intermissions. Five or six thousand of the
bravest youth, and most valient warriors in New England sell sacrifices to the
heathen's rage, during those wars. Peace was then enjoyed for ten years. In
1723, the savages began once more to harass our frontiers -- they sell upon
various towns, and killed the Rev. Mr. Willard of Rutland. This war lasted
about two years; when the English destroyed the Indian settlements at
Norridgwalk, with a great part of that tribe. This brought them to terms of
peace, which was ratified in 1725. In this war Capt. Lovel was ambush'd by the
enemy, and slain, with several of his brave men. From 1725 the land had peace
for nineteen years; when war being proclaimed between England and France (in
1744) we were called again to war. Many among us not only remember, but some of
these were personally in those rencounters. Several towns were sacked and
burnt, with a scene of bloodshed. Men, women and children tortured and
butchered in the most tragical manner. Again "were heard the most bitter groans
of the tortured, dying father! the shrill schreeches of the tender and
distressed mother! with the piercing accents of the dying babe, on whom they
exercised the infernal art of torture. The enemy attempted the reduction of
Annapolis-Royal repeatedly (in 1745) but were disappointed.

GOD in his providence roused the martial spirit in New England. An expedition
against a strong fortress on the island of Cape-Breton was planned and
prosecuted with inimitable ardor. A series of astonishing events and almost
miraculous interpositions of heaven facilitated the conquest of that important
place. GOD, not only made the stars in their courses fight for us, by ordering
the season favorable to our army, encampments and entrenchments, beyond what
was ever known at that place before: but also by overruling the affairs in such
a manner that even the very balls from the enemies cannon were of no small
service to our army. Almost as soon as they fell, they were returned with
advantage: timely supplies arrived to our army, either by transports or prizes.
GOD causing that our enemies should help supply our forces by sea and land,
though contrary to their design. A new 64 gun ship from France with near 600
men, and great quantities of arms and stores, was taken, just at the mouth of
that ^ar. Pr's Th^^^^g. Ser. P.28, 29.
The time would sail to give a particular account of the rema^able providence,
attending that expedition: the secrecy with which it was carried on -- the
extraordinary spirit of prayer poured forth on the inhabitants of this land --
how our army was protected from the power of their enemies and the perils of
waters -- landed -- sought -- prevailed -- when the navy and army had just
agreed on a general and desperate assault by sea and land; which would
doubtless have been exceeding bloody and its consequence was very precarious.
At that critical moment GOD influenced them to a quiet surrendering of that
important fortress. When the strength of the place was known (which was not
till after the surrender) and the fortifications viewed, amazement seized
those, who were hitherto strangers to fear. Immediately upon their entering the
city, (June 17, 1745) the clouds gathered blackness and poured down rains
incessantly for ten days together. -- This closed the scenes of wonder. The
conquest of this place was very important in its consequences and purchased the
peace of Europe. "Cape-Breton was the single equivalent for all the conquest of
France in the Netherlands." -- Though its reduction cost but a few lives, yet
many hundreds died, engarisoned there -- Notwithstanding the unsuccessfulness
of former attempts upon Canada, the reduction of that country was planned again
by the ministry at home. Upon the first intimations of the royal pleasure, the
colonies cheerfully engaged, and in the number of their troops exceeded the
royal requisition, 8200 were engaged by the colonies. Hist, Mass. V. 2. P.424.
with impatience they waited, the arrival of troops from Europe, 'till they
heard the design was laid aside. So much were the hearts of the inhabitants of
this land, upon the conquest of Canada; whose inhabitants had ever been to us,
as the Canaanites were to GOD's Israel of old, pricks in their eyes and thorns
in their sides, vexing them continually. -- The French and Indians insidiously
attacked our people at Minas, killing and wounding in one night an hundred and
sixty. -- Instead of a sleet from home to assist and defend us, we were alarmed
with the news of a powerful sleet and army from France, with orders to destroy
all our maritime towns. The sleet consisted of 70 sail, 14 of which were
capital ships, and 20 smaller men of war: the rest fireships, bombs, tenders
and transports for eight thousand troops. Hist. Mass. V. 2. P. 4^5.
England was not more alarmed with the Spanish armada in 1588, than New England
was at the arrival of this fleet in their neighborhood. The firmest mind bends
at sudden news of imminent danger. Every measure of defense was taken, that lay
in our power. Heaven interposed for and delivered New England -- Instead of a
British fleet to protect us, GOD was our defense. He who has all nature at his
command, who kills and makes alive, sent mortal sickness among the enemy;
diminishing their numbers, in such a wonderful manner, that they were obliged
to burn several of their ships for want of men to navigate them. -- Their
General died on a sudden; or as some say, laid violent hands on himself. Some
of their ships were lost in a violent storm; others taken in their return. In
this armament, near half the navy of France, was in a great measure destroyed.
We, as Israel of old, stood still and saw the salvation of GOD. He saw that
there was no man to help -- his own arm brought salvation. Peace was not
settled with the eastern. Indians 'til 1749. -- New England flourished
surprizingly, during the peace between the two last wars, extending their
settlements further into the wilderness; which now blossoms like a rose. But
how soon were we called again to arms* France had long before laid the plan to
overcome North America -- surrounded us with fortresses well manned -- filled
their colonies with regular troops, to carry into execution the scheme formed
at Versailles. Upon their making encroachments, imprisoning British subjects
and the like, war really begun in 1755, though not declared 'till the year
following. The memory of this is still fresh in your minds, and a considerable
part of this congregation were in some or other of those expeditions. The
armies led forth to war were much greater; the battles fought were more
important; the sieges laid, more difficult; the defeats experienced more
terrible; the victories obtained more glorious, and the consequences thereof
far more interesting than America had ever known before. This was now become
the seat of the war, and our public affairs received peculiar importance. Not
only we and those nations, with which Americans stood particularly connected,
but all Europe listened to our fate. The last war proved unsuccessful --
General Braddock was defeated and slain; considerable part of the troops under
his command. -- An army consisting of French and Indians, under the command of
general. Dieskau, engaged the provincial troops near Lake George; and though they
killed numbers of a large scout they me^, and pursued the rest to their camp;
yet there they were defeated and their General taken, The same year the French
inhabitants were removed from Nova Scotia. -- Oswego was taken by the enemy (in
1756) Here by we were cut off from all our communication with the great lakes.
This opened the frontiers of America to the ravages of the enemy. Very little
was this year effected by out troops. GOD was pleased greatly to humble us
before our enemies in 1757. Destruction upon destruction was cried through the
land. Our hopes were disappointed and most fearful apprehensions raised. The
GOD of armies seemed to be against us. An army under General Montcalm,
demolished Fort William-Henry: with many circumstances of cruelty and horror
attending their success. Many of our fellow subjects were barbarously murdered
contrary to the laws of nature and nations. The success of the enemy alarmed
the continent. We feared the worst, that the enemy would improve their victory
to bring fire and sword into the interior parts of the country. Every face
gathered paleness, and the hearts of many melted for fear. -- The best judges
looked on our circumstances very distressing. It was surely a day of gloominess
and thick darkness. Every thing run counter to our wishes, and heathens
triumphed: who among us don't remember the warmwood and the gall! What a
surprise and consternation was this congregation put into, in time of public
worship, when an herald made sad proclamation at the door? Mean while, the
fleet and army destined for the reduction of Louisburg made a brilliant
appearance but at an observable distance from the enemy. The progress of the
enemy this year, the inactivity of our armies and danger of the colonies,
alarmed the nations fear -- greater numbers of troops and stronger naval forces
were sent over to prosecute the war.

THE year, 1758 was interchecquer'd with a diversity of fortune prosperous and
adverse. Louisbourg was invested and taken. The colonies exerted themselves
beyond their strength. Near one fourth part of the militia in this colony went
volunteers this year, into the army: which was repulsed at Ticonderoga, with
the loss of about 2000 of the flower of the British troops killed, wounded or
missing. How affecting was the spectacle when numbers of you, my dear friends,
saw garments to I Would in human blood, and heard the dying groans of those
mortally wounded! -- After this repulse, Frontenac, the enemies magazine, to
supply their western forts and savages to butcher our frontier-inhabitants, was
taken. Their garrison on the Ohio, was not long after deserted, and our
frontiers had general rest. -- Our military enterprises were attended with
glorious success in 1759. Niagara was invested and taken: Oswego saved from a
powerful attack made upon it. Those forces that went to raise the siege of
Niagara, were vanquished. This it is said was when our army had just expended
their ammunition, and must have raised their siege, had'nt the enemy come, who
instead of accomplishing their design, actually did quite the reverse by
supplying our army. At Ticonderoga but little resistance was made --
Crown-Point was deserted -- upon one of the Lakes, Carillon, a place of great
strength and importance was reduced, just before the abandoning of Crown-Point,
which had so long been the scourge and terror of N. England; a resource for
murderers. -- St. Francois was destroyed, whose inhabitants had been monsters
of barbarity, delighting in blood, and the LORD gave them blood to drink. To
close the military operations of this year, the LORD of hosts through a field
of blood brought our army into the strong city of Quebec, our enemies capital
in this country, "a glorious, but costly victory!" Glorious as it was obtained
by unequal numbers, with a firmness and resolution scarcely to be equalled.
Costly as it cost the life of the renowned General WOLF. Let us drop a tear
over the renowned warrior, who died in the bloom of life, at the head of his
troops, commanding, as with angelic wisdom and nobler ardor, forgetting that he
was mortal. O glorious instrument of GOD for our deliverance. Let him live in
all succeeding annals and shine in a full blaze of glory with a monument
erected over his grave, more durable than statues of brass and marble. On the
plains of Abraham a bloody and decisive battle was fought -- both the generals
slain and the power of the French broken. The year ensuing ( viz. 1760) brings
us that glorious era, which our fathers ardently desired to see. Early this
year the enemy made some small attempts to save their country, but all to no
purpose. GOD made inquisition for blood in Canada, and would no longer suffer
them to distress us. He, who led Israel through the red sea, on dry ground, and
caused the waters of old Jordan to roll backward, bringing Israel from Egypt to
Canaan by slow but sure steps; He, through the watery avenues, led our armies
into the enemy's country; while fear and dread fell upon them and their whole
country was surrendered to the crown of Great Britain. Thus Canada was
conquered. Tribes and nations much greater than our fathers, have been driven
out from before them and us to bring it to pass as it is this day, when we
consider the many bloody wars they were obliged to engage in -- the wants and
distresses that surrounded them in their very infancy -- the combined force of
French and Indians, urged on by Popish legends and indulgencies: through what
scenes of cruelty and bloodshed has the LORD of hosts done these great things
for us? We have heard with our ears, O GOD, our fathers have told us, what work
thou did in their days, in the times of old: how thou did drive out the
heathen. -- They got not the land in possession by their own strength -- but
their how abode in strength and their arms were strengthened by the mighty GOD
of Jacob. The LORD has done great things for us whereof we are glad. The
British empire is unrivaled in North America -- Those places now rejoice in
peace and safety, where merciless savages, in countless multitudes, have
exercised their cruelty. None now make us afraid. -- Not a great many years
past, one was killed and another taken by the Indians in this town, but the
LORD has delivered us. Mr. Harris was killed. -- Capt. Griswold was taken by
the Indians, but made his escape the night after, taking with him, their goes
and ammunition.
The colonies now increase amazingly fast -- Spread far and wide -- Solitary
places sing for joy -- Yet we may not expect perfect felicity here. -- Since
the war, some particular acts at home have greatly disturbed the plantations.
The Stamp Act, which affected our liberty, and was soon repealed by those who
made it. -- Another parliamentary-act for raising a revenue in America, is
generally esteemed unconstitutional, and not to wear a friendly aspect to our
liberty -- The total repeal of this is devoutly to be wished for. GOD has
always owned the cause of liberty in North America, and will continue to own it
unless we sin away our privileges. These acts of Parliament have caused almost
an universal uneasiness in the colonies. -- While seeking redress in a
constitutional way, let our fervent prayers ascend continually, that the throne
may be established in righteousness. -- Let us practice frugality and industry
-- avoid dissipation and prodigality -- leading quiet and peaceable lives in
all godliness and honesty.

THUS we have taken a very brief and general view of the difficulties and
distresses which our fathers and the present generation, were necessarily
obliged to engage in. What multitudes of heroic and loyal Americans have
sacrificed their lives for their country, and in obedience to royal mandates:
many of whose bones are to this day whitening in the sun. Their memory should
be embalmed to the latest posterity. At their own expense, the first planters
undertook, supported and defended themselves. For more than 120 years they
received (as far as I can learn) not the least parliamentary aids. Instead of
those, met with many discouragements from home, within that time, to damp the
spirits of an infant plantation. Their help was in the name of the Lord. Had
not the Lord been on their side, how often would their enemies have swallowed
them up, when their wrath was kindled against them. Blessed be the Lord, who
has not given us a prey to our enemies. We proceed briefly to consider,

III. OUR pecular obligations to know this day and consider that the LORD he is
GOD over all -- and to keep his statutes and commandments, that it may go well
with us and our children, in the land which the LORD our GOD has given us.

THE infinitely glorious GOD is infinitely worthy of our supreme regard. GOD'S
glory is the noblest end we can propose; and God is glorified by us when we
sincerely keep his statutes: therefore as reasonable creatures, we are bound to
this. -- By the law of creation, GOD has a right to require this of us. As we
received our all from GOD, so, we owe our all to GOD. All things are from GOD
and should be to him. -- GOD is our continual preserver -- in him we live --
therefore should know and serve him. It is a reasonable as well as commanded
duty, that he who made and upholds us should be glorified by us. -- Mankind are
also land under peculiar obligations of conformity to GOD and devotedness to
his service, by the glorious provision heaven made for man's salvation after
his apostasy from GOD -- Here we might contemplate the unparalled wonders of
redeeming love and grace -- an incarnate GOD -- how we were bought with the
price of CHRIST'S blood, and are not our own: therefore we should glorify GOD,
in our bodies and spirits which are the LORD'S. The obligations thence arising
are not peculiar to us, but common to all, who have heard of a Savior.
Therefore without enlargement here, we pass on to some more particular
considerations.

1. GOD has done wonderful things for us and our fathers. Survey GOD'S
mavelous works of wonder to New England -- the deliverances he has granted --
the supports he has afforded -- the designs of their enemies disappointed --
and was ever people, by a series of remarkable providence, laid under stroger
obligations to know, fear and serve the living GOD? For many years, with very
snort intermissions, they were involved in bloody and distressing wars, when
they were, as yet, but few in number. Those tragical scenes were acted over and
over, with such shocking instances of savage cruelty, that the mentioning of
them is enough to chill the blood in every vein. How many of our ancestors, who
came into America, as an asylum for liberty, have fallen sacrifices to Pagan
cruelty! How many little ones have had their brains dashed our against the
stones! Nevertheless our progenitors, through the good hand of GOD upon them,
nobly surmounted all those pressing difficulties they had to encounter, and to
which they appeared to be so unequal. GOD made way for them, by an awful
mortality among the natives. Yet, multitudes all around survived: nor did GOD
suddenly cut them off. Their destruction was slow and gradual, but sure. Every
war they waged, every horrid conspiracy they formed, hastened their own
destruction. In instances numberless divine providence protected. GOD'S people,
watched over, interposed for and marvellously delivered them -- N. England may
say the LORD GOD omnipotent reigns, and we have peculiar reason to rejoice
thereat. -- While we tell these things to our children, as in duty bound, let
cordial gratitude ascend to the father of mercies, from an alter composed of
the warmest and most affectionate hearts. While we are recollecting these
things, can we help feeling peculiar obligations to love and serve the LORD, in
truth and with all our heart, and to know that he is GOD?

2. WE are under peculiar obligations to know and se^ve the LORD, as we live in
a land of liberty, civil and religious. Liberty, fair offspring of heaven,
engages some of the most ardent desires of generous and noble souls. They bear
the yoke of bondage with reluctance, and cast it from them as soon as
opportunity presents. An ardent thirst for liberty inspired our fathers, who
sled into the wilds of America to find an asylum from those usurpations over
the consciences of men, which then prevailed. Hopes of enjoying the sweets of
liberty, animated them to leave their pleasant seats and fertile fields; to
pass the atlantic, to these then barbarous shores. Through innumerable perils
and hardships they have transmitted to us this inestimable blessing, which we
at present enjoy in the fullest manner. -- what more can be wished for on civil
or religious accounts. In matters of religion, every one may judge for himself
and worship GOD in that way, which he verily thinks his final Judge will
approve. -- The people may choose their own ministers and methods for his
support, none may control them. -- As to civil affairs, our civil rulers are
chosen by us. Every town is a corporation, yea, every family is a little
kingdom. What more can be desired or conceived of? These blessings indulged,
demand suitable returns of gratitude and obedience to the GOD of our mercies.
Peculiar blessings lay us under peculiar obligations.

3. WE are put under peculiar advantages to know GOD and that he is over all:
therefore should keep his statutes. -- We may not only read this important
truth in those large volumes of nature and providence; from the works of
creation, and the common and extraordinary occurrences, of which we are
spectators; but we have also the sacred oracles to reach us. Therein God has
caused all his goodness to pass before us. What heathens grope in the dark
concerning and cannot unfold, but are filled with perplexing doubts respecting,
is clearly revealed in the bible. All that such beings as we are capable of
knowing of GOD, is therein disclosed; even his communicable glory -- and of man
-- his origin, fall, recovery, etc. In the scriptures, GOD has fully shown
that he is supreme governor in the natural and moral worlds. We have all
conceivable advantages to know that the LORD he is GOD alone. -- The end of
knowledge is practice -- consequently advantages to know, lay us under
obligations to perform.

4. WE have GOD'S statutes and judgments: therefore must hearken and obey.
Heathens are inexcusable for sinning against the light of nature: not having
the written law, they are a law to themselves. But how much more inexcusable
are we, if, after having GOD'S law, statutes and judgments supernaturally
revealed and published from heaven, we rebel against GOD? It will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha at the day of judgment than for us, if we sin
against such distinguishing light, love and grace.

5. WE have GOD'S worship and ordinances among us, and thereby are under
superadded obligations to know GOD and live to him. These are the ordinary and
special means of grace heaven has appointed for the salvation of fallen
creatures. The love of CHRIST should constrain us.

6. WE profess and acknowledge ourselves to be GOD'S people, and enjoy all the
privileges of such. Therefore, are bound to fear and serve the LORD. So Israel
of old were distinguished; though not under the advantages we enjoy; yet of
them GOD said, if ye forsake my law, disregard my word and ordinances, I will
sell you into the bands of the heathens round about you and will punish all
your iniquities; for you only have I known of all the families of the earth.
Their punishment was to be greater than others, for they were GOD'S professing
people, standing in a visible covenant relation to the LORD -- are we less so?
Covenant vows and engagements are upon us. GOD'S commands and our own vows are
too solemn and important to be trifled with. When the vows of GOD are upon you,
dare you transgress? Is not the obligation too sacred to be violated? Will any
plead, to extenuate their guilt, that they have not publicly and explicitly
entered into covenant with GOD? Were you not devoted to GOD, by baptism in
early life? Have you not been instructed, counseled, warned and admonished, as
being a child of the covenant, being followed with line upon line precept upon
precept? -- Was you never in wracking distress or imminent danger? Under those
circumstances, did not you cry to GOD, mingling vows with your tears, that if
GOD would deliver you, the residue of your days should be devoted to his
service? The LORD heard and delivered you; whereby he has bound down your vows
upon you. Wherefore your guilt in the violation of them, remains before GOD.
How will you answer it to God another day, if you violate these solemn
obligations you are under to consecrate your time, talents and all to GOD? GOD
has laid his people under still stronger obligations to keep his statutes and
commandments by promising glorious rewards to those that love and serve him;
and by threatening eternal woe and misery to the ungodly. All the joys of heaven
are set before us, to animate us to our duty; and all the horrors of
everlasting burnings, to deter us from iniquity. -- GOD may say to us, what
more could have been done, that I have not done for you? -- Once more, as we
may, in subordination to GOD'S glory, have respect to our own and our childrens
comfort here and hereafter; so this is mentioned in our text as an inducement
and obligation to serve the LORD -- that it may go well with thee and with thy
children -- in the land which the LORD thy GOD gives thee, forever. That we
may enjoy the smiles of divine providence in this world, and be late received
to eternal rest. Yea, and that it may go well with our children after us --
That when we shall be laid in our graves, having nothing more to do with things
terestrial, but shall be immutably fixed in eternity: then our posterity may
dwell in this land, surrounded with the blessings of heaven -- and that we and
they may finally meet together in the kingdom of heaven. -- These things may
show us some of our peculiar obligations to be the LORD'S.

IV. TO ENUMERATE some of those sins, which will (if indulged) provoke GOD to
destroy those who have been distinguished as the favorites of heaven. In
general, we may observe, contempt of GOD and religion, tempting CHRIST and
despising gospel grace, are things which GOD abhors and the procuring causes of
divine judgments. -- Especially if these prevail, may be expected to be so to
New England; whose fathers came hither to escape those sins, or rather to
escape persecution for the contrary virtues.

1. INDIFFERENCY about religion, must be peculiarly provoking to GOD; when this
temper prevails among the inhabitants of this land, for whom GOD has. done
such wonderful things. -- What should be most is by many least cared for. As
religion includes acquaintance with GOD and conformity to him, it is matter of
the last importance and concern to mankind. Yet how much is it disregarded --
the gospel despised, and how few seek first the kingdom of GOD and the
righteousness thereof! Most inexcusably guilty are those distinguished in point
of privilege, if they despise.

2. PROFANATION of GOD'S holy sabbath, is another sin, which will provoke GOD
to destroy those who have been distinguished as the favorites of heaven. GOD
has set apart and sanctified one seventh part of time for himself, On this day
we may not speak our own words, think our own thoughts, nor find our own
pleasures. -- Where no conscientious regard is paid to the sabbath, there can
be no true religion. Reason and experience teach us that the religious
observation of the LORD's day, with a serious attendance upon the word,
sacraments and prayer, must have a powerful influence on the lives of
christians. Religion flourishes or declines among a people, as the sabbath is
regarded or profaned. -- GOD is provoked, when his sabbath's are profaned and
public worship neglected. Of old, the indignation of the Almighty was
determined against those who trampled under foot the sacred law of the sabbath.
Six days are allowed us for our employments; what sacrilege to rob GOD of the
seventh!

SOME of our ancestors sell under the tokens of royal displeasure because they
would not read the book of sports and games, on the LORD's day, for persons to
go to gaming and diversions after public worship; which was the edict of K.
CHARLES the first, who is kept so much in remembrance -- But for us to pretend
such sports are right, would be to rise up in opposition to the good and
wholesome laws of our land and nation; yea more -- the laws of GOD, the supreme
King. -- No diversions, worldly discourses, trifling visits, reading romances
or the like may be allowed of upon GOD's holy day.

3. SERIOUS and devout attendance on the ordinances of the gospel is required;
and when these are either neglected or prostituted, the great institutor is
highly provoked. By many, these ordinances are totally neglected, -- This is
become too fashionable. Does not disregard to divine ordinances, argue
disregard to CHRIST, and too great indifferency about the salvation of our
souls? If this be owing to the careless, irreligious lives of the professors of
christianity, surely they are doubly guilty. But who dare entertain a low
esteem of those ordinances CHRIST appointed as with his dying breath. A general
omission argues, at least, coldness in religion and prevailing infidelity of
heart. By a solemn profession, it is true, persons lay themselves under the
necessity of a circumspect life, or dishonor themselves by having their
practice give the lie to their profession. Let all in their respective places
seriously consider these things and exert themselves to the utmost of their
power, to wipe away the reproach cast upon the glorious REDEEMER and his
ordinances. Let the baptized seriously consider their obligations -- and let
all that love the LORD JESUS, cry mightily unto GOD, that he would be
graciously pleased to pour out his spirit plentifully and cause multitudes to
fly to CHRIST and attend his ordinances, the neglect of which must be provoking
to the Almighty.

4. AWFUL neglect of church discipline, is another thing displeasing to heaven.
CHRIST appointed church discipline for the good of mankind. When scandalous
persons are not disciplined, but there are ways to escape gospel censure, by
some means or other; this is a threatening symptom. When baptized persons are
not considered as under the obligations of the covenant, nor educated and
disciplined as children of the covenant. -- To have the rising generation grow
up in profligacy and dissoluteness of manners, without religious principles
impressed upon their consciences, is one of the most ill-boding prognostics.

5. PROFANENESS -- customary and habitual swearing are sins of a crimson dye,
and will not fail to incense the DEITY. The prophet Jeremiah declared in the
name of the LORD, that, because of swearing the land mourned. When our fathers
came into this country, a man who had lived here for seven years, on his return
to Old England, declared that during this space, he never heard a profane oath,
nor saw a man drunk. How are the times changed! the late war served greatly to
corrupt the morals of many youth, and spread profaneness through this
continent. This sin provokes GOD, without pleasing one of the senses. It is a
tasteless, fruitless sin -- an horrid perversion of the use of speech, which is
a sort of miracle in nature. Are youth suitably watched counseled, admonished,
and when guilty punished? If our air be tainted with the language of hell, no
wonder if we feel the judgments of heaven. By some in our land, is not the
tremendous name of Almighty GOD tossed, wantonly and blasphemously tossed upon
their impious tongues? The LORD will not hold them guiltless.

6. INTEMPERANCE is another sin provoking to GOD, and very pernicious to
mankind. It is such an enemy to all that is virtuous, decent or religious that
all mankind should rise up with utmost indignation against it. This exposes to
every other sin -- brings a train of calamities -- destroys the constitution
here, and the soul forever -- drives away GOD'S holy spirit -- unfits for
religious exercises -- wastes the estate -- benumbs the senses -- stupifies
conscience -- dishonours GOD, and will procure an inundation of divine wrath.
When persons act as though they would drink up Jordon at a draught, and all the
spiritous liquors in the western isles, cannot slake their thirst; yea, and are
ready to bless themselves in their hearts, saying, we shall have peace though
we walk in the imagination of our heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, then
their destruction is nigh and unavoidable -- For reasonable man, who is a
candidate for heaven, to part with his reason, his conscience, his GOD and
heaven, for a few sensual draughts, which only tend to his shame and misery
here, as well as torment hereafter, is a most desperate pitch of fully and
madness, -- Yea, for those who swim in rivers of GOD'S goodness, thus to abuse
the bounties of heaven, in some respects, exceeds the sins of devils. Such an
horrid abuse of the blessings of heaven, throwing them as in the face of the
donor, the damned have no opportunity for. -- When once the appetite has got
the ascendecy of a person, he is in a fearfully dangerous state: and finding
this to be the case, ought immediately to mortify his appetite, by an utter
renunciation of all such intoxicating spirits, as he would hope for heaven.

O my friends these vices call for the united force and opposition of ministers
and magistrates, householders, informing officers and all that wish the
prosperity of mankind. Arise and excert yourselves to avert impending ruin. For
by reason of these things, where they abound without control the righteous
judgments of GOD come upon a land, 'til it be made a reproach and a desolation.

AGAIN, neglect of family prayer is another GOD provoking abomination. If there
be one prayerless family belonging to this congregation; remember, GOD in his
word, ranks those with heathen, upon whom he will pour forth his fury. -- This
shall be the portion of all those who neglect a duty so important. -- Here I
might mention the sins of lying, slandering, backbiting, neglect of family
government, and education of children -- Idleness, uncleanness, murmuring,
covetousness, envy, self-seeking, malice, contention, uncharitableness,
revellings, chambering and wantonness, with too many other sins to be
particularly mentioned, each of which singly, is sufficient and all of them
collectively considered, will not fail (if indulged) to pull down the judgments
of heaven upon an highly privileged people.

FINALLY, when stupid security and amazing insensibility possess the minds of
men, who are under most peculiar obligations to be the LORD's -- When they are
not awakened to righteousness and true holiness by awful rebukes, signal
mercies and the precious means of grace, they stand, upon scripture record,
marked out for judgment, according to their respective sins. Woe to them that
are at ease in Zion, who live secure in sin, boasting of their privileges and
covenant relation to GOD. crying the temple of the LORD. The LORD will come
suddenly and unexpectedly upon those who have a name to live and are dead. If
Laodicean lukewarmness take place, and mankind are easy without the life and
power of godliness; they are so offensive to the LORD JESUS that he will spue
them out of his mouth. If the profligate and abandoned bless themselves in
their heart, saying they shall have peace though they live in their sins; there
ruin is near. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck shall suddenly be
destroyed and that without remedy. -- Must it not be peculiarly provoking to
GOD, to see his people remiss and careless under his solemn and remarkable
goings? If ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the
LORD of hosts, I will even send and curse upon you, and I will curse your
blessings. -- Notwithstanding the various blessings of heaven indulged us, and
a series of remarkable providence by which GOD has brought it to pass as it
is this day. -- Yet, we, in this Colony, have reason to be seriously affected
with the testimonies of divine providence, in the past year, against our sins
and ingratitude. Particularly in removing by death, our very worthy and
honorable governor PITKIN. He is no more. Having served his generation,
according to the will of GOD, he fell asleep. -- His pious counsels and example
cease. -- May we always have those to rule over us, who fear GOD, and are fast
friends to the civil and religious interests of the people.

DIVINE displeasure is also testified against us, in disappointing our hopes of
relief from the burdens laid upon us, and the threatening prospect of the
continuance of our distresses. As ^n is the procuring cause of all our
calamities, it greatly concerns us to inquire after and lament the evils we are
guilty of, from a regard to the glory of the divine Majesty; our dependence on
and obligations to GOD and the danger of offending him. These things are
beautifully expressed in the charmingly serious and peculiarly animated
proclamation, for the religious observance of this day, by solemn fasting and
prayer. -- GOD is loudly admonishing of us, by his word, ordinances and
various, alarming, effecting providence, and expostulating with us, saying
turn ye, for why will ye die? If capital vices are indulged and a people remain
stupidly secure, under those advantages, motives and obligations to holiness;
Almighty GOD is awfully incensed and his right hand ready to take hold on
vengeance. The most dreadful destruction from the LORD is pro-claimed against
them, in his word, Hear and fear. -- Ah sinful people laden with iniquity!
shall I not visit for these things, says the LORD? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Is not destruction to the wicked and a
strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? I will make mine arrows drunk
with blood, faith the Almighty. And upon the wicked GOD shall rain snares, fire
and brimstone and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup
-- Now therefore consider this, ye that forget GOD, lest he tear you in pieces
and there be none ^o deliver you. For because of these things comes the wrath
of GOD upon the children of disobedience. -- wherefore awake O sleeper* what
meanest thou? Arise, cry mightily unto GOD, if so be GOD will think upon us
that we perish not.

APPLICATION.
1. HAVE our fathers been carried through so many perils and hardships --
supported under so many trials and discouragements? We may see, admire and
adore the good hand of GOD upon them. GOD made them his special care --
delivered them, and will deliver us also, if we will cleave to the LORD,
trusting in him. The Most High has gloriously owned the cause of liberty, in
New England, and will continue to own it, unless we so abuse, as to sin away
our privileges. GOD has made the wilderness blossom as a rose, and solitary
places to sing and rejoice. Admire the dispensations of divine providence in
gradually cutting off the heathen -- making room for us -- causing the land to
spue out the barbarous nations, as they grew ripe for ruin. How strangely have
they wasted away 'til they almost disappear? Many are the wars they have
engaged in, and obliged our ancestors to be involved in: various conspiracies
have been formed by them: every of which, eventually hastened their own ruin.
In what unexpected and mavelous ways has GOD apppeared for our ancestors I
once when they were just ready to starve, having appointed a day of fasting and
prayer; a few days before the time appointed therefore, GOD sent a vessel laden
with provisions to them, and they turned the fast into a thanksgiving. It is
impossible to relate or even conceive the difficulties and distresses they
struggled with; or the mercies and deliverances they experienced. Now GOD has
given us peaceably to enjoy the fruit of their labor: can we help feeling
ourselves under peculiar obligations to love and serve the GOD of our fathers.
Fear the LORD and serve him in truth, with all your heart, for consider what
great things he has done for you.

2. HENCE see the wonderful goodness and awful severity of GOD. Goodness to our
fathers; defending them -- because he loved them and those their seed etc;.
Shall this mavelous goodness of GOD -- these numerous mercies be abused by
their posterity? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance
and long suffering; not knowing that the goodness of GOD leads thee to
repentance? But, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto
thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment
of GOD. Affronts offered to goodness and mercy are most provoking and
aggravated. Of all men we are then most inexcusable, if we rebel against GOD.
Has GOD dealt so with any people as with us and our fathers? Our frontiers,
which have so long been exposed to the most horrid barbarities of merciless
savages, are now become peaceable habitations. -- How amazingly does the
country populate! The inhabitants enlarge their borders almost from sea to sea,
and from the river to the ends of the earth -- When recollecting the history
hereof, it should be our chief view and aim to discover the greatness and glory
of the works of GOD. To disregard his providential operations, is a sin of the
deepest dye. None but the most stupid or abandoned of mankind, will be guilty
of such infatuation.

GOD's awful severity is also held up to view in this discourse -- severity
upon the heathens, whom the LORD has wonderfully dimin shed and destroyed,
their name and memory is almost perished from the earth. Of how much sorer
punishment shall we be thought worthy, if we trample, as under our feet, the
Son of GOD, and count the blood of the covenant an unholy thing, doing despite
to the spirit of grace? In their destruction, we have an awful example of GOD's
justice to alarm us. When we consider the numerous tribes GOD has destroyed --
how they have perished: -- that if we sin, it is at a dearer rate than they
have done -- and as our sins will be more aggravated so will our punishment --
if those died without mercy what will be our doom? We shall perish from off
this good land -- and sink into misery infinitely deeper and more dreadful than
we can conceive of. Fear as well as love should excite us to serve the LORD.
These are powerful motives of action in the human mind, and should this day
have their influence on our minds -- numberless are the motives, heaven has
especially set before us, to excite us to a conscientious observance of duty.
If we have any regard for the glory of GOD, our own comfort here and hereafter,
or for our tender offspring and posterity, we must serve the LORD. We cannot
plead, to extenuate our guilt, that we have not known our LORD's will, as
revealed by his word and wonderful works. Those heathen, whom GOD has driven
out from before us, will rise up in judgment against us, if we live without GOD
and CHRIST in the world, despising gospel light and grace.

3. WHAT an ungrateful part do those act, who live in comfortable
circumstances, in consequence of those hardships and pe^^^s their ancestors
encountered, and yet speak slightly and reproachfully o^ them! If they are so
ignorant, that knowledge of the truth don't teach them better; yet filial piety
should check their impious tongues. How indecent and undutiful for children to
rise up and load with reproach, the names and memory of those, to whom under
GOD they are indebted for their existence and numberless mercies and blessings
they enjoy. It is impious in any, to reproach those, who have given such
illustrious demonstrations of their rising superior to the most discouraging
obstacles, surmounting perils and want, toil and famine, and the sword of the
wilderness. -- After such signal interpositions of heaven in their behalf; --
after having left behind them such a sweet memorial, (more than a brazen
monument) of the sincerity of their profession -- after all this, their ashes
should remain undisturbed by any: but for their posterity to traduce their
memories with reproaches, is such complicated, God-provoking, heaven-daring,
soul-ruining, land-defiling and detestable a sin as wants a name. -- Did our
pious and venerable ancestors forsake houses, lands and the most tender
connections, with every thing dear and estimable amongst human kind, for the
undisturbed fruition of the rights of private judgment, sacred by the laws of
GOD and nature. -- Let us adore GOD who supported them, and walk worthy the
descendants of such pious and illustrious ancestors.

4. LET us lament the crying sins of the present day. America was sought at
first and settled, as an asylum for liberty civil and religious. Regard for
GOD, religion and liberty brought our forefathers hither: and how strict were
they in family religion and government -- in attendance upon public worship and
gospel ordinances: and in all their moral behavior -- profaneness and
intemperance were not practiced by them. But alas! how are the times changed!
GOD has put us into the quiet possession of this land; though every thing is
not as we could wish; yet we are freed from those distresses they endured. Do
we walk humbly and thankfully before and with our GOD? Does not iniquity abound
and the love of many wax cold? What divisions in church and state? Some would
subject themselves to that yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able to
bear. Our privileges, favors and blessings are dear bought. They may be looked
upon and prized by us, as flowing to us, in that crimson tide, which gushed
from the great IMMANUEL'S veins. Shall we dare to sin away those precious
privileges, which our glorious REDEEMER expended his blood to procure? -- We
may also look upon these privileges as handed down to us, through the blood of
our forefathers. How inexcusably and aggravatedly guilty are the inhabitants
of this land, if they refuse or neglect to know and serve the LORD GOD of their
fathers. Did the first planters, from before whom GOD drove out the
Aboriginals, appear in any thing, to be over-rigid and severe, as if they
retained something of that old leaven of persecution from which they fled? Yet,
certainly their general character was that of eminently pious christians. Loose
principles and loose practices are too prevalent with the present generation.
Are these the descendants of those noble worthies? How degenerate!

FINALLY, let us break off our sins by repentance and return to GOD through
JESUS CHRIST. We have dangerous and threatening symptoms upon us; among which
this is one. that some appear to set light by those inestimable privileges of a
civil and religious nature, which we enjoy, Remember from whence we are fallen,
repent and do the first works -- Begin at home first. Mankind are apt to say
such and such are vile: there is a profane person; there is a sabbath breaker,
or an intemperate wretch, etc;. Begin with thyself. -- Which of the divine
commands have you not broken, in thought, word or deed, and are daily breaking?
Hereby thou do bear apart, in pulling down, as with violent hands, the
vengeance of heaven. Let every one repent, saying what have I done? Fear GOD
and honor the King. We must know GOD so as to love and serve him, as an holy,
just and righteous being: consecrating our time, (...) and our all to his
praise and glory: living by the faith of the son of GOD. It is high time to
wake out of sleep and put on the LORD JESUS* Now is the accepted time and now
the day of salvation. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come and
will not tarry. Eternity is just before us. Our fathers, who first settled this
country* where are they? Having served their generation, according to the will
of GOD, they are fallen asleep. We must quickly lie down alike in the dust --
Let us live as pilgrims and strangers here -- seeking an heavenly country -- as
people professing godliness and under the best advantages and strongest
obligations to practice that righteousness which exalts a nation. Wherefore
repent and be converted. -- In point of duty, gratitude and interest, we are
under infinite obligations to love GOD and live to him. God is infinitely
worthy of our supreme love and entire obedience, as he is by nature GOD. And
every motive from heaven, earth and hell conspires to urge duty upon us. To
continue in sin, is to despise GOD* CHRIST and heavenly joys; yea, and to be
stupid to our own present interest and comfort. Abandon a I sin -- stand fast
in the liberty wherewith CHRIST has, made us free. Abuse not those precious
privileges -- may GOD continue them and we perpetuate the memory of them -- May
we, through grace, educate here for a blessed immortality; transmitting to
posterity, this fair inheritance and these privileges unimpair'd. When we are
gathered to our fathers, may there be here a generation to serve the LORD: and
when CHRIST who is the believers life, shall appear to judge the world, with
all his saints around him, may we appear with him in glory.

AMEN AND AMEN.
ERRATA.
PAGE 12, l. 18, dele dis. P.16, l. 14, 15, for a recorder. r. an order. Ibid,
l.3 from bot. for Duad r. Dugd. P. 25. at bot. for the last war, r. the
beginning of the last war. P.26, l. 2 after command add were destroyed. P. 28,
l. 6, after us, add to. P. 30, l. 25, for stroger r. stronger. P. 39, l. 4.
from bot, for effecting, r. affecting.


