Dr. Chauncy's SERMON, Preached May 30th. 1770.

Trust in GOD, the Duty of a People in a Day of Trouble.

A SERMON Preached, May 30th. 1770.

At the request of a great number of Gentlemen, friends to the LIBERTIES of
North America, who were desirous, notwithstanding the removal of the
Massachusetts General-Court (unconstitutionally as they judged) to CAMBRIDGE,
that GOD might be acknowledged in that house of worship at BOSTON, in which our
tribes, from the days of our fathers, have annually sought to him for
direction, previous to the choice of his Majesty's Council.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cornhill. 1770.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE author of the following Sermon acknowledges the candor of the many
respectable Gentlemen, who so kindly over-looked it is imperfections in the
hearing, as to desire it is publication: and hopes the reader will be in the
exercise of a like candid temper of mind; as the warning to preach did not
exceed forty-eight hours, and what was preached is printed without
transcribing; their being no leisure for it.

PSALM 22.4. "Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou did deliver
them".


HOLY David spoke these words in the name of the Jewish nation, looking back to
their pious ancestors, through the several successive periods, in which they
had existed as a people; and what he says concerning them is, that they
"trusted in GOD". He then records the happy effect consequent thereupon "Thou
did deliver them": which deliverance GOD sometimes wrought out for them in
the most signal manner; "riding in the heavens for their help, and in his
excellency on the clouds".

THE inspired psalmist reminds the Jewish people, in his day, of this piety of
their progenitors, and the good effect of it, that he might excite in them a
becoming concern to make GOD the supreme object of their trust; encouraging
them, in this way, to hope for deliverance, however pressing the difficulties
might be they were under.

MY text, though thus primarily directed to the Jews to engage their trust in
GOD, that they might obtain deliverance from evil, is yet applicable to other
people, under like circumstances; and may obviously be accommodated to the
people of GOD in this land. Perhaps, there are no people, now dwelling on the
face of the earth, who may, with greater pertineney, adopt the language of king
David, and say, "our fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did
deliver them".

I shall discourse to the words in this accommodated sense; taking occasion
from them to speak of our pious ancestors as those who "trusted in GOD"; and
then of the good effect of their so doing, in the "deliverances GOD wrought out
for them". The way will then be clear to point out to us their posterity our
duty in this day of trouble, and the good effect we may humbly look for from
the faithful performance of it.

IT may with real truth be said of our pious progenitors, that they "trusted in
GOD"; that is, that they made GOD the alone ultimate object of their dependence
in every time of need. And this they did, not blindly, or groundlessly, as
having no solid reason for their conduct; but from just conceptions of that
wisdom, power, and goodness of GOD, which render him a being every way suitable
to be entirely confided in. In this view of the all sufficiency of GOD, they
ever repaired to him as their strength and refuge, commiting themselves, and
all their concerns, into his hands, and relying on him as their supreme help.
Sensible of their own inability to provide for and protect themselves, and of
the inability of all creatures without GOD, much more in opposition to him,
they took off their dependence from every thing else, and placed it on him
supremely and ultimately, as that glorious, and yet gracious, being, who alone
was sufficient to be their guide, defense, and help, especially in their days
of trouble.

THUS our fathers trusted in GOD; and some special properties of this their
trust, are eminently worthy of notice.

IT was a trust accompanied with prayer. This is observed, in the verse
immediately following my text, concerning the trust of the Jewish fathers.
"They cried unto thee, and were delivered". They prayed, as well as trusted.
They not only made GOD their dependence, but committed their case to him in
humble, fervent supplications. In like manner, prayer to that glorious being
who dwells on high, was ever a concomitant of that trust which the pious
forefathers of the people of New England placed in GOD. They were eminently men
of prayer; they prayed always; and their prayers were more abundant, and more
importunate and incessant, when their circumstances made it proper to make GOD
their special refuge in any times of more than ordinary difficulty and danger.
They now besieged the throne of GOD, with their fervent cries, at once hoping
in his mercy, and praying to him for the bestowment of it.

THEIR trust also was accompanied with humility, a becoming sense of their
unworthiness, and the infinite condescension of GOD, that he should be willing
to allow such sinful undeserving creatures to place their dependence on him for
protection and help. They entertained in their minds exalted apprehensions of
this favor of the "high and lofty one who inhabiteth eternity"; and as low ones
of themselves, in consideration of their own comparative nothingness, much more
of their sinfulness, whereby they had exposed themselves to the righteous
resentments of heaven.

THEIR trust in GOD was likewise exercised with profound submission to his
alwise pleasure, as to the time, manner, measure, and all the circumstances
relative to the good they confided in him for. They were so resigned as to have
no will of their own, in opposition to GOD's. That was the feeling of their
hearts, as well as the language of their lips, in all times of danger and
distress, whether personal or public, "let the Lord do to us as seems good to
him". "Father, not as we will, but as thou will".

Again, THEIR trust in GOD was steadily and firmly fixed. Nothing was able to
shake their confidence in the divine perfections, and promises, no difficulties
in the course of providence, no discouragements, no dangers, no trials however
heavy and severe; but in the midst of all, and notwithstanding all, they had
rest in their souls by resolutely cleaving to GOD as their ultimate hope and
refuge. With holy Job they could say, "though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him"; Yea, they could triumph in the language of the 46th Psalm, "GOD is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not
fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the depth of
the seas; though the waters thereof roar and are troubled; though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof".

Yet again, THEIR trust in GOD was accompained with their own endeavors, in
the use of proper means, in order to the obtainment of needed salvation and
deliverance: Otherwise, instead of placing a well grounded confidence in the
divine all sufficiency, they would have been chargeable with the weakness and
folly of presuming upon the help of heaven. For it ought always to be
remembered, though it is GOD ultimately who protects, helps, and saves; yet, he
ordinarily does this by the intervention of second causes, adapted in their
nature to the purpose. Our fathers, therefore, that they might not substitute
presumption, in the room of a well-placed trust, joined with their dependence
on GOD, though in absolute subordination to it, a due use of such means as he has
been wont to accompany, or follow, with his blessing. Had they, in a time of
danger, needlessly exposed themselves, or had they not taken such methods as
were wise, fit and reasonable, in order to their own preservation and safety,
they would in vain have trusted in GOD; as in this way only they might
reasonably have expected his blessing.

MOREOVER, their trust in GOD was an obediential one. They at once obeyed GOD
and depended on him. They made it their care to walk in the way of his
commandments; and now they confided in his power, wisdom, and goodness to
defend, protect, guide, and do them good. For, as the scripture says, to which
they always paid a sacred regard, "the Lord is a sun and shield; the Lord will
withhold no good thing"; -- from whom? It follows, "from them that walk
uprightly".

IN fine, their trust in GOD was exercised through Jesus Christ. This son of
GOD's love they esteemed the divinely appointed medium of communication between
GOD and man, and the only one that was so. Through him they believed GOD was
reconcilable to sinners, and might be a friend to supply their wants, to help
them under difficulties, to guard them against dangers, and to be their
salvation in a day of trouble. They accordingly repaired to GOD through Jesus
Christ, the one mediator between GOD and men, making him their refuge, the
supreme object of their dependence in regard both of soul and body, this world
and another. The worthiness of CHRIST, and not their own, was the reason or
ground of all they expected in consequence of their trusting in him They knew
GOD was ever well pleased with his Son Jesus Christ, in virtue of his obedience
to the death; and that, through him, they might with humble confidence rely on
him to pity, and help them; to appear their savior, and work out deliverance
for them. Him therefore they made the great object of their trust, their
supreme refuge, and all-sufficient director and protector.

AND they found their account in thus trusting in GOD. For what is said in the
latter part of my text, is justly applicable to them, "Thou did deliver them".

THE word, "deliverance", carries in it the idea of difficulty and danger,
either felt or feared. Our fathers were often exposed to dangers, and sometimes
called, in the course of providence, to suffer the trial of pressing
difficulties. GOD was their refuge in these times of trouble, in him they
trusted; and the effect was, their deliverance out of all their troubles.

IT was a day of grievous trial to them, when they were oppressed in England,
by having put on their necks the ecclesiastical yoke of bondage, which was
sorely galling. They were not permitted to worship their GOD according to the
dictates of conscience, guided by his word. And unless they submitted to the
inventions of man, added to the ordinances of GOD, they became liable to fines,
confiscations, imprisonments, and banishment. It could scarce be believed what
they were called to, unless they would shipwreck faith and a good conscience,
was a rehearsal to be here given of what they suffered. -- But, as they trusted
in GOD, he made way for their deliverance from this tyranny, by bringing them
over to this then desolate land, with CHARTER-RIGHTS, not only setting them
free from the oppression of church power, but intitling them to distinguishing
liberties and privileges, both civil and religious. And very signal was the
appearance of heaven on their behalf in bringing about this deliverance. The
alwise good GOD not only gave them favor with the great men at home, so as to
encourage their enterprise to this new and unknown part of the world; but made
a path for them in the great waters, and bro't them over the atlantic to these
then dangerous, because, in that day, untried shoars; landing them in safety.
The deliverance of our forefathers from tyranny and oppression, by bringing
them over to this distant region, is not unlike his carrying his Israel of old
through the red sea to the promised land of rest: And that might have been their
song of praise upon this account, "The Lord is our strength and song; and he is
become our salvation. He is our GOD, and we will prepare him an habitation. Who
is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. Thou in mercy have led forth the
people whom thou have redeemed; thou have girded them in thy strength. -- Thou
have bro't them in, and planted them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in
the place, O Lord, which thou have made for thee to dwell in, in the sanctuary,
O Lord, which thy hands have established. The Lord shall reign forever and
ever".

OUR fathers, after their coming into this land, were at first, and for many
years, in straits and difficulties, and at times much put to it even for the
necessaries of life. But as they trusted in GOD, he appeared for their help,
and made provision for their support, in ways as extraordinary, as unexpected.

OUR fathers, after their settlement in this land, were sometimes in great
distress from the savages that invaded them, and threatened their destruction.
And had it not been for mavelous protections afforded to them by GOD
almighty, they must have perished by the hands of these enemies. They might
with great propriety have adopted those words of the Psalmist, "If it had not
been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. -- Blessed be
the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth. -- Our help is in the
name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth".

OUR fathers, even after they had, in a good measure, subdued this
wilderness-country, enlarging their borders, increasing in numbers, and in a
plenty of the comforts of life, and, at the same time, adding strength and
glory to the British crown, were hardly dealt with by those who had the
government in their hands. The following summary of the tyrannical oppression
of those days will not be esteemed a misrepresentation, as it is taken from the
history of the Massachusetts Bay, wrote by his honor, our present commander in
chief. "Nero (page 355.) concealed his tyrannical disposition more years than
Sir Edmund, and his creatures, did months. It was not long before the case of
some, who apprehended themselves oppressed, came under consideration; one of
the Council told them, that they must not think the privileges of Englishmen
would follow them to the end of the world. This gave an alarm through the
government. -- One of the first acts of power was the restraint of the press.
Randolph [that tool of power] was the licenser -- A restraint upon marriages
was more grievous. None were allowed to marry, except they entered into bonds,
with sureties to the Governor, to be forfeited in case there should afterward
appear to have been any lawful impediment. -- Sir Edmund considered the
congregational ministers as mere laymen. Randolph wrote to the Biship of
London, "I press for able and sober ministers, and we will contribute largely
to their maintenance; but one thing will mainly help, when no marriages shall
hereafter be allowed lawful, but such as are made by the ministers of the
church of England. -- The people (356, 537.) were menaced, that their
meeting houses should be taken from them, and that public worship in the
congregational way should not be tolerated. -- Several churches had agreed to
set apart days of thanksgiving for his Majesty's declaration for liberty of
conscience. The Governor forbad them. -- He told them, they should meet at
their peril, and that he should send soldiers to guard their meeting houses. --
Swearing by the book (page 358.) which had never been practiced, was now
introduced; and such as scrupled it were fined and imprisoned. -- The fees to
all officers were exorbitant. Fifty Shillings [money of that day] was the
common see for probate of a will. The Governor was supreme ordinary, and acted
by himself. -- It was a great burden upon widows and children, who lived
remote, to be obliged to come to Boston for every part of business relative to
the settlement of estates. The fees of all other officers were complained of as
oppressive. THE HARPIES THEMSELVES QUARRELLED ABOUT THEIR SHARE OF THE PREY. --
But the greatest profit (page 359) arose from patents for lands. The Charter
being vacated, the people were told that their titles to their estates were of
no value. -- It was made public, that all who would acknowledge the
insufficiency of their title, derived from the former government, by
petitioning for new patents, should be quieted upon reasonable terms. -- In the
complaint to King James, it is alleged, that the fees of some amounted to
Fifty Pounds. -- Men's titles were not questioned all at once. Had this been
the case, according to the computation then made, all the personal estate in
the colony would not have paid the charge of the patents. -- The Governor (page
361) with four or five of his Council laid what taxes they thought proper. This
the people complained of as their greatest grievance. They thought themselves
ENTITLED TO THE LIBERTIES AND IMMUNITIES OF FREE AND NATURAL BORN ENGLISH
SUBJECTS, and consequently that NO MONEYS OUGHT TO BE RAISED FROM THEM BUT BY
THEIR REPRESENTATIVES".

These, and such like in general, were the sufferings of our fathers, under the
administration of Sir Edmund, "who knew too well the disposition of his master
to give him any concern about the complaints preferred against him": But they
were the occasion of a revolution here about the same time, the revolution took
place in England; a general account only of which would take up more room than
can be here spared.

I shall only subjoin that observable remark of our honorable commander in
chief, in a note at the bottom of page 391. "Of all that were concerned in the
late government [Sir Edmund's] Mr. DUDLEY felt most of the people's resentment.
Oppression is less grievous from a stranger than one of our own country". He
further says, in the words of Danforth to I. Mather, "Mr. Dudley is, in a
peculiar manner, the object of the people's displeasure -- They deeply resent
his correspondence with that WICKED RANDOLPH for overturning the government.


Their charter rights were trampled upon, and arbitrary methods taken to
dispose of their lands, and make them slaves to those who had it in view to
tyranize over them. But, as they trusted in GOD, he made bare his arm for their
deliverance. This he did by effecting a glorious revolution in England;
glorious in this, among other respects, that it changed the line of the Regal
succession, settling it on her Electoral Highness, the Princess SOPHIA SOPHIA
was daughter of ELISABETH, daughter of King James the first. She married COUNT
PALATINE of the Rhine; and in her day the whole Palatinate (who were
PROTESTANTS) suffered greatly, in consequence of the exercise of catholic
tyranny. It was reasonably expected her own father would have afforded her
needed help; but she had no assistance from him. The famous Dr. Preston, master
of Emanuel-College in Cambridge, and chaplain in ordinary to his then Majesty
King James, in a Sermon, preached in his hearing, has these observable words
(page 52), directed to those who had great power, and opportunity of doing
good, "Let them consider that excellent speech of Mordacai to Esther, (chap. 4.
v. 24.) If thou hold thy tongue at this time, deliverance shall appear to the
Jews from another place; but thou and thy house shall perish. The meaning is
this; then there was an opportunity of doing good to the church. Therefore,
says he, if thou do not do it, thou and thy house shall perish. For if any be
an impediment, nay, if any do not do their best, I pronounce this, in the name
of the the most true GOD, that shall make it good sooner or later, they and
their houses shall perish, and be as the straw that we spoke of, that
oppresses the coal of fire". Some, perhaps, may look upon this as a prophetic
speech, and remarkably fulfilled, when they are told, that Charles the First,
King James's Son, was awfully beheaded; and that James the Second, his
Grandson, abdicated the throne, upon which, after the death of Queen Ann,
George the First was seated, in whole family the succession has run on to this
day.
Duchess of Hanover, the only remaining PROTESTANT branch of the old royal
family, and the heirs of her body, being PROTESTANTS; which settlement of the
crown, first made in the reign of King William and Queen Mary, and afterward
confirmed by repeated acts of Parliament, upon the death of Queen Ann, who left
no issue, placed his Majesty King George the First on the British throne, then
his royal Son our late King George the Second, and now his Grandson, our
present most gracious King George the Third; in whose family, our prayer to the
GOD of Heaven is, that the succession may abide for ever!

THE religious and civil liberties and privileges, both of the mother country
and the American colonies, were nearly and closely connected with this signal
interposition of that GOD, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and whose dominion rules over all. Had it
not been for this mavelous appearance of divine providence, in favor of the
people in Old, as well as in New England, they would have been governed, not by
law, but by sovereign will, absolute pleasure; that is, in plain words, they
would, instead of being freemen, have been made abject slaves. That was the
language of our pious fathers, both at home and in this country, upon this
great and never to be forgotten deliverance, "The Lord is our strength and
refuge, our shield and defense. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof
we are glad. Ascribe ye greatness to our GOD. He is the rock. His work is
perfect. A GOD of truth, and without iniquity; just and right is he".

IN a word, our fathers, as they trusted in GOD, were favored with many
deliverances from great dangers, and heavily pressing difficulties; and in a
manner, sometimes, peculiarly striking and surprising. Perhaps it cannot be
said of any deliverances, wrought out for any people, those excepted which GOD
wrought out for his Israel of old, that they were more signally great and
glorious than those, in which he made his arm bare for the salvation of our
fathers in this land. "He made them to go forth like sheep, and guided them in
the wilderness like a flock; and he led them on safely, and brought them to the
place his right hand had purchased for them. He cast out the heathen before
them, and divided them an inheritance as it were by line: Yea, he drove out the
heathen with his hand, and planted them; he afflicted the people and cast them
out. For they got not this land in possession with their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them, but the right hand and arm of GOD, and the light of
his countenance, because he had a favor for them".

THUS we have seen, that our forefathers "trusted in GOD", and that GOD, in
consequence of this their piety toward him, wrought out deliverance for them.

THE way is now prepared, according to the method at first laid out, to point
out to us their posterity our duty in this day of trouble, and the good effect
we may humbly look for from the faithful performance of it.

IT is our lot, my hearers, to live in a time when the face of providence is
angry and threatening. Our mother country is in a state of great perplexity,
difficulty, and confusion. If we may give credit to the accounts we have from
home, complaints run high, uneasiness and discontent are grown general,
insomuch that, if GOD does not mercifully interpose, no one knows what may be
the consequence. And it is with us, in these American lands, a day of darkness,
a day wherein we are called to put on sackcloth. We are out of favor with our
sovereign, and most of those who stand round his throne; though it is an
alleviation of our unhappiness, that their displeasure is owing to injurious
representations, repeatedly and wickedly made to our disadvantage. -- The
restraints we are under as to the exercise of some of our rights and privileges
are grievous; and the more so, as they were the purchase of our fathers at the
risque of every thing near and dear to them, their lives not excepted. -- In
return for the part we cheerfully bore in the late gloriously successful war,
which emptied our purses, brought upon us an heavy debt, and occasioned a much
greater loss of our young men, the flower and glory of the country, than was
ever known before; I say, in return for this expense of blood and treasure,
from which we expected to reap great benefit, new duties have been imposed on
us, and without any to represent our persons in parliament, or to act in our
behalf; new officers have been appointed, and a numerous train of them too,
with enormous stipends for this part of the world, and to be paid out of our
pockets; in consequence of which our trade was never before so incumbered with
difficulties, never so loaded with charges, and never so obstructed in its
operation. -- And we have, in a measure, been treated as though we were rebels;
otherwise, what occasion could there be for this metropolis to be, as it were,
garrisoned with the King's troops, to the infinite hurt of the morals of its
inhabitants, and to their being in a variety of ways insulted, injured, and
abused? But it would be needless to enlarge in a detail of hardships we are all
knowing to, from what we have already felt, or are now groaning under: Nor
shall I incur the charge of going out of my line, by entering upon a political
consideration of what may be thought the true source of those difficulties
which make the present, a day of trouble. It Is certainly the truth of fact,
however the right of taxation be determined, that we are in a perplexed
situation.

AND our duty is, after the example of our Fathers, in like circumstances, to
"trust in GOD". He only is the ultimate object of dependence. On him alone can
we securely rely for the salvation our case calls for In vain will it be to
look to the hills and to the mountains, to second causes of whatever kind or
nature; for they are nothing, and can affect nothing, without him, to the
neglect of him, much less in opposition to him. The scriptures are accordingly
filled with calls to trust in GOD, especially in a day of trouble. And we are
there told, that "it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in
man"; that "it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in
Princes". Yea, we are there warned against placing our confidence in any being
below the one true and living GOD, "the Lord Jehovah, in whom is everlasting
strength". Yea, further, we have such a solemn denunciation as that, "cursed is
the man who trusts in man, who makes flesh his arm", that is, in opposition
to GOD, without a becoming subserviency to the will and pleasure of the
almighty Ruler of the world.

IT is therefore our duty, nor can we do any thing better, under our present
circumstances, than to put our trust in GOD. And if we do this with humble
reverence; with all due submission to the sovereign alwise, dominion of
providence; and in the use of such means as are reasonable and just, and will
be so accounted by "the righteous LORD who loves righteousness", we may hope
to be delivered out of all our troubles. This was the good effect consequent
upon our father's trusting in GOD. "They trusted", and GOD "delivered them".
And he is the same almighty good GOD now, that he was in their day. "His arm is
not shortened that it cannot save".

THE grounds upon which we may hope for deliverance, if we trust in GOD, are
such as render all fear of being either ashamed or disappointed, needless and
unreasonable.

GOD has abundantly declared, in the revelation he has made of his purposes,
that he will be the deliverer of those that sutably repair to him as their
supreme refuge, and all-sufficient help. The texts to this purpose are
scattered all over the bible. Hence the prayer of David, recorded in Psalm.
17.7. -- "O thou that savest, by thy right hand, them that put their trust in
thee, -- hide me under the shadow of thy wings from the wicked that oppress me,
from my deadly enemies who compass me about: they are enclosed in their own
fat; with their mouths they speak proudly. -- Arise, O Lord, deliver my soul
from the wicked". Hence also those words in the 33. Psalm. v. 20. "Behold, the
eye of the Lord is upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from
death. Our soul waits for the Lord: He is our help and shield. Our heart
shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name. Let thy mercy,
O Lord, be upon us according as we hope in thee. In like manner, it is said
Psalm. 37. "The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength
in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and deliver them; he shall
deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust him".

AND this GOD that has engaged deliverance to those who sutably depend on him
for it, is abundantly able to fulfill his word and promise. For he is infinite
in the perfections of his nature; in wisdom, knowledge, power, faithfulness,
and goodness. No obstacles are the least hindrance to him. All nature is at his
command, all second causes, whether physical, or moral; and he can make just
what use of them he pleases in accomplishing his own purposes. He can bring to
naught the most deep laid counsels; overruling them to his own glory, and the
good of those against whom they are designed. The hearts of men, the greatest
as well as the least, are known to him, and absolutely under his control; and
he can, whenever he pleases, "turn them even as the rivers of waters are
turned". No devices of men, whether high or low, can take effect in
contradiction to his alwise pleasure. There are a thousand ways in which he can
defeat them; yea, he can employ the worst and most powerful evil devisers, as
instruments to confound their own designs, and bring the contrary to what they
intended into effect. In short, all the wisdom and power of heaven and earth,
of all angels and all men, are under the government of GOD; and he can make use
of it all, should he think fit to employ their instrumentality, in working out
salvation for his people that truly trust in him: Yea, he could invert the
course of nature, stop the sun in its course, commission the stars to fight,
and interpose by stupendous signs in heaven, and wonders on earth, for their
defense, protection and deliverance. Thus he has done, and he may do the same
again. There is no withstanding GOD. He can with infinite ease, in opposition
to earth and hell, defend and save those that make him their strength and
refuge.

LET us then, my brethren, cast all our care and fear on the Lord. Let us make
GOD the ultimate object of our dependence; looking above all second causes; not
"trusting in man, whose breath is in his nostrils", and can do nothing but in
subserviency to the governing wisdom of that providence which extends over all
human affairs.

ONLY, let me remind you of one thing, which ought never to be forgotten, and
that is; that our trust in GOD must be accompanied with repentance, evidencing
its genuine reality by an amendment of our doings which have not been right,
and obedience to the voice of the Lord. We shall only presume, if we pretend to
trust in GOD, while we go on in our sins, and refuse to be reclaimed. A pious
trust in GOD, and impenitence in sin, are utterly inconsistent with each other.
We cannot in a truly religious way, make GOD our refuge, while we retain a love
to our sins, and will not be prevailed on to part with them.

AND here you will permit me to say, our sins are the worst enemies we have.
They are, properly speaking, the true moral cause of all that we now suffer, or
have reason to fear. We may ascribe the ill state of our affairs to this or the
other second cause. We may ascribe it to misrepresentations sent to the
mother country by those, in this, who seek their own, not the welfare of the
public; We may ascribe it to the pride, the resentment, the hatred of men at
home, clothed with dignity and honor; we may ascribe it to a malignant spirit
in some, who cannot be easy without having the purses of the colonies
subjected to their arbitrary pleasure. But if any should suppose our
difficulties may, in any measure, be owing to these, or such like causes, it
must be said, they are only secondary ones, superintended and governed by the
great Ruler of the world. Men can do nothing without GOD. And whatever
difficulties, hardships, and sufferings they may be the occasion of, they are
only instruments in the hands of providence. GOD ultimately is the inflicter of
these evils; and he would neither inflict, or permit the infliction of them,
but on account of the sins of those who suffer by them. Our sins therefore, in
the last result, are the alone cause of whatever troubles we groan under.
Instead therefore of reflecting blame on GOD, we should blame ourselves; and in
truth, we have much more reason to blame ourselves for our sins, than to blame
even the secondary causes of our suffering.

IF then we would trust in GOD, so as to secure his favor, and obtain the
deliverance we need, we must make him our refuge in the way of repentance and
reformation; humbling ourselves in a sense of our multiplied offenses committed
against the majesty of heaven, and resolving, in the strength of divine grace,
that wherein we have done iniquity we will do so no more. If we would hope,
upon just grounds, to be a happy people, and to have continued to us those
invaluable rights and liberties that have been transmitted to us from our
fathers, we must be imitators of their virtue, trust in GOD in a way of
repentance, and a due care to live in the world piously, righteously, and
soberly, as the grace of GOD, in the gospel, has taught us to do, and is ready
to enable us to do. If we are but once effectually wrought upon to renounce our
sins, and walk in newness of life, ordering our conversation, not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of GOD, we may humbly hope, that GOD will be for us;
and if GOD be for us, we need not fear who are against us. No power whatever,
in this case, shall do us any real harm. The things that, to human appearance,
are against us shall in the end turn out to our advantage. GOD can make the
most adverse state of affairs work out our best good; and he will certainly do
it, if we love him with all our hearts, and serve him with all our might,
conforming ourselves to the directions of his word. While we trust in the
perfections of almighty GOD, in the way of doing our duty to him, we need not
fear, however dark and melancholy the face of providence may appear for the
present. For GOD will be our help. And "happy are they who have the GOD of
Jacob for their help, whose hope is in the Lord their GOD". While we thus set
our hope in him, we may triumph and sing, "the Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies, came upon me to eat up
my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an host should encamp against me, my
heart shall not fear; though they should rise against me, in this will I be
confident.

I may now, with pertinency, put you upon recollecting, that this is the day,
on the yearly return of which we were wont to take to ourselves words, and say,
"we were glad when they said unto us, let us go into the house of the Lord. Our
feet shall stand within thy gates, O BOSTON. BOSTON is as a city compact
together, whither the tribes, throughout the province, by their
representatives, the tribes of the Lord, assemble to give thanks to the name of
the Lord", preparatory to the exercise of one of our important CHARTER-RIGHTS,
the ELECTION of his MAJESTY'S COUNCIL.

The removal of the GENERAL COURT, from this its ancient and constitutional
seat, to transact the business of this day, unhappily excites in our breasts
those sensations of grief which obstruct the motions of that joy, which, upon
this occasion, used to be pure and unalloyed. And our grief is heightened from
the consideration, that this change of place took rise from those, beyond the
atlantic, who, as we have reason to think, wish not well to our Sion. But
though we lament this obstacle which has been thrown in the way of our joy, we
bow the knee in humble grateful acknowledgments to the supreme Ruler of the
world, that we are not deprived of our RIGHT, in virtue of the ROYAL GRANT, to
choose councellers from among ourselves, whatever representations have been made
to those in power, at Home, tending to wrest from us this invaluable right. And
it is, I doubt not, the sincere, ardent prayer of this whole assembly, in union
with our brethren at Cambridge, that his majesty's council may this day be
filled with men of wisdom and understanding; men of integrity and uprightness;
men of ability, and well knowing in the times; men that fear GOD, honor the
King, and are zealously disposed to seek the welfare of this people. We have,
without controversy, a sufficiency of such men in the province. And the fault
will lie with those who are entrusted with the elections of this day, or with
him who has a negative on their choice, if we have not the best men in the
country for our councellers, men well acquainted with the constitution, laws,
priveleges, and interests of this people; men of fidelity to their King and
country; men of a public spirit, who are above acting under the influence of
narrow and selfish principles; men of inflexible justice, and undaunted
resolution, who will dare not to give their consent to unrighteous acts, or
mistaken nominations; men who will disdain in their hearts to accomodate their
conduct, in a servile manner, either to their electors, or him who can prevent
their political existence; in fine, men who will steadily, and in a uniform
course, act up to their character, support the honor of their stations, and
approve themselves invariably faithful in their endeavors to advance the
common weal.

THESE are the men that may be called to sit at the council board; and we hope
in that alwise almighty being, who presides over the affairs of the children of
men, so to govern the views, and direct the thoughts, of the electors this day,
as that they may be led into the choice of such councellers as he shall own,
and succeed to promote the best interest of this people, especially under their
present difficulties and distresses.

AND when the several branches of the legislature shall proceed upon the
affairs of the public, we pray GOD they may be unitedly disposed and enabled to
act as those, who have upon their minds a just sense of the vast importance of
the trust that is reposed in them.

AND let it not be thought unseasonable, no one present will think it so, if I
should say, that it may reasonably be expected of our executive courts, that
they act with vigor, and impartiality, in the distribution of justice. If there
should have been, in any measure, a failure in this respect, since the King's
troops were stationed in this town, from whatever cause, it is now hoped that
"justice and judgment will run down our streets as a stream": And I the rather
mention this, because the opened earth in one of our streets, in the month of
march last, received the streaming blood of many slaughtered, and wounded
innocents. So shocking a tragady was never before acted in this part of the
world; and GOD forbid it should ever be again! Who the sheders of this blood
were may possibly appear, upon the trial of those who are under confinement, as
being supposed to be the guilty persons. We wish them as fair and equal a trial
as they themselves can desire. And should they all, or any of them, be found
guilty, though their sin be as "scarlet, and red like crimson", we heartily
wish their repentance, that, of the mercy of GOD in Jesus Christ, they may
escape the second death; though our eye is restrained from pitying them so as
to wish their deliverance from the first death. For the supreme legislator has
said, "whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed" -- "life
shall go for life" -- "No satisfaction shall be taken for the life of a
murderer -- He shall surely be put to death.

SOME have whispered a suspicion, as though a reprieve from death would be
granted, should the guilt of blood be fastened upon some who are supposed to
have been actors in this horrid wickedness -- But it is an high indignity
offered to him, who has the power of giving a reprieve, so much as to suspect
he would do it in the case of BLOOD GUILTINESS, clearly proved upon any, in
consequence of a fair and impartial trial. Surely, he would not counter-act the
operation of the law both of GOD and man. Surely, he would not suffer the Town
and Land, to lie under the defilement of blood! Surely, he would not make
himself a partaker in the guilt of murder, by putting a stop to the shedding of
their blood, who have murderously spilt the blood of others! All such
suspicions should be suppressed. They are virtually a scandalous reproach
reflected on him, of whose integrity, and regard to public justice, we should
entertain a more honorable opinion.

I HAVE no need, my hearers, to be urgent with you to approve yourselves loyal
to our rightful and lawful KING GEORGE the Third, now setting on the British
throne. For it is undoubtedly the truth of fact, that his Majesty has no
subjects, in any part of his extended dominions, that would more readily
venture their lives and fortunes in defense of his person, the succession in
his royal house, and his government within the bounds of the english
constitution, than we in the MASSACHUSETS-PROVINCE, notwithstanding the base
and false representations which have occasioned his Majesty, and many of his
ministers, to look upon us with a jealous and angry eye. GOD forgive those
lovers of themselves in opposition to their King and country, who, from selfish
views, have represented this people as disposed to treason and rebellion. Let
us, my brethren, notwithstanding the malice of our enemies, and their unwearied
attempts, to impress the mind of our Sovereign, by communications to his
ministers, with an ill opinion of us; let us, I say, go on, as we have hitherto
constantly done, to "make supplications, prayers, intercessions, with giving of
thanks", for the King as supreme, and for all in authority under him", that by
means of their wise, gentle, and just administrations in government, "we may
lead quiet and peceable lives in all godliness and honesty".

AND may we all so conduct in the various stations and relations we sustain in
life, as that we may honor GOD, serve our generation according to his will,
and finally be accounted worthy of an admission into that kingdom that is
above, where we shall dwell in love and peace, without sin or sorrow, through
the neverending ages of a blessed eternity.

Now to the "blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
of whom, and through whom, and to whom, are all things, be honor and power
everlasting". AMEN.


