THE SACRAMENTAL CONTROVERSY BROUGHT TO A POINT.

THE FOURTH DIALOUGE Between a MINISTER and his PARISHONER.

A REPLY To the Parishioner's Letter, concerning Qualifications for Christian
Communion; lately printed at New Haven.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, D. D.

Sacraments are holy Signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace.

Confession of Faith. None shall be admitted as Members, in order to Communion
in all the special Ordinances of the Gospel, but such Persons as -- credibly
profess cordial Subjection to JESUS CHRIST.

Heads of Agreement. As we assent to the forementioned Heads of Agreement, so
we unanimously resolve, as the Lord shall enable us to practice according to
them.

Synod at Say-Brook. NEW HAVEN: Printed by T. and S. GREEN.

The Fourth DIALOGUE Between a MINISTER and his PARISHIONER.
Parishioner. SIR, three times I have been with you heretofore, to get my child
baptized; and I am now come to make you a fourth visit, with the letter, lately
printed at New Haven, in my hand.


Minister. I am willing, Sir, and ever have been, to oblige you in all things
wherein I lawfully may. And particularly, I am willing to baptize your child,
if you, really understanding the true import of the action, are willing to
offer your child in baptism; even, to dedicate it to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost; in whose name it is to be baptized. But, if you do
indeed love God so well, as that you are willing to give him your child, to be
his for ever; why are you not as willing, to give him your self? And why should
you not, first of all, give your self up to God through Jesus Christ; and then,
after that, give your child to him? In this way God will become your covenant
God and Father in this world, and your eternal portion in the next. This is all
I wait for. And this is what I have, from the beginning, been urging upon you,
as your immediate, indispensible duty. You remember what I said to you in your
first visit, if you love God so, as to be willing to have him for your portion;
if you love Christ so, as to be willing to deny your self, take up your cross
and follow him; you may have your choice: you may do as you like: Come, for all
things are now ready. And if you would now in fact make this choice, it would
put an end to your present difficulties about your child. Nothing, therefore,
can hinder the baptism of your child, but your continuing to reject God and the
Redeemer, by which you practically renounce your own baptism, and forfeit all
the blessings of the covenant. -- And you remember my parting words in your
last visit, every circumstance of your own soul, and every circumstance of your
dear offspring, calls upon you, without delay, to awake, and to turn to God
through Jesus Christ, in sincerity and truth. -- O, what joy would it give me,
e're long, to admit you into full communion with the church, on a profession of
a compliance with the covenant of grace, in which you should appear to act
understandingly and honestly! -- And you are my witness, that, at all times, I
am ready to instruct you, to pray for you, and, if need be, to rebuke you, with
all tenderness and kindness.


P. Inspired by the spirit, which runs through the New Haven letter, I must say,
that I despise your rebukes, p. 4. and do not desire your prayers, p. 18.
"Could I sufficiently dissemble, I should give you joy, and gain a speedy, easy
admittance into your church." p. 10. -- But, for my part, I look upon you, as
little or nothing better than the very worst of heretics. For your principles,
Sir, are too near of kin to those most shocking principles, lately broached in
the land, by several who have a fondness for being authors; particularly, by
Mr. Sandeman and Mr. Hopkins. Mr. Sandeman says, that faith is obtained, as the
most remarkable discoveries have been obtained, the use of the magnet,
Jesuit's-bark, and many chimical discoveries, i. e. not when these things, but
some thing else was looked for. -- Mr. Hopkins says, it is indeed, as great an
absurdity as can be thought of, to suppose that the corrupt, vicious heart does
any thing toward becoming holy. etc. -- for all the exercises and volitions of
the corrupt unregenerate heart are certainly the exercises of sin.

These principles, Sir, I look upon of the most dangerous tendency, of any that
were ever broached in the christian world, deism itself not excepted. p 20.


M. My dear Sir, be cool, and think a minute or two, who you are, and what you
say, and what you have been doing. You are my parishioner. In this character
you have made me three visits before this. In this character you are now
talking with me. You knew my principles before you ever desired me to baptize
your child. And you knew that the church under my care profess to be in the
same scheme of religion with me. And would you desire, that your child should
be baptized by the worst of heretics! Or would you desire to join with such a
church! Where is the honesty or consistence of your conduct! You are inspired
with a spirit indeed; but I fear, you know not what spirit you are of.

As to our sentiments touching total depravity, works done by unregenerate men,
and the sovereignty of divine grace in the conversion of sinners, we profess to
agree with the assembly of divines at Westminister. And you know, that their
confession of faith, and larger and shorter catechisms are adopted by the
church of Scotland, as their test of orthodoxy; and are much the same with the
Savoy confessien of faith, which is adopted, in general, by the churches in the
Massachusetts and in Connecticut. -- But,

These public formulas declare, as to total depravety, that "we are utterly
indisposed, disabled and opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all
evil." -- And as to works done by unregenerate men, that although for the matter
of them, they may be things which God commands, and of good use to themselves
and others; yet, because they proceed not from a heart purified by faith, nor
are done in a right manner, according to the word; nor to a right end, the
glory of God; they are therefore sinful and cannot please God, or make a man
meet to receive grace from God. And yet their neglect of them is more sinful
and displeasing to God. -- And as to the divine sovereignty in the conversion
of sinners, they say, that all those whom God has predestined unto life, and
those only, he is pleased in his appointed and accepted time effectually to
call, etc. -- This effectual call is of God's free and special grace alone, not
from any thing at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive therein, until
being quickened and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer
this call, etc.

And the famous Mr. Stoddard, in his treatise concerning the nature of
conversion, says, p. 7. If men do not act from gracious motives and for
gracious ends, they do not the thing that God commands; there is no obedience
to God in what they do: they don't attend the will of God." And p. 9. "There is
an opposition between saving grace and common grace -- common graces are lusts
and do oppose saving grace. Making his own salvation his end, is contrary to
making the glory of God his last end: hating sin, not because it wrongs God,
but because it exposes him, is resisting the command of God: bringing every
thing into subserviency to his own ends, is opposite to the bringing every
thing into a subserviency to God's glory: The man that has but common grace
goes quite in another path than that which God directs unto: When he goes
about to establish his own righteousness, he sets himself against that way of
salvation which God prescribes. Romans 10.3. There is an enmity in the ways of
such men as have but common grace, to the ways that godly men take. Thus Mr.
Stoddard.

And now, my parishioner, I appeal to you, to judge, whether these quotations,
out of the confession of faith and Mr. Stoddard, -- are not as near of kin to
those shocking principles, which you look upon of the most dangerous tendency,
of any that were ever broached in the christian world, deism itself not
excepted, as any thing I ever advanced from the pulpit or the press.

And if some of the important doctrines of christianity are more obnoxious to
you than deism itself; that is, if you are nearer a deist than you are a
christian; certainly you are not fit to be a church member, or to offer your
child in baptism, or to partake of the Lord's Supper, according to your own
principles: For, you say, that men must be orthodox. And you cannot deny, that
the church of Scotland, and the churches in New England have as good a right to
judge for themselves, what principles are agreeable to the word of God, and of
importance to be professed, as you have to judge for your self. We are willing,
that those who look upon the doctrines contained in our public formulas, as
being worse than deism, should hold communion among themselves, but we think it
an inconsistence in them to desire to be members of our churches.


P. Unholy obedience is a contradiction in terms, for holiness and obedience
are the same thing. p. 8.


M. In saying this, you condemn Mr. Mather's scheme of an external graceless
covenant, by wholesale. -- However, strictly speaking, what you say, is true.
And in this view Mr. Stoddard's words are exactly right, (speaking of the
unregenerate) 'There is no obedience to God in what they do.' And thus it is
said by the church of England in her 39 articles. Works done before the grace
of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit, are not pleasant to God. -- Yea,
rather, for that they are not done as God has commanded and willed them to be
done, we doubt not but that they have the nature of sin. See article 13. -- Do
you, Sir, believe this?


P. No. Far from it. Rather I believe, that all the obedience of an unconverted
man is holy obedience. Yea, I believe, that the obedience of an unrenewed man,
so far forth as it is obedience, is as holy as any, that a gracious man can
yield. Though it is but a partial and imperfect obedience, yet just so much as
there is of obedience, just so much holiness. -- And -- 'a measure of strength
is given him by God, to walk in all his ways and keep all his Commands, seeking
his glory.' p. 8, 9. -- And in any other view, I must acknowledge, that the
inconverted covenanter would be 'perjured.' For to swear to obey a covenant
which we cannot obey is perjury. And therefore had the unconverted no power to
yield a holy obedience, it would be perjury in them to enter into covenant
engagements to do it. p. 8.


M. If I understand you right, and you are in earnest in this declaration, then
you believe that the unconverted are, in a measure, really holy. And,
therefore, are not totally depraved, as is asserted in the confession of faith
adopted by our churches. And if this be so, then you are not sound in the
faith. And those who are not found in the faith have no right to church
privileges, according to your own principles. You, therefore, cannot
consistently claim church privileges of any of our churches. -- Indeed, you may
think our confession of faith not agreeable to the word of God, and you may
think the same of the articles of the church of England: If, therefore, you
would act a consistent part, you should join, neither with us, nor them; but,
rather form a new church, on a new plan, with those who think as you do. For,
it is absurd for those, who differ in essentials, to walk together, as
brethren. And to profess our belief of articles of religion, which we do not
believe, for the sake of church privileges, is as gross dissimulation in the
laity among us, as it is in the clergy in England, who subscribe the 39
articles of that church, in order to enjoy a benefice, when they do not believe
them, as in the case with the Arians, Socinians and Arminians among them. -- In
a word, if you really disbelieve the doctrines of total depravity and of divine
sovereignty, you can by no means consistently join with us.


P. These principles deny the present state of the unregenerate to be a state
of probation: they deny him to be a moral agent: they deny the justice of
punishment for any sin. p. 21.


M. So says Dr. Tailor, so says Dr. Whitby, so says Dr. Stebbins, and all other
Pelegian and Arminian writers I ever read. They all agree, that the doctrines
of total depravity, and of divine sovereignty, as held by the Calvinists, are
absolutely inconsistent with moral agency. They have said it a thousand times,
and they have been answered as often. -- Thus stands the controversy. --
"Because I have no heart to love GOD, therefore I cannot be bound in duty to
love him." -- "Because I am dead in sin, and opposite to all good;" therefore
that law which says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things,
cannot justly reach me." -- "Because we all, with one consent, excuse ourselves
from coming to the gospel feast; therefore we are not in a state of probation."
-- "Because GOD says, may I not do what I will with my own? Therefore, we may
say, we are not in duty bound, to regard his law, or hearken to his gospel." --
Reasoning, which, if it has weight in it, proves the fundamental maxims of the
bible to be be false; for, that book teaches, that we may be dead in sin, and
yet deserve to be damned for that sin: That GOD is not obliged in justice, or
by promise, to grant converting grace to any impenitent sinner; and yet it is
the duty of such sinners every where to repent. -- But, you may, at your
leisure, see my sentiments on these subjects at large, and my confutation of
Mr. Sandeman's scheme of religion, both at once, in a book lately printed at
Boston; entitled, An essay on the nature and glory of the gospel. -- However,

I will readily grant, that there is an absolute necessity, of denying total
depravity, on the one hand; or, of giving up the covenant of grace, and
substituting a graceless covenant in its room, on the other hand; in order to
open a door for the unconverted, as such, to enter into covenant with GOD, and
join in full communion with the church, consistently with truth and honesty. --
But, yet, so it happens, that, on either plan men cannot consistently be
admitted into our churches. -- For, if they deny total depravity, they must be
deemed not sound in the faith, according to our approved standard; and,
therefore, must not be admitted. And if they substitute a graceless covenant in
the room of the covenant of grace, they go off from the plan on which our
churches were originally founded; and so, consistantly, cannot be members of
them. -- We must have a new confession of faith, and a new plan of church
order, and form new churches, before either of these ways will answer the end.
-- Besides, if the unconverted have a degree of real holiness, and do, though in
an imperfect manner, yet really comply with the covenant of grace, then the
unconverted are, in fact, entitled not only to the seals, but also to all the
blessings of the covenant of grace; even to pardon, justification, and eternal
life. Than which nothing can be more contrary to the whole tenor of scripture,
which every where declares all such to be under the wrath of GOD, and curse of
the law, condemned already liable to be struck dead and sent to hell at any
moment. John 3.18, 36. Gal. 3.10.


P. The unconverted Israelites made a proffession of the very covenant you
plead for: Any why cannot we? p. 23.


M. You can, if you will do as they did, viz. Flatter him with your mouth and
lie unto him with your tongue. But then, you ought not to take it ill, if the
true nature of your conduct, is from the word of God, set in a clear light
before you.


P: But I do take it ill: indeed I do. -- Particularly, the rebuke you gave me
for dissimulation, in my last visit, I do not take well at your hands. For I am
not the guilty man. p. 3.


M. The Man, I rebuked for dissimulation, was my parishioner, whose
conversation with me was printed in the New Haven Dialogue; and who, in his
first visit, told me, 'that he did not mean to profess a compliance with the
covenant of grace, when he owned the covenant.' -- On which, I let him know,
that he, for that very reason, had no right, by virtue of that profession, to
claim the seal of the covenant of grace for his child. For, this very same man,
afterward, came again to me, to baptize that very same child, and put on a
bold face, and declared, that "he had entered into that covenant," and,
therefore, had a right to the seal of it.


P. "I shall not trouble my self to defend this parishioner against the charge
of dissimulation." p. 4. But I am not the same man. p. 3.


M. If you are not the same man, why do you take the charge of dissimulation to
your self now? Or why did you pretend to be the same man then? Why did you call
your self by the same name? And why did you begin with me in these words? "Sir,
I find the dialogue which passed between us the other day is printed." -- Is it
not evident, by this, that you intended, then, that I should consider you, as
the very same man? but no sooner do I find you concontradicting yourself, and
rebuke you for it, but you cry out, "This dialogue did not pass between you and
me." -- To use your own words, Sir, "'it is easy to see your unlucky mistake." --
And "'it is really pleasant enough" to see you drove to a necessity, of changing
your name, in order to get rid of the fault, which, otherwise, you must, even
in your own judgment, be reputed guilty of. We have heard of men's changing
their names, when pursued for their crimes, that they might avoid their
pursuers, but did you, before now, ever hear of a parishioner, that went to his
minister to get his child baptized, that did so?


P. Be this as it may, the grand question is this, viz. Can a man, who knows he
has no grace, profess a compliance with the covenant of grace, without wilful
lying? p. 5. -- You say, he cannot. -- I say, he can. -- Indeed, once, I was of
your opinion; and this was the reason I did not join in full communion; but I
am of another mind now. And I can, though I know I have no grace, yet make a
profession of a compliance with the covenant of grace, as honestly as any man.
-- And to charge any one with wilful lying for this, is virtually to charge the
ministers and churches through the land with that horrid crime. p. 3.


M. As this is a matter of importance, it deserves to be thought of seriously,
and to be thoro'ly looked into. And if you will be serious, only long enough to
understand the proposition, you will be forced to believe it. -- For,

By the covenant of grace, we mean, that covenant which promises pardon and
eternal life, to those who comply with it. -- By a compliance with it, we mean,
saving grace; i. e. such gracious exercises as are infallibly connected with
salvation. Such as repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: which imply supreme love to God and Christ in their very nature, and a
cordial disposition to a life of sincere obedience to all God's commands. A
saving compliance with the (...) of grace, is what does not in the least degree
take place in the unregenerate, but does actually take place in all true
believers. For although it implies saving grace, yet it does not imply perfect
holiness. Those, therefore, who are true believers may make a profession
honestly; but those who are not, cannot. -- To say, that a true believer cannot
make a profession honestly, because he is not perfectly holy, suppo^^ that a
saving compliance with the covenant of grace implies per^^ct holiness. Which is
not true, as is granted on all hands.
-- By one, who has no grace, we mean, one who is entirely destitute of this
repentance, faith, love and new obedience, which are connected with eternal
life; being dead in sin.

When, therefore, it is said, that "a man, who knows that he has no grace,
cannot profess a compliance with the Covenant of grace, without wilful lying;"
the truth of the proposition is as evident, as when it is said, that "a man who
knows that two and two are but four, cannot say, that two and two are five,
without wilful lying." And, therefore, as soon as the proposition is
understood, it cannot but be believed. There is no way to avoid it. -- For,

1. If you explain down the covenant of grace, into a graceless covenant, with
which a graceless heart may really comply, it will not help your cause in the
least. For if a graceless heart may comply with this graceless covenant, yet it
still remains a self-evident truth, that a graceless heart does not comply with
the covenant of grace. -- Or,

2. If you represent an unconverted graceless men, as not being dead in sin,
and without strength; but as really having a degree of spiritual life, and
spiritual strength, and spiritual ability to yield holy obedience to all GOD'S
commands; and so, as complying with the covenant of grace, in reality, though but
in an imperfect degree: it will not help your cause at all. For, this graceless
man, so called, is, in fact, a gracious man, and is entitled not only to the
seals, but also to the blessings of the covenant of grace. Because, he does, in
fact, comply with it. -- Rather, it runs you into the absurdity, of saying,
that some unconverted, graceless sinners, are real converts and true saints,
and have a title to eternal life, i. e. of expressly contradicting your self.
-- Or,

3. If you say, "a graceless sinner may comply with the covenant of grace, with
moral sincerity, though not with gracious sincerity:" it will not help your
cause, For there is but one kind of real complying with the covenant of grace;
and this entitles to eternal life. For he that really complies with the
covenant of grace, does, in so doing act graciously. Thus, he who loves God
supremely, with moral sincerity, does love God supremely, in reality; but this
real supreme love to God is a gracious and holy love to God. And you have
already said, "that obedience to God is always holy" -- "and the obedience of
the unrenewed, as holy as any, that a gracious man can yield." p. 8. But if so,
then this obedience is performed with gracious sincerity, as really as the
obedience of any gracious man is. -- But, if your graceless man does comply
with the covevant of grace, in a gracious manner, he will go to heaven along
with true saints. And, therefore, that saying of our blessed Savior is not
true. Except a man be born again be cannot see the kingdom of God.

It remains, therefore, that this proposition must pass for a self-evident
truth, which cannot but be believed, as soon as it is understood, viz. A man,
who knows he has no grace, cannot profess a compliance with the covenant of
grace, without wilful lying. -- You may as well say, that black is white, or
that a dead man is alive or that a graceless sinner is a real saint, as say
(...) "a man, who knows he has no grace, can profess a compliance with the
covenant of grace, honestly and with a good conscience." -- And, therefore, a
man must either not know what he is about, or his conscience must be very much
seared, or he will not dare to profess a compliance with the covenant of grace,
while he knows he has no grace. Indeed, it is a full proof, that a man is to a
great degree destitute of moral honesty, if, with his eyes open, he dare to
make such a profession. It is, at least, as gross wickedness, as that, which
Annanias and Sapphira were guilty of, in saying, This is all the money, when
they knew that, it was not all. They lied to the Holy Ghost, and this man
flatters God with his mouth, and lies unto him with his tongue. Psalm. 78. 36.

To be consistent, therefore, we must vote the covenant of grace out, in our
church, and vote in a graceless covenant in its room, or you cannot be admitted
as a member. And, if we should vote out the covenant of grace, and vote in a
graceless covenant in its room, we should, so far as this vote should have
influence, cease to be a visible church of Christ. Nor should we have a visible
right to baptism and the Lord's Supper, which are seals of the covenant of
grace, and of no other covenant. For there are but two covenants, which now
take place between God and man, viz. The covenant of works, and the covenant of
grace. Romans 3.27.


P. I am not able to think of this seriously and to answer it honestly. I have
no other way therefore to get rid of the truth but to misrepresent and ridicule
it. p. 5 -- 9. -- However, I have two objections against this scheme, viz. (1.)
The church cannot know who do really comply with the covenant of grace. p. 16.
Nor (2.) can any join with the church but those who have full assurance. p. 19.
Obj. Baptism alone makes me a church member, or it does not. If it does, then I
have a righr to the Lord's-table: If it does not, then the church have no right
to discipline me.

Ans. If baptism alone gives a right to the Lord's-table, then all baptized
persons in Christendom, young and old, good and bad, the excommunicated not
excepted, have an equal right: which none will grant. -- And if the church have
no right to discipline any but those who have a right to come to the
Lord's-table, then they have no right to discipline any who are guilty of
heresy or scandal, for such have no right to come to the Lord's table. -- The
objection is founded on two propositions, both of which are false, even in the
judgment of the objector, viz. (1.) That baptism alone gives a right to the
Lord's-table, without any other qualification whatsoever: upon which rule, even
the excommunicated cannot be debarred. (2.) That the church have no authority
to exercise discipline over any but those who have a right to the Lord's table:
upon which rule, those who are disqualified for the Lord's-table, by heresy or
scandal, are not subjects of discipline.





M. You may find a full answer to these objections in what I have already
published on this subject, which you appear not to have attended to. -- But
pray, what rule would you have the church proceed by in the admission of
members? Would you have certain evidence, that the candidates for admission
have the requisite qualifications, insisted on by the church?


P. Yes, indeed. For, this is my principle, that every man (asking special
ordinances) is as CERTAINLY qualified to partake of the Lord's Supper, as he is
to breathe, unless there is CERTAIN EVIDENCE that he is disqualified. p. 16.


M. But one, who is, at heart, a deist, and who lives secretly in adultry, may,
to answer political ends, "ask for special ordinances," and there may be no
"certain evidence" of his crimes. Therefore, according to this NEW DIVINITY,
this infidel, this adulterer, "is as certainly qualified to partake of the
Lord's Supper, as he is to breathe."


P. Shocking consequence! However, this I lay down for an infallible truth,
that all who have visibly entered into covenant, as I have done, "to walk in
all God's ways and to keep all his commands," are bound by their own vow to
attend special ordinances. p. 10, 11, 12.


M. What! Bound, though they know themselves to be unqualified? Is the
abovementioned infidel and adulterer bound? What! bound in the sight of GOD and
a well regulated conscience, to come to the Lord's table, as he is? Pray, who
bound him? GOD never did: nor does the vow he publicly made to "walk in all
GOD'S ways and keep all his commands" bind him to come as he is. For, this, is
what GOD never commanded.

And it is equally evident, that GOD never commanded men to make a lying
profession, in any instance, either verbally, or practically. But to seal a
covenant is (practically) to profess a compliance with it. To seal a covenant,
therefore, with which we know we do not comply, is what GOD never commanded.
Yea, it is what GOD has forbidden in every text in the bible, which forbids
lying. So that, if the covenant to be sealed in baptism and the Lord's Supper
is the covenant of grace, as you allow it is, then those who know they have no
grace are forbidden to seal it, by every text in the bible, which forbids
lying. And, therefore, that command, do this in remembrance of me, is, beyond
all doubt, a command which respects believers, and them only; agreeable to the
publicly professed belief of the church of, Scotland, and the churches in
New England, held forth in their public formulas. -- Indeed, it is the duty,
the indispensable duty of every one to whom the gospel comes, and their highest
interest, to comply with the covenant of grace, and that on the very first
invitation. As soon as the glad tidings come to our ears, come, for all things
are now ready, whosoever will let him come. We ought not to delay a moment, we
ought not to make one excuse, we ought not to feel the least reluctance: no,
rather, on the contrary, we ought with Peter's hearers, to receive the word
gladly that same day, and to make a public profession and join with the church
the first opportunity. Mat. 13.44. -- And to neglect this, is a sin so great
and aggravated, as to expose the neglecters to be given up of GOD in this
world, Luke 14.24. And to be cast off for ever in the world to come. Mark
16.16. So that your mouth is stopped, and you stand guilty before GOD. -- But,
to return, to a consideration of your visible standing. -- Pray, sir, was you
esteemed a church member, in full communion, in the town where you lived,
before you moved into this parish?


P. No, sir, by no body. I never looked upon my self to be a churchmember, in
this sense of the phrase. I never meant to join with the church, nor did the
minister or the church mean to receive me as a churchmember, and accordingly I
never met with the church when they had church meetings upon church business.
-- I never stayed, when the church was desired to stay, as they sometimes were,
after worship on sabbaths, and at other times. I never voted when the church
were called to give in their vote in any matter whatsoever. Nor had I any right
to go to the Lord's-table without making a public profession over again, and
thereby joining with the church, as the common phrase was. No such thing was
allowed where I was bro't up. So that I did not think myself a churchmember
before I moved into this parish, nor was I esteemed and used as a
churchmember. Yea, it never entered into my heart, to pretend any such thing,
till my New London patron taught me to say so, and to put in these high claims,
and to deny my old principles, and contradict myself, and finally, even to deny
my own name, and pretend to be another man. And since then I have felt
"BRAVELY," and have looked down upon you with great contempt.


M. The more men mock GOD in religion, the more proud, haughty and insolent are
they apt to be toward their fellowmen. A religion begun in ignorance like
yours, and carried on and perfected in this shocking manner, if it may do to
live with, yet will not do to die by.


P. Be this as it may. Yet to say, as you do, "better do nothing than lie,"
tends to increase the number of prayerless persons, and prayerless families, to
put an end to all means, and in the end to overthrow all religion. p. 20.


M. Does not GOD himself say, Eccl. 5.5. Better is it that thou should not
vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. i. e. in other words, "better do
nothing than lie." And will you condemn the Holy One of Israel? Either give up
the bible, or abide by its sacred maxims. -- Besides, there is a difference
between covenanting transactions and common means. And, accordingly, Christ
ordered his ministers to preach the gospel to every creature; but he did not
order them to baptize every creature. -- For,

Graceless sinners may hear the gospel preached, may hear all the truths and
duties of it explained, proved and urged; and may attend; yea, may be very
attentive, and meditate on them day and night, till they are pricked at the
heart: they may forsake vain and vicious company, become sober, serious, deeply
distressed about their eternal welfare: They may spend much time in secret
prayer, (and an awakened sinner cannot fail to do it) and frequently spend
whole days in fasting and prayer, as Mr. Brainerd used to do, under his
terrors, when he was unconverted; pray read his life: -- I say, graceless
sinners may do all this without making any profession of Godliness. Yea, they
may do all this, and yet, in all, profess that they have no grace, no love to
GOD in their hearts, but are dead in sin.

You insinuate, that the doctrines which I preached tend to licentiousness. --
I appeal to facts. -- Look from the reformation down to this day -- look through
England, Scotland and Ireland -- look through the British colonies in America,
and through our West India islands -- and put the question -- when -- and where
-- and among whom -- has there been, or is there now, the greatest strictness
maintained, and the most constant, diligent and painful attendance on means?
Either, among Calvinists, who heartily agree with the Westminister confession
of faith and catechisms, and where these doctrines are taught privately and
preached publicly? -- Or, among Pelagians, Arminians, and Semi-Arminians, who
are constantly teaching and preaching in another strain? -- While the assembly
of divines sat at Westminister, composing the formulas, which I am now
vindicating; London, that great city, was full of sermons, and prayers, and
strictness: but since these doctrines have been laid aside, and contrary
doctrines introduced, they are become very licentious and debauched. The more
you flatter the sinner, the farther will he run from GOD and all good. But tell
him the truth, pierce him to the heart, and he will begin to cry, What shall I
do to be saved?


P. But can an unconverted sinner say the Lord's-prayer, and speak true? i. e.
Can he profess to GOD, that he has all those holy and pious affections in his
heart, which our Savior designed those words to express? p. 12.


M. I also will ask you one question; answer me: And then, I will answer you.
Is not the man, who thus says the Lord's prayer, entitled to pardon and
eternal life?


P. No doubt he is. For, our Savior says, If ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly father will also forgive you, with a design to explain in what
sense he meant that petition should be made, forgive us our debts as we forgive
our debtors. And besides, in the same sermon, he expressly declares, that every
one that asks, receives.


M. It therefore follows, that no unconverted man ever said that prayer, in
that sense, unless you will own, what seems to be a necessary consequence of
the scheme you are pleading for, that some unconverted men are entitled to
pardon and eternal life. Which is so contrary to the most plain and express
declarations of scripture, (Joh. 3.18.36. Gal. 3, 10.) that, as yet, you have
not ventured to own it.

Thousands, no doubt, have, after a sort, said the Lord's prayer, who have
fallen short of eternal life. For the papists say the Lord's-prayer oftener than
protestants do, ten to one, and for every Paternoster they count a bead. And
while sinners are secure in sin, such kind of praying, i. e. using words
without any meaning, will quiet their consciences. For they now think they have
done their duty. For without the law sin was dead: and so I was alive without
the law once. But no sooner do they fall under deep convictions, but that they
find something else to do. Pray read Mr. Brainerd's Life, and there you may see
how an awakened sinner feels, and how he prays.


P. Thus far, sir, I have acted the part of a disputant. I have passed over
nothing in the New Haven letter, that is new, and to the purpose. For this
letter-writer has not said one word for my old beloved scheme, the halfway.
Now therefore, I beg leave, to assume the friendly, honest character, which I
sustained in my first visit, For, let others do as they will, I am resolved to
be an honest man. Wherefore to sum up the whole,

1. I believe, that there is but one covenant, of which baptism, and the
Lord's Supper are seals: And that he that is qualified to offer his children in
baptism is equally qualified for the Lord's-table: And therefore that the
halfway practice is not according to scripture.

2. I believe, that any man, who seals any covenant, does, in and by the act of
sealing, declare his compliance with that covenant which he seals: because this
is the import of the act of sealing.

3. I believe, that it is of the nature of lying, to seal a covenant, with
which, I do not now, and never did comply in my heart; but rather habitually
and constantly reject.

Therefore,

4. I believe, that a man, who knows he has no grace, cannot seal the covenant
of grace, honestly and with a good conscience.

5. I believe, that the only point, which needs to be settled, in order to
settle the whole controversy, is this, viz. Are baptism and the Lord's Supper
seals of the covenant of grace, or of a graceless covenant.

6. I believe, that there are but two covenants between GOD and man, called in
scripture language, the law of work* and the law of faith, but commonly called,
the covenant of works, and the covenant of grace. And that the doctrine of an
external covenant distinct from the covenant of grace, is not from heaven, but
of men. -- Thus, sir, you have my creed.


M. Sir, I hope the time will soon come, when you and all my other
parishioners, through the country, will well understand the controversy, and be
able to judge for yourselves what is truth, and what is not so. In the mean
time, remember, my friend, that he that knows his master's will, and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Behold now is the accepted time, and
now is the day of salvation; therefore today, if you will hear his voice
harden not your heart. Every moment in which you continue practically to
renounce your baptism, by rejecting CHRIST JESUS and his gospel, you hang over
hell, ready to sink under the curse of the divine law, into eternal burnings:
For he that believes not is condemned already. Wherefore, repent and believe
the gospel.

Some seem to think that baptism alone makes a man a Christian, and brings him
really into the covenant of grace, so as that he is no longer under the
covenant of works, as the unbaptised are. But the apostle Paul did not think
so. For he, speaking to the baptized Galatians, among whom he feared there were
some, who were self-righteous, Christless sinners, he says. Gal. 3.10. As many
as are of the works of the law are under the curse. "As many" be they
circumcised, and baptized too, "as are of the works of the law" as depend on
their own works for justification in the sight of GOD, "are under the curse,"
even they are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one, etc. But
if baptism delivers men from the covenant of works, they cannot any one of them
be under its curse. For no man is liable to the curse of a law which he is not
under. Besides, in this Apostles view of things, it was peculiar to true
believers to be really in the covenant of grace, and not under the law as a
covenant of works. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
are not under law, but under grace. For according to this scheme of religion,
every soul is either married to the law; and these bring forth fruit unto
death; or married to Christ; and these bring forth fruit unto God. (chap. 7.)
Wherefore, know assuredly, that your baptism, although it increases your
obligations and so enhances your guilt; yet it, alone, gives you not the least
right to any one of the peculiar blessings of the covenant of grace, so as at
all to exempt you from the curse of the law; but you are now, this moment, in
fact, as liable to be struck dead and sent to hell, by the Divine Justice; as
any unbaptized sinner in the land. And should you die in the state you are now
in, you would most certainly be damned along with the unbaptized heathen: only
your hell would be hotter than theirs. Mat. 11.20 -- 24. For if thou be a
breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. Romans 2.25. --
Wherefore, I advise you,

First of all, immediately to repent of your sins, and return to God through
Jesus Christ, looking only to free grace through him for pardon and eternal life.
For I testify unto you, that if you trust in your baptism to recommend you to
God, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. 5.2. Wherefore; give up this, and
all your other self-righteous claims, and apply to the mere, pure, free grace
of God through Jesus Christ, as all your hope. For, as to acceptance with God,
there is no difference, between the circumcised Jew and the uncircumcised
Greek, or between the baptized nominal Christian and an unbaptized Indian. Romans
3.22. If you will thus repent and believe the gospel, and in this way, not in
falsehood, but in truth, "avouch the Lord Jehovah to be your sovereign Lord and
supreme good through Jesus Christ," you shall, in fact, have your choice, that
is, have God for your God and portion in time and eternity. This, my dear
Parishioner, this is the way to take upon you your baptismal covenant, and to
get delivered from the curse of the covenant of works, and to enter into the
covenant of grace, in reality and in truth. -- This therefore do without delay.
-- And having done this, then make a public profession of religion, and join
yourself to God's people, and bring your dear child and dedicate it to the same
God to whom you have dedicated yourself. And let it be the business of your
life to bring up that, and your other children, in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord.

And now as you travel through the country, for I understand you are become a
great traveller and gain admittance into all companies, and among men of all
denominations and character, I advise you to use your utmost influence, to
diffuse a friendly spirit every where, among all your acquaintance, in this
controversy. Particularly, urge it upon parishioners of your acquaintance, to
treat their ministers in a respectful manner, while they apply to them for
light and instruction, or when they undertake to dispute these points with
them, especially, wherever your influence extends, let no man, on our side of
the question, treat his minister ill, because he is in the opposite scheme. It
is not manly, it is not christian-like, it is not prudent to do it. For there
is no way to promote truth so effectually, as to hold forth light in love; and
to treat your opponents in a kind and friendly manner. -- For my part, I have
an high esteem for many in the ministry, who differ in their practice in the
admission of persons to sealing ordinances for themselves and for their
children, from what I think is right. For it is a controversy which has not
been attended to, nor is it an easy thing, at once, to get rid of the
prejudices of education, and in the face of a frowning world to espouse the
true scripture plan. I have great hopes, however, that, ere long, we shall
think and act nearer alike, when there has been sufficient time to understand
one another, to weigh and deliberate, to get rid of the prejudices of
education, etc. etc. In the mean time, I most earnestly desire, that the
controversy may be carried on, in the most open, fair, honest, cool, calm,
friendly manner possible.

Who this letter-writer is, is not know by the public, as he has secreted his
name. And whether it was on design, or through inadvertance, that he has given
up the doctrine of total depravity, as held forth in scripture and in our
public formulas, I shall not determine. Perhaps, on second thoughts, he will
retract every thing he has said, which has that aspect. I wish he may. But if
it should come to pass, as I fear it will, that in the course of this
controversy, numbers should openly fall off to the Arminian scheme, in order to
defend their lax manner of admission to sealing ordinances, I advise you, to
keep by you, and to spread every where among your acquaintance, the
Westminister confession of faith, and larger and shorter catechisms: a book,
which will be of excellent service to teach people sound doctrine, and to guard
them against Arminian errors.

To conclude, I shall always retain a most grateful sense of your kind
treatment of your minister, when acting yourself, and be always ready to do
every kind office in my power, which either you, or any other of my
parishioners shall need at my hands. I esteem it among the great blessings of
my life, that I live in a parish, and among a people, so well disposed to treat
a minister with that respect which is due to his office. And I hope you may
never find me wanting in any instance of kind and friendly conduct toward you.
-- I wish you the best of heaven's blessings. -- My dear parishioner, adieu.


THE END.

