Mr. Winthrop's LECTURES On the USE of THE TRANSIT OF VENUS.

TWO LECTURES ON THE PARALLAX and DISTANCE of the SUN, AS DEDUCIBLE FROM The
Transit of Venus.

Read in HOLDEN-Chapel at HARVARD-COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE, New England, in March
1769.

By JOHN WINTHROP, ESQUIRE. HOLLISIAN Professor of the Mathematics and Philosophy
at Cambridge, and F. R. S.

Agite, mortales! et oculos in Spectaculum vertite, quod hucusque spectaverunt
perpaucissimi; spectaturi iterum sunt nulli. Published by the general Desire of
the Students.

BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES and GILL IN QUEEN STREET, M, DCC, LXIX.

The Use of the TRANSIT of VENUS.
LECTURE I.
A TRANSIT of VENUS UNDER THE SUN is the most uncommon, and the most important
phenomenon, that the whole compass of astronomy affords us. So uncommon is it,
that it can never happen above twice in any century; in others, but once; and
in some centuries it cannot happen at all. And the importance of it is such, as
to supply us with a certain and complete solution of a very curious Problem,
which is inaccessible any other way. On both accounts it well deserves a very
particular attention.

THE phenomenon itself is, the passage of the planet Venus across the face of
the Sun, from east to west, in the form of a round, black spot. As we shall
have the opportunity in a few months of viewing one of these phenomenon, if the
weather permit, I shall adapt my description of them to the particular
circumstances of this Transit. This planet then, having approached the Sun on
his eastern side, and arrived at his limb or edge, will, by being opake, make a
small, black notch upon it; which, as soon as it is big enough to be visible,
is called the first external contact. The notch will immediately grow bigger,
by the planet's advancing, and in about 9 minutes her center will be got on the
Sun's limb, and the appearance will be that of a little black semicircle,
which will occupy about 3 degrees on the circumference of the Sun. When the
planet is advanced above half, her circular figure will cause an appearance as
of a luminous horn or cusp on each side of it, with the points turned toward
each other, and gradually approaching, and in 9 minutes more Venus will be
wholly within the Sun's disk, and the two luminous cusps running together at
their points, will form a narrow thread of light behind the planet. The Sun's
limb now recovers its light, where it had been interrupted by the body of the
planet. This is called the immersion, or the first internal contact. In about 3
hours the planet will be in the middle of its course, and nearest to the Sun's
center, from which it will be distant to the north about part of the Sun's
diameter; its own diameter being 1/32 part of the Sun's. Then approaching the
western side of the Sun, the thread of light between their limbs will grow
narrower till it breaks, and Venus again touches the Sun's limb, forming, what
is called, the beginning of emersion, or the last internal contact. The light
of the Sun's limb will now again be interrupted, and two luminous cusps formed,
as before, which will recede from each other as the planet moves off from the
Sun. In about 18 minutes, the last external contact will be formed, the
impression made by the planet upon the Sun's limb having become gradually less
and less, till it is quite imperceptible. -- These several phases will be very
conspicuous with any telescope, and even with the most ordinary perspective;
but few eyes are sharp enough to discern so small an object as Venus divested
of her radiance; her apparent diameter being less than a minute of a degree.

YOU see what are the appearances in a Transit of Venus. -- The theory of it is
easily understood. -- Venus circulates round the Sun, the same way as the Earth
does, that is, from west to east, but in a smaller orbit, and in a shorter
period. When Venus is in the same degree of the ecliptic with the Sun, she is
said to be in conjunction with the Sun; and as her orbit is enclosed within the
Earth's, it is plain, that a conjunction may happen two different ways; either
by the planet's being beyond and above the Sun, and so in the remotest part of
its orbit from us, which is called a superior conjunction; or being below the
Sun, and nearest to us, and this is called an inferior conjunction. -- The
planet, having past a superior conjunction, will appear to move quicker to the
east than the Sun does, whose apparent velocity is the same as the Earth's real
velocity in its orbit; and thus will depart farther and farther from him, till
she has attained to the distance of 48 degrees; and this is her greatest
elongation from the Sun, her whole orbit being included within two right lines
drawn from the Earth, at the distance of 48 east and west of the Sun. She will
now appear stationary, in respect of the Sun; and after this, while she is
describing the nearest part of her orbit contained between the two right lines
just mentioned, will seem to move with a retrograde motion, or the contrary way
to what she did before; approaching the Sun from east to west, and so will pass
through an inferior conjunction with him. Then running off to the distance of
48 west from the Sun, she will again appear stationary; and after this, will be
seen to resume her direct or proper motion eastward, and will at length arrive
at another superior conjunction. -- In the course of such a revolution, she
puts on all the phases of the moon. Near the superior conjunction she appears
round like the Full moon, but small; after this, waning, like the moon after
the Full; though her diameter grows larger, because she is coming nearer the
earth. At her greatest elongation she resembles the moon in the Quarters; and
from thence to the inferior conjunction is cuspidated or horned, like the moon
from the last Quarter to the Change; that hemisphere, which is enlightened by
the Sun, being turned more and more from the Earth, till in the conjunction
itself, it is wholly turned from us. Her diameter now appears largest. -- In
all this time, being on the eastern side of the Sun, she sets after him; and
for her extraordinary luster, is called, by way of eminence, the Evening-Star.
She passes through the same series of changes, but in an inverted order, from the
inferior conjunction to the superior just as the moon does from the Change to
the Full; and in this interval, being on the western side of the Sun, and
rising before him, she is called the Morning Star. -- Such are the phenomenon
of Venus. -- It may be observed by the way, that those of Mercury are
altogether similar; and that they demonstrate beyond all doubt, that these
planets perform their revolutions round the Sun, and not round the Earth.

FROM what has been said it is obvious to collect, that it is only in the
inferior conjunctions that Transits can happen. -- If the orbit of Venus lay in
the same plane as that of the Earth, or the ecliptic, there would be a Transit
at every inferior conjunction; for in this case, the planet would pass directly
between the Sun and the Earth; and only her unilluminated side being turned
toward us, she must appear like a black spot upon the Sun's disk. But the fact
is otherwise. The orbit of Venus is inclined to the ecliptic in a certain
angle, though but a small one, and intersects it in two opposite points, called
the nodes. At one of them, the planet crosses the ecliptic from south to north,
which therefore is called the ascending node; the other, where she is moving
from north to south, is called the descending node. It Is only at those inferior
conjunctions which happen so near one of the nodes as to make Venus's latitude,
or her distance from the ecliptic, less than the apparent semidiameter of the
Sun, that we can have a Transit; at all others, Venus will pass clear of the
Sun, either to the north or south; and that, at so much greater distance as she
is farther from her nodes. And for this effect, the Sun must be within 2
degrees of a node; which are he goes over in 2 days. In this age and the next,
the nodes being situated near the middle of Gemini and Sagittarius, where the
Sun is the 4th of June, and 7th of December, Transits can happen only at those
times of the year; that is, between the 2d and 7th of June; and between the 5th
and 10th of December. I shall confine myself at present to those which happen
in June, when the planet is at its descending node, since it is with these we
are more immediately concerned. -- The conjunctions succeed one another after
an interval of about 584 days, or 1 year and 7 months; as is easily computed
from the period of the Earth, which is nearly 365 days; and that of Venus,
which is 224. When a Transit happens in the beginning of June, there cannot be
another at the same node, till there is another inferior conjunction in the
beginning of June, within the limits of the four days just specified. This will
not be, till the interval of 584 days, repeated some number of times, will make
nearly some number of years. To find when this may happen, reduce the ratio,
584:365, to its least terms, and you will find it to be as 8:5; which shows
that 5 of these intervals make 8 years: More accurately, they make 8 years
wanting 2 days, 7 hours; which defect falls within the limits above assigned.
This then is the shortest period in which one Transit can follow another. --
The several conjunctions in this period succeed in the following order; June 6;
January 11; August 14; March 25; October 25; and June 3. And this order is
repeated in the next period; only the conjunctions happen 2 days sooner. As the
last of these Transits comes earlier in the year, and so the planet is not got
so far to the east as it was at the first, while the node remains nearly in the
same place, it necessarily happens that the planet now describes a different
path from what it did before. By calculation we find that its path the last
time is near 20 minutes more northerly than the first. And as the semidiameter
of the Sun is near 16 minutes, if at the first of these conjunctions Venus past
more than 4 minutes to the South of the Sun's center, this last more northerly
path will still fall within the Sun's disk on its northern half, and there will
also be a Transit at the last of the conjunctions. This was the case in the
Transit of June 1761, when Venus past near 10 minutes South of the Sun's
center; which is the reason why we shall have another in June this present
year, in which the planet will pass 10 minutes North of the Sun's center. But
if in any Transit Venus pass within 4 minutes South of the Sun's center* or to
the Northward of it, in the conjunction 8 years after she will pass quite to
the North of the Sun's disk, and there will be no Transit. Accordingly, in the
conjunction which will happen June 1, 1777, Venus will pass near 30m north of
the Sun's center, and 14m from his northern limb. -- Thus you see that there
cannot be another Transit after two consecutive periods of 8 years. Let us
inquire when there can be another.

FROM the foregoing account of the order in which the conjunctions succeed one
another, it appears that the conjunction which happens nearest after the 3d of
June, in the course of the year, is on the 12th of August. There will therefore
be no other Transit at the descending node, till the conjunction which falls on
the 12th of August, by anticipating at the slow rate of 2 days, 7 hours, in 8
years, has got back to the 7th of June; which is 66 days. This cannot be done
in less than 29 of these periods of 8 years, or 232 years, which make 235 years
from the preceding Transit. Nor will it be done then, unless at the preceding
Transit Venus past above 5m north of the Sun's center; otherwise it will take 8
years more to accomplish it. Upon these grounds we find, that beside the two in
1761 and 1769, no Transit has happened at this node, in the beginning of June,
since the year 1526, nor will again till 2004. -- The foregoing remark clears
up what at first sight appears so paradoxical, that there should be two
Transits at the same node in 8 years, and no more in so long a period.

ANOTHER may indeed happen before the year 2004, at the opposite node. For,
agreeable to the account of the order in which the conjunctions succeed one
another, we shall find that, after a Transit on the 3d of June, the next
conjunction will fall on the 9th of January; which is but a month after the
time of year when Transits may happen at the ascending node. The conjunctions
going back somewhat quicker at this node, viz. 2 days and about 11 hours in 8
years, this space of a month may be gone over in 13 of these periods, that is,
in 104 years; or, reckoning from the preceding Transit, in 105 years and an
half. Accordingly, the next Transit will be on the 9th of December in the year
1874; which will be followed by another in 8 years, and then there will be no
more in December till the year 2117. Thus the 20th century will pass without a
Transit.

So extremely rare are these phenomenon. And in fact, till that which was
observed in 1761, there never had been but one seen since the creation. This
was in December (N. St.) in the year 1639; and it was seen by two persons only;
Jeremiah Horrockes, a young English Astronomer, of an admirable genius, who was
the only person that predicted it, and a friend of his, William Crabtree. And
when this of next June is past, the present race of mortals may take their
leave of these Transits; for there is not the least probability, that any one
who sees this, will ever see another.

ON account of their rarity alone, they must afford an exquisite entertainment
to an astronomical taste. But this is not all. There is another circumstance
which strongly recommends them. They furnish the only adequate mean of solving
a most difficult Problem, -- that of determining the true distance of the Sun
from the Earth. This has always been a principal object of astronomical
inquiry. Without this, we can never ascertain the true dimensions of the solar
system and the several orbs of which it is composed, nor assign the magnitudes
and densities of the Sun, the planets and comets; nor, of consequence, attain a
just idea of the grandeur of the works of GOD. Such as are unacquainted with
this science, are apt to look upon every thing that can be advanced with
relation to this inquity, as at best but mere conjecture. It Is however true,
that methods have been proposed for this purpose, which show the great
acuteness of the inventors, and are founded on mathematical demonstration. The
grand defect of them was, that they required observations which could not be
made with sufficient exactness. And this is the reason why so capital a point
has not as yet been duly settled. -- This important use of the Transits of
Venus was first pointed out by the sagacious Dr. Halley in the year 1691, and
largely explained by him in the Philosophical Transactions in 1716, when that
great Astronomer, despairing, by reason of his age, to reach so distant a
period, most earnestly left it in charge to the Astronomers who should be on
the stage, that with this view they would strenuously and with all their might
apply themselves to make observations, in distant parts of the world, of the
Transit in 1761; but especially, that of the present year, on account of a
peculiar advantage attending it, which we shall hereafter explain. -- It will
not be easy to give a distinct account of the several steps in the method of
applying these phenomenon to this purpose, without the use of diagrams, which
are not suitable to this place. I shall, notwithstanding, endeavor to convey to
you as clear an idea as I can, of the general method; and, in order to it,
shall trace things from their first principles.

TO find the distance of one object from another, the first way that presents
itself is, to repeat a known measure successively till you have gone over the
whole space between the objects. But this supposes one of them to be
accessible, from the other. If it is not, the method is impracticable, and we
must have recourse to some other. -- The properties of a plane triangle supply
us with another. If two angles of a triangle are given, the third is given too;
and the proportion of the sides is also given; and therefore, if one of the
sides be given in magnitude, the others are given in magnitude also; as appears
from Euclid's Data. In other words, If we can observe two angles of a triangle,
and measure the length of one side, we can find the length of the other sides.
-- To apply this to the case of measuring a distance on the land or sea.
Suppose we observed an object to bear due north from us, but having moved one
mile to the east, we find the object now bears N. W. Here, by drawing lines
through our stations and the object, a triangle is formed, two of whose angles
are known; -- the angle at the first station, which is 90; and the angle at the
object, which is 45. One side is also known, viz. the distance between the
stations. From these Data, it is easy to find the distance of the object, and
that with the same degree of accuracy as the observations can be made. On the
present suppositions, the distance of the object from the first station is
equal to the distance between the stations, that is, one mile. If the object
were moved, provided its motion were known, its distance might be found on the
same principles. This method is rendered universal by trigonometry, and may be
extended to astronomical as well as geographical disquisitions. The known
distance between the stations is usually called the base; and the angle at the
object, the parallax. This is a greek word, which signifies a change; and is
used to denote that change in the apparent place of an object, which is
occasioned by changing the observer's station.

CONCERNING this change or parallax, we must make a few Remarks, which will be
of use to us in the sequel.

1. That the parallax is always made the contrary way to that which the
observer has moved. As, if he move East, the object seems to have moved West;
if he move North, that moves South; if he upward, that downward, etc.

2. The parallactic angle is so much the less, as the base is more obliquely
situated in respect of the distance of the object. -- It is also less,

3. As the base is less than that distance.

THE first of these Remarks is evident from the nature of parallax; the two
last, from the properties of a triangle.

FROM the last Remark it appears, that this method is subject to limitations in
practice; -- owing to the limits which nature has prescribed to our senses. For
when the base is the same. the parallax is less, as the distance of the object
is greater; and vice versa. Therefore if the base be very small in respect of
the distance of the object, the parallactic angle may be so small, that it may
be extremely difficult to observe it. Thus, if we should attempt to find the
distance of an object, which was 20 miles or more, by changing our station only
5 feet, the parallactic angle would not be quite 10 seconds; which is so small
that it can scarcely be observed, even with very nice instruments. In such
small angles, the convergence of the lines is so slow, that a small error in
observing the angle will make a great difference in the distance of the point
of intersection.

IT is plain enough, that our hopes of finding the distances of the heavenly
bodies, with any certainty, must be built on observations of their parallaxes.
If the diameter of the Earth bear any sensible proportion to the distance of an
heavenly body, that body must be subject to a parallax, of some quantity or
other; that is, it must appear in different points of the starry heaven, when
viewed from different parts of the Earth. For this reason, Astronomers reduce
all observations, wherever made, to the center of the Earth, which they
consider as the only true point of view. The semidiameter of the Earth, then,
is the base which subtends the parallactic angle. Indeed, if we compare
observations made in opposite parts of this globe, then the whole diameter of
it will become the base, and will subtend the sum of the two parallaxes. And
this is the greatest base we can possibly get, for investigating these
parallaxes.

THE immediate effect of parallax is, to make a star appear below its true
place, according to our first Remark; because the Observer is above the center
of the Earth. But while parallax alters the position of a star in respect to
the horizon, it must alter it, to the other circles of the sphere too, as the
equator, ecliptic, etc. and thus it alters the times of the star's arrival at
those several circles. When a star is in the horizon, its parallax is greatest;
that semidiameter of the Earth, at the end of which the observer is placed,
being then directly opposite to the parallactic angle, and perpendicular to the
distance of the star. So that the horizontal parallax of any star is equal to
the angle under which the semidiameter of the Earth would appear, if seen from
that star. As the star rises, this semidiameter becoming more oblique, the
parallax diminishes, according to the second Remark. And if the star comes to
the zenith, the parallax vanishes; the star then appearing in the same place as
if it were viewed from the center of the Earth. For the contrary reason, when a
star is descending toward the horizon, its parallax must increase.

HENCE it appears, that if one person could observe the place of the Sun or a
planet, in the starry heaven, when in his zenith, and another at the same time,
at the distance of 90, observe it in his horizon, the difference of the two
observed places would be the horizontal parallax sought. But this method,
especially with regard to the Sun, though the most obvious of all, is attended
with insuperable difficulties. And indeed, so are all other methods of
attempting the Sun's parallax, immediately. But, happily, we are under no
necessity of confining ourselves to this. As we know the proportion of the
parallaxes of the several planets, if we can discover the real quantity of any
one of them, we discover all the rest. We are therefore at liberty to choose
that which we find most convenient; and, according to our 3d Remark, that
planet will be most convenient, which comes nearest to the Earth. This limits
the inquiry to Mars, of the superior planets; and Venus, of the inferior. Mars,
in his opposition to the Sun, at his mean distance, is but little more than
half so far from us as the Sun is, their distances being then nearly as 11 to
21; and therefore his parallax then is almost twice as great as the Sun's. But
if he be in his perihelion at the same time, As he was 13th Aug. 1766; but will
not be again in many years.
he comes considerably nearer, his distance being to the Sun's as about 8 to
21; and so his parallax is proportionally greater. -- Venus in her inferior
conjunction is but little more than one quarter so far from us as the Sun is,
and therefore her parallax almost four times as great as his. This therefore is
the most advantageous circumstance. But a Transit of Venus is the most
favorable conjuncture of all, because the limbs of the Sun afford the best
terms with which to compare the planet; and instead of trying to observe the
parallactic angles, which are extremely small, it is much better to observe the
differences of time, occasioned by them, which are much more sensible. For
Venus on the Sun moves 1 second of a degree in 15 seconds of time. Now a second
of time is very perceptible; but a second of a degree can scarcely be
discerned; much less can 1/15 part of a second be so. The best observations
will be, when the planet is in contact with the Sun's limbs, at its immersion
and emersion; the moments of which may be determined with great accuracy, if
the air be clear, by such as are furnished with good astronomical instruments,
and are expert in the use of them.

IF it be enquired, whether the Transits at one node have any advantage above
those at the other, the answer is, that, caeteris paribus, those in December,
at the ascending node, are preferable. The reason is, Venus is then about 1/1^
part nearer to us than in June. But this advantage, though real, may be much
overbalanced by other circumstances, which we shall mention when we come to
explain the manner in which the parallax may be deduced from such observations.
But this must be the subject of another discourse.

Read, 1 st March 1769.

LECTURE II.
IN the conclusion of the last discourse we remarked that a Transit of Venus is
the most favorable conjuncture that can offer, for investigating the parallax
of the Sun and planets; -- a fundamental element in astronomy, which
necessarily enters into the theory of those bodies; and yet is extremely
difficult to be settled with exactness by its being so very small, as almost to
escape the most critical observation. It was farther remarked, that the best
method for this investigation is, to observe the differences of time occasioned
by parallax, at the ingress and egress of the planet. Our next business then is
to inquire, in what manner the times of these phases will be affected by
parallax in different parts of the Earth. -- They will be affected both by the
difference of Longitude, and the difference of Latitude. There is accordingly,
a parallax in Longitude, and a parallax in Latitude In Geography, Longitude and
Latitude are referred to the Equator; in Astronomy, to the Ecliptic. This
distinction was here pastover, to avoid embarassing the subject; and there was
the less need to insist upon it, because in the present case, the former
necessarily involves the latter.
. The former alters the time, as the Observer is farther East or West; the
latter, as he is farther North or South. Their effects, though blended together,
must be examined separately. -- We begin with the parallax in Longitude.

LET us suppose an Observer on such a place of the Earth, as that he can see
the first external contact of Venus, when the Sun is in his Zenith, and
therefore at Noon: He sees this contact without parallax, that is, at the same
instant of time as he would, if he could see it from the center of the Earth.
-- Suppose another Observer West from the former, and under a meridian 6 hours
distant. To him, the Transit will begin at Sunrise, in the lower half of the
Sun. Both the Sun and Venus being depressed by parallax, and Venus more than
the Sun, because nearer; at the time when the contact is formed to the first
Observer, it will not yet be formed to the second; but Venus's western limb
will be as far distant below the Sun's eastern limb, as her parallax excedes
the Sun's; and the contact cannot happen, till the planet has gone over this
distance, which is called her parallax from the Sun. The contact therefore will
not happen at 6 o'clock, but some time after. And if the two Observers should
compare their observations; instead of finding the difference of the observed
times of contact to be the same as the difference of their meridians, viz. 6
hours, as they would, if there were no parallax, they will find it to be less
than 6 hours. -- Suppose a third Observer 6 hours East from the first. He will
see the Transit begin at Sunset. As the Sun's eastern limb, on which Venus
enters, is now the uppermost, it is evident that Venus, depressed by parallax,
will be brought into contact with this limb, sooner than if there were no
parallax. To this Observer, therefore, the contact will happen before 6
o'clock; and upon a comparison of this observation with the first, the
difference of the times will here also be found less than 6 hours, which is the
proper difference of meridians; and as much less, as it was in the foregoing
case. -- But if the Western and Eastern observations should be compared
together, the difference of their times from 12 hours would be double of the
preceding difference from 6 hours, when each of them was compared with the
Zenith observation. -- The same thing is to be said of the first internal
contact; as also, of the two contacts at the egress. Each of these phases will
happen later to those who see them in the East, and sooner to those who see
them in the West, than to those who see them in the zenith, or indeed, near the
meridian. -- You see what a difference is made in the beginning and end, by the
parallax in Longitude.

FROM hence it follows, in the second place, that the whole duration of the
Transit will be altered by this parallax in Longitude. If our Western Observer,
who sees the beginning in the East, and therefore later, could travel so far
Eastward as to see the end in the West, and therefore sooner, it is plain that
the duration of the Transit would be shortened to him. The rotation of the
Earth produces the same effect: It transports an Observer from West to East,
during the continuance of the Transit; so that he, who saw the beginning in the
East, may see the end in the West. On this account, the Transit will be shorter
to those parts of this globe, which have the beginning of it in the Morning,
and the end in the Afternoon, than it would be as seen from the center of the
Earth. And it is not necessary that the observation should be made in a place
where the middle of the Transit happens just at noon: It is sufficient, if it
be within an hour or two, before or after it. The contraction of the duration
will be much the same, if the Latitude be the same. The duration will be most
contracted, on this account, from the northern tropic, near which the Sun will
then be, to the equator. From these limits, either to the north or south, it
will still be contracted, though not so much; because the degrees of the
parallels of Latitude, which measure the base of the parallactic triangle, or
the space through which the Observer is carried eastward, grow less as you
advance toward either of the poles.

THE reverse will take place with respect to such parts of the Earth as have
the middle of the Transit not far from midnight, and therefore see the
beginning in the West, and the end in the East; which will be the case with
places so far North as to have their night shorter than the duration of the
Transit. For, the beginning in the West being accelerated by parallax, and the
end in the East, retarded, it is manifest that the whole duration must be
protracted, and be longer than it would be, as seen from the center of the
Earth. -- Or the thing may be considered in this light. Where the middle is
near noon, the Observer is carried, by the rotation of the Earth, with a motion
contrary to that of Venus; the former being from West to East, the latter from
East to West. This accelerates Venus's apparent motion on the Sun. But where
the middle is near midnight, the Observer, being on the opposite side of the
Earth, is carried in a direction contrary to the former, and therefore the same
way as Venus; and this retards her apparent motion on the Sun. These different
effects of contrary motions have been well illustrated by an ingenious writer,
Mr. Ferguson (Astron. p. 39.) If two birds, says he, fly along side of a ship
under sail, in contrary directions to each other, the bird which flies contrary
to the motion of the ship will pass by its whole side sooner than the other
bird will, which flies the same way as the ship sails. The protraction of
duration in these northern parts on account of the parallax in Longitude, will
be diminished as you advance toward the north pole, because the parallels of
Latitude diminish. In the pole itself, the protraction on this account would be
nothing; and it will be greatest, in that Latitude where the night is but
little shorter than the Transit, and where consequently, the beginning might be
seen a little before Sunset, and the end a little after Sunrise; as it may be
in some places in the Latitude of 60 N. If these lengthened durations, observed
where the middle is not far from midnight, be compared with those shortened
ones, where the middle is not far from noon, the differences will be much
greater than if either of them were compared with the true duration as seen
from the Earth's center.

THE foregoing differences may be altered, and made greater or less, by the
parallax in Latitude, which is the third particular we have to speak of. A
person who sees Venus in his Zenith, sees her without parallax, and therefore
in the same place on the Sun as if the view were taken from the center of the
Earth. One to the Southward of the former, will see Venus more Northerly on the
Sun; and one to the Northward, more Southerly; according to the first Remark we
made concerning parallax. For this reason, if a plane be conceived to pass
through the center of the Earth and that little arc of Venus's orbit which falls
within the Sun's disk, all the inhabitants of the Earth, when to the Southward
of that plane, see Venus with a Northern parallax of Latitude; that is, they
see her more Northerly on the Sun, than she would appear, from the center of
the Earth; and all to the Northward of it see her with a Southern parallax; but
all in the plane it self, see her without any parallax of Latitude. Such a
plane, about the place which is in the middle of the Earth's enlightened disk,
where the Sun is in the Zenith, will cross the surface of the Earth just within
the tropic of Cancer; on the Western side of that place, it will pass more
Southerly; and on the Eastern, in general, more Northerly; -- by reason of the
inclination of Venus's orbit to the equator. -- The effect of this parallax is,
to make the planet appear to pass at different distances from the Sun's center,
and consequently to describe chords of different lengths on his disk; and thus
it will vary the duration of the Transit. The variations on this account will
be so much greater, caeteri paribus, as the path of Venus on the Sun is farther
from his center; because the farther the chords of a circle are from the
center, so much quicker they alter in length. -- The change of duration by this
parallax will not be made the same way as by the parallax in Longitude, if the
Declination of the Sun and the Latitude of Venus are of different
denominations, one North, the other South; but when they are of the same
denomination, the change will be made the same way; and the difference of
duration in distant parts of the Earth will be more considerable in the latter
case than in the former. In June the Declination of the Sun is North. If Venus
past South of the Sun's center, the inhabitants of the Southern part of our
globe, who would see her about noon with a Northern parallax of Latitude, would
see her passing nearer to the Sun's center, describing a longer chord, and
consequently continuing longer within the Sun. But to the inhabitants of this
part of the globe, the duration would be shortened by the parallax in
Longitude; as we showed under the second article. -- On the other hand, where
the middle was near midnight, and where the duration would be protracted by the
parallax in Longitude, the inhabitants being in a high North Latitude, would
see Venus with a considerable Southern parallax of Latitude, which would carry
her farther from the Sun's center, and by making her describe a shorter chord
on his disk, would shorten the duration of her Transit. Thus, in the
supposition, that Venus past South of the Sun's center, the parallaxes in
Longitude and Latitude would counteract one another; one would shorten the
duration in the same parts of the Earth where the other lengthens it; which
would diminish the difference between them. This was the case in 1761. -- But
in the Transit of the present year, the contrary will happen. Venus will now
pass North of the Sun's center; and therefore most of the inhabitants to the
Southward of the tropic of Cancer, who have the middle of the Transit within an
hour or two of noon, and so have the duration of it contracted by the parallax
in Longitude, will see the planet, with a Northern parallax in Latitude, in a
more Northerly path, that is, passing farther from the Sun's center, and
consequently describing a shorter chord, and having a shorter duration within
the Sun. And though the parallax of Longitude is not quite so great in the high
Southern Latitudes, as between the equator and tropic of Cancer, yet the
parallax of Latitude is so much greater as to more than make amends for it. --
On the other hand, where the middle is near midnight, and the duration
protracted by the parallax of Longitude, there the inhabitants, on account of
their high North Latitude, must see Venus with a considerable Southern parallax
of Latitude. Her path will therefore to them appear not so far to the North,
but nearer the Sun's center, and consequently longer. In the case therefore of
the present Transit, the parallaxes of Longitude and Latitude conspire to
produce the same effects; both of them shorten the duration in the Southern
parts of the Earth, and both lengthen it in the Northern. This is the peculiar
advantage, hinted in the preceding discourse, which the next Transit will have
above the last, for ascertaining the exact quantity of the Sun's parallax. The
general method of doing which you may now easily understand.

FROM what has been said, it appears that there are two ways in which the
observations of this celebrated phenomenon are applicable to the present
research. Observations of only the beginning or end, made in different places,
may be compared; or, observations of the whole duration may be compared. It
will be easy to obtain many more observations of the former kind than of the
latter, because a great number of places on the Earth are situated, so as to
see one or other of these phases, which are not able to see them both. You
perceive that parallax differs in its operation in various parts of the Earth,
both in kind and in degree: In some, it accelerates; in others, it retards; and
that, more or less, according to the different situation of the places. And in
each place, its effect will be greater or less, in the same proportion as the
Sun's total or horizontal parallax is greater or less.

IN the former way of proceeding, the observed times of the beginning or end
must be compared with the difference of the meridians where the observations
are made; and any excess or defect found between them is owing to the operation
of parallax; and from the quantity of this excess or defect, the quantity of
the Sun's parallax may be calculated. The method of calculation is indirect, or
tentative. The Sun's parallax is assumed to be of a certain quantity, namely,
that which from former observations we know to be, either the truth, or at
lest, very near it; and from hence, the effects of parallax both in Longitude
and Latitude must be computed for each place of observation; the particular
process of doing which, may more properly be explained elsewhere. The total
effect of both parallaxes being thus found by computation, so as to get the
difference of times when the phases of the Transit should happen in each place;
if the observed difference comes out the same as the calculated, it will be
certain the Sun's parallax was rightly assumed; but if the observed difference
turns out greater or less than the calculated, it will follow that the true
quantity of the Sun's parallax is greater or less than that which was assumed.
To explain this by an example. The difference of meridians between the Royal
Observatory at Greenwich and this, is 4h 44. By calculation we find, that
assuming the Sun's parallax to be 8, 55, as it was found to be nearly by the
last Transit, the external and internal contacts, at the beginning of the next,
will be accelerated by parallax 7 minutes of time at Greenwich; happening there
but a little before Sunset, when parallax has its greatest effect. With us,
where it will begin about half an hour after II, when the Sun is about 54 high
in the western hemisphere, the contacts will be accelerated by parallax but 4
minutes. Therefore, if observations be made in both places and compared, the
times should be sound to differ but 4h 41; which falls short of the difference
of meridians, by 3. This is on the supposition that the Sun's parallax is 8,
55; a parallax of this quantity being just sufficient to produce here this
defect of 3 minutes. A greater parallax would produce a greater defect; and a
less parallax, a less defect. If therefore the observed difference of the times
should be found greater or less than 4h 41, and consequently its defect from
the difference of meridians greater or less than 3 minutes, the inference must
be, that the Sun's true parallax is greater or less than 8, 55, in the same
proportion. Whereas should this defect appear to be exactly 3 minutes, we might
be assured that the Sun's parallax is exactly 8, 55. Thus shall we obtain the
true value of the Sun's parallax. -- In this example, which is designed purely
for illustration, I have taken no notice of the seconds of time. But it is of
the highest importance, that in making the observations they should be attended
to with the most critical accuracy. And herein lies one great advantage of
these Transits above every other phenomenon that can be used for finding the
parallaxes of the planets, namely, that the observations can be made with much
greater exactness. For the times of Venus's contacts with the Sun's limb may be
determined, by experienced Observers and in favorable circumstances, within a
very few seconds; as was intimated before.

As the two places in this instance differ not much in Latitude, which is North
in both; and the observations in both must be made in the Afternoon, and so the
operation of parallax is alike in both, viz. to accelerate the beginning, there
is a difference of only 3 minutes of time, occasioned by the parallax. If the
Greenwich observation should be compared with one made in South latitude, and
in a place so far West as to have the beginning happen in the Morning, where
the effect of parallax will be contrary, and retard the beginning, the
difference would be more considerable. But to take the utmost advantage of
these observations, we ought to make the difference of time as great as
possible; and therefore, the afternoon observation should be made in some place
where the beginning happens not long before Sunset, but yet long enough to have
the Sun of a sufficient height; and where the planet will be seen to enter on
the highest point of the Sun; for then parallax will have its full effect in
accelerating the contacts, by depressing the planet directly downward upon the
Sun's limb. This place I find to be near the latitude of 50 N* and about a
quarter of an hour East of Greenwich. But Greenwich itself, or indeed any part
of Great Britain or Ireland, will serve very conveniently for this observation.
The corresponding observation, to be compared with this, should be made, if
possible, in a place where the beginning happens not long after Sunrise, and
the planet enters on the lowest point of the Sun; for then parallax has its
full effect in retarding the contacts, by depressing the planet directly
downward from the Sun's limb. The place where this will happen, is nearly
opposite or antipodes to the former, in the Southern part of the great South
Sea, not far from which is marked on our globes a tract of land but little
known, called New Zealand. If an observation could be made there, it would be
found to differ from the Greenwich observation about 14 minutes of time; the
difference being double of what it would be, if each were compared with an
observation in the Zenith, which might be made on the western coast of Mexico,
just within the tropic. -- All this is as applicable to the egress of the
planet, as to its ingress; Only the stations must be different. The egress will
happen soonest, in the lowest point of the setting Sun, in the South sea, near
the tropic of Capricorn, and meridian of California; and latest, in the highest
point of the rising Sun, in Arabia; the difference being about 14 minutes, as
before. -- To dismiss this head, it is plain, that in this way of investigating
the Sun's parallax, it is absolutely necessary to have the Longitudes of the
places of observation determined with the most rigorous exactness; for the
success of the whole depends on comparing the observed differences of time with
the known difference of meridians.

THE other way of deducing the Sun's parallax is, by comparing observations of
the whole duration of the Transit, made in distant places. From the preceding
discourse it appears that to the inhabitants of the Southern parts of this
globe, who have the middle of the Transit about Noon, as will be the case in
the South Sea, the duration of it will be shortened by both parallaxes; and
that to the inhabitants of the Northern parts, who have the middle of the
Transit in the night, or when the Sun is near the North part of the meridian,
below the pole, the duration will be lengthened by both. This will be the case
in Lapland. But here again, such stations should be chosen as will make the
greatest difference in the duration. The best places for the latter
observations will be near the polar circle, rather within it, and about 20 or
30 East from London; between the bottom of the gulf of Bothnia and the North
Cape. There, the duration between the internal contacts will be about 5h 54;
and this is the longest that will be any where seen. And the best for the
former will be in the southern part of the South sea, not far from the opposite
meridian. It is not indeed known, whether there be any land situated in that
part of the globe. Nor is there any known place, that can see the end of the
Transit, nearer to it than Mexico, in the Latitude of 20 N. and in that place
there will be hardly any parallax of Latitude. Mexico being very near the plane
passing through the centres of the Earth and Venus. But by the parallax of
Longitude alone, the duration will be made about 18 minutes shorter there than
in Lapland. If an observation could be procured in the Latitude of 55 S. where
the parallax of Latitude as well as that of Longitude will have a great effect,
the duration would not be above 5h 30; that is, no less than 24 minutes shorter
than in Lapland; which is so considerable a difference, that the Sun's parallax
must be ascertained by it to vastly greater exactness than can be done any
other way. And in this way, there is no need of being scrupulously nice as to
the Longitudes of the places of observation: A considerable error in them, even
of several degrees, will only make the difference of a few seconds in the
duration.

THERE is yet a third way of deducing the parallax, and that is, from
observations of the least distance of Venus from the Sun's center, at the
middle of her Transit. But this distance being useful, chiefly as it serves to
determine the total duration, I need not enlarge upon it. -- I may add,
however, that if an observation could be made of this least distance, in the
Latitude of 63 N. and Longitude of 60 E. from London, where the middle will
happen at Sunrise; and another in the opposite place of the Earth, where it
will happen at Sunset, the comparison of these two distances would give the
double of Venus's parallax from the Sun, immediately and without calculation.
The former place is in Siberia, the latter in the unknown southern parts of our
globe, and probably inaccessible. An observation at the former might,
notwithstanding, be compared, to advantage, with a similar one made in any high
southern Latitude. -- But enough of this. My subject did not lead me to speak
of the use of Transits in determining Longitudes; though those of Venus, and of
Mercury too, of which last there are 13 or 14 in 100 years, are certainly one
of the best means in the world for this purpose, when once the parallax of the
Sun is exactly determined.


IN consequence of Dr. Halley's recommendation, great endeavors were used to
have the Transit in 1761 duly observed. The approach of this interesting and
long-expected phenomenon excited the curiosity of every one who had the least
relish for Science; and engaged Astronomers, wherever situated, to employ all
their skill and care in making so critical and delicate an observation. The
most learned Societies and the first Monarchs in Europe exerted their influence
and power with emulation on this singular occasion. It is beside the present
purpose to give a detail of the several observations that were made: They may
all be seen in the Philosophical Transactions. I shall content my self with
mentioning those which were made at the greatest distances from the Royal
Observatory at Greenwich. -- The most Northern place the Transit was observed
at, was in EUROPE, namely, Tornea in Lapland; almost under the polar circle. --
In ASIA, it was observed at Tobolsk, the capital of Siberia, by a French
Astronomer, who performed a journey thither of 4000 miles from Paris, at the
instance of the Imperial Academy of Sciences at Petersburg, and under the
Auspices of the Czarina. This place was farthest East. It was observed besides
at Madrass, which was farthest South-east, under the direction of the
East India Company of London. The French King also commissioned two Members of
his Royal Academy of Sciences, to make the observation in the East Indies. --
In AFRICA, it was observed only at the Cape of Good Hope: It would have been so
at St. Helena too, had not clouds prevented; by Astronomers sent to those
places by the Royal Society, at the expense of his late Majesty K. GEORGE II.
The Cape of Good Hope was the farthest South. -- In AMERICA, it was observed
only at St. John's Newfoundland; and that at the expense of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay. And this place was the farthest West.

THESE observations and all the others were collated, and the proper
computations and conclusions made from them, with incredible industry and
patience, by the late ingenious Mr. Short of London, F. R. S. though he was able
to make but little use of the second method, viz. by the total duration; the
greatest difference observed, which was that between Tobolsk and Madrass,
amounting only to 2 minutes, 50 seconds. In a Paper published in Phil.
Transact. for the year 1763, he has given the result of the whole; which is,
that the parallax of the Sun, on the day of the last Transit, was 8, 56. But in
a Letter he was pleased to write me afterward, dated London 23 July, 1766, he
has the following words. I have, since the publication of that Paper on the
Sun's parallax which you were pleased to approve of, collected the observations
of the late Transit made at many more places than I then had; so that by a
comparison of 43 places with the observation at the Cape [of Good Hope] the
mean result of the Sun's parallax, by the internal contacts, is 8, 545; and by
the external contacts, 8, 551.

ACCORDING to this last determination of Mr. Short, I find the Sun's parallax
at his mean distance from the Earth to be 8, 68; and consequently this mean
distance to be 23,763 semidiameters of the Earth. And as, by the latest
measures, a mean semidiameter of the Earth is 3,957 miles, the mean distance of
the Earth from the Sun is 94,030,000 miles nearly. And in this we must
acquiesce till the next Transit; at which time, if the Astronomers dispersed in
the several parts of this globe, prove successful in their observations, we
shall be able to determine the Sun's distance to a greater degree of precision,
and from thence ascertain the just dimensions of the whole system. For,

CARE has been taken in due season to station Astronomers in some of the most
suitable places of the Earth. We are told that the Czarina has sent out eight
companies to the most northern parts of her empire It is a fortunate
circumstance for those Northern Missionaries, who are gone to unknown parts of
the Russian empire, that there is to be an eclipse of the Sun on the morning of
the Transit. This, if they have weather to observe it, will enable them at once
to settle their Longitudes; proper phenomenon for which, seldom occur in those
regions of perpetual day. -- Extremely unfortunate it would have been, had this
eclipse happened but 6 hours sooner: It would then have intercepted their view
of the Transit.
, where the whole duration will be visible and of the greatest length; and that
the French King has sent Observers to other remote parts; though we have not yet
learned the particular places of their destination. The Royal Society with the
aid of the Government have sent several into the South sea, who, it is to be
hoped, will be able to observe the duration where it will be shortest. It was
also proposed to send some into Hudson's Bay; but whether they actually went, I
am not able to say The equal-altitude and Transit-Instruments for these several
astronomical Missions, as well those from France and Russia as from Britain,
were all made by the accurate hand of Mr. Bird of London, who also made the
Instrument of that kind which lately arrived here for the use of this College.
. -- The beginning may be seen in Great Britain and Ireland, and all over
America; and the end, in the East Indies; but the beginning happening before
Sunrise in the East Indies, and the end after Sunset with us, will prevent
observations of the whole duration. All Africa and the biggest part of Europe
will be entirely deprived of this curious spectacle.

IT were greatly to be wished that we could obtain an observation of the whole
duration, in this quarter of the world. If made with exactness, it would be a
valuable addition to the stock of this sort of observations, which, after the
utmost exertions, it is to be feared will be but very small; as there are but
few places, at least that are accessible, in which both the beginning and end
will be visible. The only places which can see the whole of the Transit, are,
the South sea, those parts of America which lie N. W. of a circle drawn through
the northwest side of the gulf of Mexico, Lake Huron, the south end of James's
Bay, the east end of Hudson's straits and the south part of Greenland: Also,
all within 67 of the N. pole, Kamshatka, Japan, the Ladrone Islands and New
Zeland.
The nearest place to us at which an observation of this sort could be made, is
Lake Superior, where the end will happen a little before Sunset. An expedition
thither, I am sensible, would be attended with difficulties; but in such an
expedition, what are the difficulties, which love of Science in Persons
possessed of wealth and power, and resolution in the undertakers, cannot
surmount? Extract of a Letter to the Author from a Gentleman of the first
distinction in the literary world, dated London, July 2, 1763. The Reverend Mr.
Ma^kelyne [Astronomer-Royal at Greenwich] wishes much that some of the
Governments in North America would send an Astronomer to Lake Superior to
observe this Transit. I know no one of them more likely to have a Spirit for
such an undertaking, or a Person and Instruments suitable, than the
Massachusetts. -- If your health and strength were sufficient for such an
Expedition, I should be glad to hear you had undertaken it. Possibly you may
have an Eleve that is capable. The fitting you out to observe the former
Transit, was a public Act for the benefit of Science, that did your Province
great honor.

Had it been possible, I would have undertaken this affair with the utmost
alacrity; but my state of health absolutely forbidding it, I was obliged, to my
great mortification, to decline all thoughts of it; and could only endeavor to
procure an observation by some other means. Accordingly, I made a proposal for
that purpose* and persued it, as far as I could, and had the pleasure to find
that it met with the approbation and countenance of many Gentlemen of Rank and
Fortune. But since the above Discourse was read, I find that in literary
expeditions as well as others* there may be such things as insurmountable
difficulties. -- A perfect observation was not likely to be obtained: An
imperfect one would be of little service. -- The proposal failed of being
carried into execution.




I CONCLUDE with the emphatical words of the Rev. Mr. Hornsby, the present
Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, who, in a dissertation on this
subject addressed to the Royal Society about three years ago, (Phil. Trans.
1765. p. 326) having shown the necessity of sending Observers into the South
seas, which has accordingly been done, adds, An opportunity of observing
another Transit of Venus will not again offer itself till the year 1874. It
behooves us therefore to profit as much as possible by the favorable situation
of Venus in 1769, This situation, from the principles laid down in p. 29. I
find to be more favorable for the investigation of parallax than any from the
year 1526 till 2125. -- Six hundred years!
when, we may be assured, the several Powers of Europe will again contend which
of them shall be most instrumental in contributing to the Solution of this
grand Problem, [finding the parallax.] Posterity must reflect with infinite
regret upon their negligence or remisness; because the loss cannot be repaired
by the united efforts of industry, genius, or power.

Read 15 th March 1769.

THE END.
Advertisement.
AS it is very probable, that a great number of persons may have the curiosity
to behold so uncommon a sight as that of Venus in the Sun, I think it necessary
to give a public caution, that no Body should venture to look on the Sun,
without defending his eyes from the dazzling brightness; whether he uses any
kind of perspective-glass or not. I have known several persons who have greatly
injured and impaired their eyes by looking on the Sun when eclipsed. A proper
defense is so easily had, that no one need be without it. A piece of common
clear window glass, drawn a few times through the flame of a candle or lamp, till
it be covered with smoke, will effectually answer the purpose; and it may be
covered thicker at one end than at the other, so as to be just suited to the
degree of the Sun's brightness at any time. To prevent the smoke being rubbed
off, when in use, it will be best to have two such pieces of glass, with their
smoked sides turned inward, and tied together, with a thread between them. Thus
guarded, a person may view the Sun, without the least danger to his eyes. But
to see Venus, most people will stand in need of a perspective. -- A very
agreeable way of viewing the Transit, spots on the Sun, etc. is to transmit the
Sun's rays through a telescope or perspective, and receive them on a piece of
white paper, held a few inches from the end of the telescope, and shaded from
all other light. A person that desires to observe the Transit, for use as well
as entertainment, should be furnished with a very good Telescope, and Clock,
exactly adjusted to the true time by altitudes of the Sun taken with an
astronomical Quadrant or Transit-Instrument for several days; a common meridian
line not being sufficient in this case. He should be free from every thing that
may disturb or take-off his attention; and therefore, in profound silence, and
without any company but one or two assistants to watch the clock, and write the
observations.

According to the latest corrections of Dr. Halley's Tables, We expect that in
this place the phases will happen, as follows, Venus will first touch the Sun's
limb June 3, 2h 25 36 She will be totally within 44 8 The middle, or Venus
nearest the Sun's center 5 36 8 The Planet being then 10 to the North of it.
True time of Sunset 7 29 48

The first impression of Venus will be made in a point about 11 degrees of the
circumference of the Sun, to the right hand of the highest point of the Sun.
And there it will appear in reflecting telescopes, and in the common sort of
perspectives. But in astronomical refracting telescopes; which invert objects,
it will appear as far to the left hand of the Sun's lowest point.

We heartily wish all curious Observers a serene sky.


