Mr. Clarke's SERMON ON The Divine use of Vocal Music.

The Use and Excellency of Vocal Music, in Public Worship.

A SERMON Preached at an occasional Lecture, in Lexington. Appointed to promote
and encourage the divine use of vocal Music, more especially in Public Worship,
On Wednesday April 25. 1770.

BY JONAS CLARKE A. M. Pastor of the Church in Lexington.

Praise ye the Lord: For it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely.

Psalm 147. I will praise the LORD with my whole heart, in the assembly of the
upright, and in the Congregation.

Psalm 111.1. I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live: I will sing praise
unto my God while I have any being.

Psalm 10^.^3. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also.

1 Cor. 14, 15. BOSTON: Printed for NICHOLAS BOWS in Cornhill. 1770.

The Use and Excellency of vocal Music, in Public Worship.
PSALM XLVII. 6.7. Sing praises to GOD, Sing praises; Sing praises unto our
King, Sing praises: For GOD is the King of all the Earth, Sing ye praises with
understanding.


THAT there is a Deity, or a supreme Being possessed of all possible
excellencies and perfections; -- that he is the Alpha and Omega, the first
cause and last end of all things; or that he is the creator, preserver,
governor and sovereign disposer of all things, in heaven and earth, are truths,
which the light of reason and revelation conspire to evince, truths generally
received in the christian world, and truths (I trust) which are not called in
question by any, who profess to believe and receive the word of God and gospel
of Christ.

EVERY one, that acknowledges the being and perfections of God, his power and
providence, and his sovereign right to dispose of all his creatures and all his
works, according to his own good pleasure, must, of necessary consequence,
acknowledge his sovereign right to every rational expression of religious
worship, homage and adoration, from all intelligent beings, in heaven and
earth. Angels and Men are jointly obliged hereto, and though they cannot,
hereby, be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself; Job 22.2.
yet, as in this way, both Angels and Men may express their entire dependence
upon him, and obligations to him, as their creator, preserver, benefactor,
sovereign and judge, it is their indispensible duty to bow before the LORD and
kneel before their Maker, Psalm 95.6.
to worship and adore him. In this way, may they glorify him, as in this way, a
gracious God is pleased to account himself glorified by them.

WITH respect to the Angels, and the heavenly host, those bright intelligences,
who inhabit the celestial abodes and continually surround the throne of God, it
is not for us to say, with any real certainty, neither is it easy for us to
conceive, in what manner they discharge this part of their duty to God; though
it is certain, beyond all dispute, that they do worship him: Because it is
expressly said, in sacred scripture, that the host of heaven worshippeth him.
Neh. 9.6.
This was undoubtedly, the service intended in that passage of sacred writ,
wherein it is expressly said, That the morning stars sang together, and all the
sons of GOD shouted for joy. Job. 38.7.
And this is expressly declared to have been the fact, at the birth of the
redeemer; upon which glorious occasion, there appeared a multitude of the
heavenly host, with the Angel that came to the shepherds, adoring and praising
God, saying, glory to GOD in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men Luke 2.13, 14.
-- But clearly to comprehend, and fully to understand, the manner, in which
these sacred and delightful acts of devotion are performed, is not for us in
this state of imperfection. For the desired satisfaction, we must wait, till we
are admitted to join them, in those heavenly and delightful services -- till we
come to see as we are seen, and know as we are known. 1 Cor. 13.12.
-- In the mean time, we may assure ourselves, from divine authority, that they
cease not day and night, to pay their religious homage to God, to worship and
adore that glorious being, from whom they derived their existence, by whom they
are preserved in life, and upon whom they depend for felicity and blessedness.

THE duty, as well as privilege of mankind, in this matter, is not less
evident, being clearly deducible, by the light of reason, from the nature of
things, and fully pointed out both as to matter and manner, by express
revelation from heaven. The divine commands and instructions, written on the
tables of our hearts, and explained and enforced by the writings of divine
inspiration, relative to our duty and obligations, to worship and adore the
God, that made, preserves, supports and governs us, are too plain and explicit
to be drawn in question, by any that have, believe and receive the scriptures
of truth. It is but rational and just, that we should acknowledge and adore the
perfection and excellencies of that glorious being, to whom we are indebted for
existence, upon whom we depend for preservation and support in life, and to
whom we may look and in whom we may safely trust, for the bestowment of every
blessing, necessary to our well-being in the present world, or to a state of
perfect felicity and glory, of which we are capable, to eternal ages, in the
world to come. -- It is but rational and just, that the God in whose hand our
breath is, and whose are all our ways, should be glorified Dan. 5.23.
by us; and that we should worship and adore him, and, in every rational way
possible, express the deep sense we have of our dependence upon and obligations
to him.

VARIOUS are the ways, in which these religious acknowledgments may be, and
are, acceptably made unto God; both internally and externally. As, in private,
in public -- seperately, by individuals, -- socially, by societies, or
assemblies of men, adoring and worshipping GOD, and giving him that glory which
is due to his name.

Internally, this is done, and this important duty is acceptably discharged, by
the devotion of the heart, or the unreserved dedication of the soul to God; and
by cultivating a deep, constant and greatful sense of our indebtedness,
dependence and obligations. -- Herein does the essence of piety toward God
consist -- Hence the intrinsic excellency, -- hence the vital influence of
religion takes its rise. Agreeable to that sacred requisition -- My son give me
thine heart. Prove. 23.26.
In this, our blessed LORD makes the sum of religion consist. Hence, when one
asked him saying, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus
said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment."
Mat. 22.36.37. and 38.
Without the sincere affections of the heart, without the unreserved devotion
of the soul, no acts of religion can be well-pleasing in the sight of that GOD,
who searches the heart, -- who cannot be deceived, and will not be mocked --
Unless the heart be engaged, -- unless religion begins, takes root in, and rise
from the heart, however showy, or splended it may appear, in the outward acts,
pretenses or professions, it is all in vain -- no better than soundding brass,
or a tinkling cymbal. 1 Cor. 13.1.
-- But not to digress --

Externally, This privilege is improved, and this duty discharged, by such
acts of religion and worship, as, by the light of reason, appear in their own
nature suited, or by immediate and express revelation are appointed, to
represent the inward sentiments of the heart and the internal devotion of the
soul toward GOD, as becomes his creatures, dependent upon and accountable to
him. So far, therefore, as the outward acts of religion, and religious services
and institutions, are attended upon and discharged with this view, -- so far as
they are truly expressive of the real sentiments and devotion of the heart and
soul to GOD; so far (and no farther) are they (...) well-pleasing in his sight.
-- Externals in religion are but the garb, or shell -- The love of the heart,
the sincere devotion of the soul, is the substance, and what is chiefly and
ultimately to be attended to; but the other is not to be neglected. -- Both are
to have a proper regard, according to the place they hold in the scale of
importance. Neither are to be omitted; though it is beyond dispute, that the
less is to give place to the greater, when brought into comparison. -- When our
blessed LORD saw the punctitious regard the Scribes and Pharisees paid, to some
external rites and ceremonies of their religion, while their gross neglect of
many things of highest importance to virtue and godliness, and vital religion,
was too notorious to be concealed, he severely reproved them, saying, " Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; For ye pay tithe of mint, annise and
cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and
faith: These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." Mat.
23.23.
This passage is evidently applicable to the point in view, and exhibits the
lesson, we have endeavored to suggest, in too legible characters to need any
comment.

THERE are a variety of ways, in which the devotion of the heart, to a glorious
GOD, may be fitly exercised, profitably cultivated and strongly expressed, in
the external acts of religion; either discretionally, according to the best
light of our own minds, or in obedience to ordinances and institutions of
divine appointment. But, in general, all religious acts and external services
of this nature, may be considered as reducible to, or virtually included in, or
couched under, these two* most expressive branches of devotion, prayer and
praise. Both prayer and praise equally suppose and include in them, a full and
unreserved acknowledgment of the Deity and adoration of his perfections. Both
are alike expressive of our dependence upon GOD and of our obligations to him.
And by whatever devotional acts, our desires and greatful acknowledgments are
expressed, in both prayer and praise, our trust, fear, love, gratitude, hope,
and even all the pious and religious affections, toward the glorious Being
whom we worship and adore, are truly engaged and devoutly expressed. In a word,
prayer and praise alike include and express, (when attended aright) a filial
acknowledgment of our entire subjection to divine government, and the righteous
disposals of a wise providence in the present state, and of our accountableness
to GOD, at last, as our rightful sovereign and final judge. These sentiments
ought always to be kept in mind and deeply impressed on the heart, as entering
into the nature of devotion, and as essentially necessary to render devotional
acts and services well pleasing to GOD.

Prayer and Praise, as they are emphatically the two grand constituent parts of
religious worship, or devotion, and as they are jointly expressive of all the
pious affections toward GOD, are very frequently, if not always joined
together, in acts of homage and religious addresses to him. Agreably, an
eminent apostle, who well understood the nature and obligations of religion,
and especially of devotion, in our addresses to GOD, expressly enjoins, that we
"be careful for nothing: But in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let our requests be made known unto GOD." Phil. 4.6.
So that it may fitly be said, that prayer and praise do, for the most part, if
not always, involve one another in the same acts of devotion. Are we requesting
the bestowment of any needed blessings, a greatful sense of divine goodness
already experienced, is not only becoming our character as dependent creatures,
and petitioners, but also a good argument of our hope and trust in GOD, as able
and ready to do us good; and, at the same time essentially necessary, as a
qualification to render us accepted of GOD, in our supplications, and meet for
the reception of mercies requested. In this way, past mercies, of which the
people of GOD have a greatful sense, are often pled with good success, as an
argument for granting the favors they seek. Numberless have been the instances
of this, recorded for our instruction and encouragement, in the sacred pages.
-- On the other hand, are we expressing our greatful acknowledgements, for
blessings received, and giving of thanks at the remembrance of his goodness and
grace, to renew the acknowledgment of our dependence upon GOD, and devoutly to
implore the continuance of his providence and blessing, and earnestly to seek
his grace and assistance, to a wise improvement of his favors, is, at once, to
express the sincerity of our desires in praising his name, and the ardour of
our souls to make such returns, of love and obedience, as, in consequence of
his goodness, he has a right to expect. Thus to offer praise, is to glorify GOD.

HOWEVER, though prayer and praise are thus interwoven, and practically
speaking, can scarcely be separated, in acts of devotion; yet they may be, and
are justly distinguished, in theory and speculation, and may fitly be
considered, as expressive of the general and main design of devotional acts, to
which they are applied: The former as denominating an act of worship, as being
of the nature of supplication and request, for favors needed; and the latter,
as denoting an act of homage, as being of the nature of gratitude and
thankfulness, for blessings received. In either, and in both, when done in true
devotion, and from the heart, as the divine perfectitions are acknowledged and
adored, GOD is pleased to accept his sincere worshippers, and account himself
grorified. -- It is the latter of these (though not to the exclusion of the
former) to which our attention is called, upon this occasion, and which is,
more especially, the subject of our text and the Psalm before us.

WHAT particular occasion this Psalm was wrote upon -- whether to celebrate
some signal victory, over the enemies of GOD's people -- or to express the joy
of GOD's people, upon the bringing the ark of the ^^^enant of GOD, into the
city of David, which was done with great pomp, solemnity and rejoicings; or
whether it is to be considered as prophetic of the kingdom of Christ, the glory
of the church, in the gosgel day; to usher in which, our blessed LORD, in
glorious triumph, ascended on high, led captivity captive, and received gifts
for men; Psalm 68.18.
(I say) whether it is to be considered, as referring to either of these, or
any other remarkable events, which the psalmist might have immediately in view,
is not easy for us to determine, at this distance of time. Neither is a
certainty, in this case, of any special importance to our present purpose. For
be the immediate occasion of it, what it will, the subject, and practical use
of it, to GOD's church and people, in every age, are the same, and will be so
to the end of time. It is an exhortation to praise the LORD, in several acts
expressive of this part of devotion. Particularly, by clapping of hands,
shouting, and singing. -- "O clap your hands, all ye people, shout unto GOD
with the voice of triumph: For the LORD most high is terrible; he is a great
King over all the earth. -- Sing praises to God, sing praises; Sing praises
unto our King, sing praises: For God is the King of all the earth, sing ye
praises with understanding."

Praise, is expressive of that part of devotion, in which we celebrate the
divine perfections, in the various displays of them, in the works of nature,
providence and grace; in which GOD's people greatly acknowledge, and
particularly celebrate, any special favors and blessings, they have received,
and and in which they express their faith, hope and trust in GOD, and make it
their concern to render to the LORD the glory due to his name. Agreeable to that
most pathetic wish of the holy Psalmist, so often mentioned in the hundred and
seventh Psalm -- "Oh that men would praise the LORD, for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men"*

VARIOUS have been the ways in which GOD's people, in the several ages of the
church and the world, have expressed their grateful acknowledgments to him and
endeavored to praise his name: And various have been the religious rites,
institutions, means and acts attended upon and used, by the saints, to excite
and assist in this part of devotion.

AS to the first ages of the church, we have reason to suppose, as sacred
history is in a great measure silent upon this subject, that the saints and
people of GOD, under the common guidance of the blessed spirit, were left very
much, to their own discretion, both as to means of exciting and manner of
performing this part of their duty and this branch of divine worship. And as we
have no reason to suppose, that men of various tempers, characters and
circumstances, would hit upon the same methods of expressing their reverence
for the Deity, and gratitude for his favors, it is natural to conclude, that
societies, families, and even individuals, for themselves, pi^ched upon those
means and methods, which, according to their best judgment and discretion,
appeared most suitable, and most expressive of their gratitude and
thankfulness, for the blessings of heaven, with which they were indulged. While
there were no standing ordinances, or institutions, of divine appointment,
relative to the forms of worship; and so long as it was discretionary, in what
way, to express their devotion to GOD, it was of little importance, what
measures were adopted, in religious services, so that the heart was found
sincere, in devout ascriptions of glory and praise to his name. Accordingly
their greatful acknowledgments were expressed, sometimes by serious and solemn
addresses to GOD, as the author and giver of blessings enjoyed -- sometimes by
costly sacrifices, offered upon altars, dedicated to the service of GOD --
sometimes by religious festivals, attended in honor to his name, and sometimes
otherways, as his sincere worshippers thought proper, or as occasion required.

WHEN GOD was pleased to choose a people to himself, and bring his church into a
covenant state, as under the jewish economy, he took the direction of these
matters more immediately into his own hands; and appointed, both as to rites
and ordinances, and time and manner of attending them, by his express
instructions and directions; as in the services of the Tabernacle and Temple,
enjoined by the mosaic institution. By this dispensation, which was expressly
given by divine authority, days were appointed for these important purposes,
annually* to be observed, as festivals in honor to GOD, and to show forth his
praise. By the same dispensation, sacrifices were directed to, and rites, of
various kinds were instituted, to be attended upon by the people of GOD, as
expressive of the gratitude of their hearts, and of that internal devotion,
which he required and expected, in return for his blessings indulged them. And,
as expressive of their joy in the LORD, and as suited to excite and assist
their devotion, in praising their GOD, upon these and all other joyful
occasions, several things were admitted, under that dispensation, into the
worship and services of the sanctuary; -- such as feasting, shouting, blowing
of trumpets, clapping of hands, leaping for joy, and even dancing -- as David
before the ark of the LORD, when it was brought up from the house of Oben^dom,
to the city of David with gladness, -- with shouting and the sound of the
trumpet 2 Samuel 6* 12, 14, 15.
In a word, by divine direction, or, at least, by divine permission, GOD's
people admitted into the divine service, in external acts of worship, almost
all acts and exercises, which in themselves were decent, manly and becoming,
and which were suited to excite or assist in devotion, or expressive of the
pious affections toward him.

Music also was introduced, for the same sacred purposes, into the services of
the sanctuary, and improved to a divine use, in worshipping of GOD, and to
praise his name. Instruments of music were prepared, and men skilled in the use
of them, were appointed, to this delightful service. Thus holy David in
preparing for the worship of GOD, in the Temple, and in appointing those who
were to wait on the service, tells us, that there were no less than four
thousand, that praised the LORD, with the instruments which he made to praise
therewith. ^ Chron. 23.5.


AMONG the numerous instruments of music, appropriated to a divine use, in the
services of the sanctuary and in the worship of GOD, the Harp and the Psaltery,
are frequently mentioned: But by what may be collected from the scripture
account, the Organ was of most ancient date, and the leading instrument, in the
divine use of instrumental music. And there is some reason to suppose, the
Organ to have been in use, even in the earliest ages of the church. vide Genesis
4.21.


BUT, then, it is not to be understood, that instrumental music, even the music
of the psaltery, harp, or organ, however pleasant and harmonious, were ever
introduced into a divine use, in the worship of GOD, to prevent, or exclude
vocal music, or the voices of men, from being employed in praising the LORD.
His design was, evidently, rather to assist, than to prevent, the people of
GOD, in using their tongues to praise his great and glorious name. Whatever
ingenuity may have been discovered, in musical instruments, of human structure;
and however sweet and harmonious their sounds, when touched by a skilful hand;
yet, certain it is, No Organs are equal to those of divine construction; -- no
music so pleasant in itself -- none so pleasant in the ears of the LORD our
GOD, as the voices of the saints and people, tuned to sacred harmony and
regularly employed in celebrating his praise. Above all, therefore, Singing the
High Praises of the LORD, seemed to constitute a most essential part of this
religious service, in the sanctuary, and was more earnestly and frequently
inculcated, and more generally attended to, in public assemblies, for divine
worship, as what greater numbers might be personally engaged in, and as better
suited, than any other part of divine worship, at once to express, excite,
assist and inflame their pious affections, religious zeal and heavenly devotion.

A gracious GOD, with smiles of approbation, in his providence, countenanced
and encouraged his people, to make proficiency in a service, so pleasing to him
and so profitable and delightful to themselves. His countenance and
encouragement, to his church and people, in this matter, were clearly
discovered, in a variety of instances. The divine approbation and acceptance of
so excellent a service, were peculiarly manifest, as under the special
direction of heaven, various steps were taken, from time to time, by the
leaders of the people and the most eminent of his servants, to bring this part
of divine worship to its greatest perfection; and to render it most engaging to
men, and most useful to the important purposes of piety and devotion.

To assist his people in praising his name, and to prepare their minds with
subjects and themes worthy his praise, an all-condescending GOD inspires a
number of his servants and prophets, with a concern for his honor and zeal for
his service and glory, in this part of his worship, and sets their tongues and
pens a going. -- Under the immediate and powerful direction of his blessed
spirit, the poetic numbers flow, in most exalted strains of gratitude,
adoration and praise. -- The glories of the Deity, the unchargeableness of his
nature, the excellency of his perfections, the majesty of his kingdom, the
wisdom of his government, the greatness of his goodness and the riches of his
grace, as clearly displayed in the works of nature, providence and redemption,
are some of the themes to which their attention is called, as suited to excite
the gratitude of men and assist them to celebrate the praises of their GOD. --
Psalms, hymns, and heavenly songs, are thus composed for the use of the church;
and in matter and measure, happily prepared for the service of the sanctuary:
And, at the same time, in number and variety of subjects, wisely calculated for
the use of GOD's people, upon every occasion and in every circumstance, that
did, or might occur to them in life. So that a gracious GOD, has not only
invited his people to so delightful a duty, but put words into their mouth, to
celebrate his praise.

BUT not enough, that GOD's people were thus furnished with suitable subjects
and matter of praise, that his praises might be sung in a manner worthy so
exalted a theme, the utmost care is taken to promote so important a service.
Inspired with a pious zeal for the glory of GOD, and knowing it to be of no
small importance to the honor of his name, in promoting true devotion, in this
part of his worship, that the music itself should be decent, regular and
engaging, the chief Rulers and Fathers of the people are not wanting, to use
their utmost endeavors, as well as influence and authority, to encourage,
cultivate and promote so pleasing, so useful an art, for so important a
purpose. -- In a word, their aim is, that the harmony of Zion might at once,
express the devotion of her children, and excite them to aspire to sing, in
higher accents and still more exalted strains of praise.

ALL, indeed, cannot be supposed, to have had the gift of, the ear and voice
for music; though all might sincerely join in the devotion, intended and
expressed in this part of the worship of GOD's house: But yet, that so useful
an institution should want no assistance, to make it as general, and
extensively beneficial, as possible, peculiar pains were taken in the church,
both to find and to instruct such as had talents, adapted for this purpose, and
a genius for music, and to prepare them to lead and assist, in the services of
the sanctuary; to the end, that in a manner, most regular, correct and
harmonious, and best becoming the house and worship of GOD, this part might be
performed. -- That GOD's people in general, even the whole congregation, might
be led and assisted in singing praise to their King and their GOD -- That all
might be enabled, in a good measure at least, agreeable to the direction in the
text to sing with understanding in the manner, as well as matter of the song --
and, at the same time, catch the attention, charm the ear, awaken the
affections, engage the hearts and excite the devotion of all around.

TO this purpose David, the sweet singer of Israel, had his musicians -- his
Chief Musicians, Neh. 12.46.
not only upon the Psaltery, the Harp and the Organ, but also (undoubtedly) in
this part of divine worship, in which his heart was so deeply engaged, in which
his tongue was so frequently employed, and in which his soul was greatly
delighted. Had he four thousand appointed to praise the LORD, with the musical
instruments, which he had prepared for this purpose, a much greater number are
often called upon by him, to sing to the LORD, and with their voices, skilfully
modulated to harmonious sound, to praise his great and glorious name: -- Yea,
he frequently calls upon all, of every character, among the people of GOD, to
engage in so rational, so delightful a duty.

TO the same end, Solomon, his son, in the Era of whose reign, the Church and
State of GOD's chosen people arrived at the summit of their glory, and the best
part of whose time, after he came to the throne, by divine appointment, was
employed in building the Temple, and appointing the worship and services of the
sanctuary, took care of this part of worship, and appointed his Men Singers and
Women Singers; as also, and more especially, for the temple service and the
worship of GOD, the Levites, which were Singers, were appointed, as one, to
make one sound to be heard when they lifted up their voice -- and praised the
LORD, saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures forever. 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13.
And there is good reason to suppose, that this order continued, in the service
of the temple, so long as the worship of GOD was therein continued and
observed, according to the divine appointment.

WHEN Ezra the Scribe of the law of the God of heaven, Ezra 7.21.
and Nehemiah the governor of Judah, Neh. 5.14.
upon the return of the captivity of GOD's people, were engaged in
re-establishing the jewish polity and government, in rebuilding the temple, in
restoring GOD's covenant people to a church state, and in reviving the worship
and ordinances of religion, agreeable to the direction of heaven, under that
dispensation, they made it their care, to revive and encourage this part of
divine worship, in particular; as an institution of no small importance to the
true worship of GOD, and as what, even in that broken state of the church,
could by no means be omitted. -- Yea, so much in earnest were these servants of
GOD, to have this part of the temple service restored, as an excellent help to
religion and as a part of worship, that they made it their concern, when about
to return to Jerusalem, with the people, carefully to collect both the Singing
Men and Singing Women, who were to be found, among the captives scattered in
the nations, whether they had been driven. And though they were few, in
comparison with the whole number of GOD's people that returned; yet so
essential, did they esteem this part of divine worship, to the services of
religion, that they were appointed to lead and assist therein: And to enable
them to improve, in that skill, in harmony and music, which was necessary to
the faithful discharge of the duty appointed them, they had daily portions
assigned and given them, for their support, according to the commandment of the
LORD, Vid. Ezra 2 65. Neh. 7.67.11.23.12.45.46, 47.
by David and Solomon his Son.

BUT this is not all: Further to show the reasonableness and propriety of this
method of praising GOD, and our obligations hereto, it may be observed, that
many of the psalms and hymns, in sacred writ, composed by the inspired penmen,
for the use of GOD's church and people, in this part of divine worship, are
conceived in terms suited to remind all of their duty, in this respect: And
some of them contain express injunctions and exhortations hereto. -- "It is a
good thing", says the Psalmist "to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing
praises unto thy name, O most high." Psalm 92.1, 2.111.1.
"Praise ye the LORD. I will praise the LORD with my whole heart, in the
assembly of the upright, and in the congregation." "Praise ye the LORD: For it
is good to sing praises unto our GOD; for it is pleasant, and praise is
comely." Psalm. 147.1.
For these and other important reasons, the holy Psalmist resolves, saying, "I
will sing to the LORD as long as I live; I will sing praise unto my GOD, while
I have any being" Ps. 104.33.
And, in full proof of what has been advanced, with regard to this important
branch of divine worship, the psalm before us, which is an exhortation to
praise the LORD, but most directly the words of our text, may be added, which
contain the nature and authority of a command. -- Sing praises to God, sing
praises; Sing praises unto our King, sing praises: For GOD is the King of all
the earth, sing ye praises with understanding.

HERE the duty, of which we have been speaking, is exhorted to and enjoined, in
words too plain to be misunderstood -- too clear to admit of dispute, or need
any comment. -- The reason with which the injunction is enforced upon us, that
the glorious Being, to whom we are exhorted to sing praises, is our GOD and
King -- and the King of all the earth, or sovereign of the world, is both clear
and conclusive, easy to be conceived of, and universally binding. For surely no
one will draw in question his obligations to God, in either of the characters
here mentioned; or the reasonableness of ascribing to him the glory and praise
that are justly his due. And as to the manner in which this duty is to be
performed, it is here represented concisely and expressively. We are to sing
praises with understanding. That is, intelligently, with regard to ourselves,
as well knowing, or entering into the spirit of the matter and subject of what
we sing, and whereby the devotion of our hearts is expressed; and also, as
being acquainted with the manner of the heavenly song, and those modulations of
the voice, and modes of singing, which are decent and becoming devotion and
praise: -- Intelligibly, with respect to others, both as to matter and manner
of the divine songs, in and by which our devotion to God is expressed. --
Herein improving, both hymns and tunes, composed for general use, and
conforming ourselves to some standing rules and measures, in both these
respects, which are or may be, easily known to others, with whom we worship,
and who join us in our public expressions of gratitude to God. Thus we shall,
like the Levites, the singers in God's church of old, (as abovementioned) as
one, make one, or the same delightful sound, of music and harmony, to be heard,
when we lift up our voices to praise the LORD: -- And in this way, like the
saints above, the door is open for thousands and thousands, to join in the same
acts of devotion, to speak the same things both intelligently to themselves,
and intelligibly to each other, and with one heart and with one voice, to
praise the LORD.

"THUS saints on earth may join their songs,
like angels round the throne:
Though thousand thousands are their tongues;
yet all their joys are one".
SHOULD it be said, that singing to the LORD, or singing his praise, is a rite
or ceremony peculiar to the legal or mosaic dispensation; and that
consequently, it shared the same fate with other ceremonial rites, upon the
introduction of the gospel: It may be answered -- That, to prove, that this is
a way of expressing our devotion to GOD and gratitude for his favors, which is
well pleasing to him, under the gospel, as well as under the law; -- we need
only say, that our blessed LORD, when upon earth, with his disciples,
worshipped GOD, in this way -- and by his example, manifested his approbation
of it and taught us our duty. Mat. 26.30.


FURTHER to satisfy ourselves, if we think this an insufficient warrant for us,
in this matter; it may be served, that the apostles, with whom, our LORD, when
he ascended up to heaven, left the immediate care of the church, undoubtedly
received it in this light. -- One apostle expressly exhorts, to the singing of
psalms, as expressive of our sacred joy in, and gratitude to GOD. Jam. 5.13.
And another, for our example and instruction, tells us how this duty should be
attended -- even as other acts of devotion, -- with the spirit and with the
understanding also. 1 Cor. 14, 15.


IT hence appears, that as singing praise to God, as a part of divine worship,
is not so novel an institution, as to be deemed an unjustifiable innovation in
the church: So it is not of so ancient standing, as to be out of date, or
abolished. -- Saints under the gospel are equally obliged and encouraged
hereto, as under the law: And it is a peculiar glory of the gospel age, that --
"The christian church does now unite,
The songs of Moses and the Lamb".


Music, in itself, when well performed, when the voices are good, and the
harmony regular and correct, has a powerful influence upon the ear, the
affections, the hearts of mankind,. -- The effects, which have been justly
attributed to the power and charms of music, in a variety of instances,, have
been truly great and astonishing. As, when David played skilfully on the harp,
the evil spirit departed from Saul; 1 Samuel 16.23.
so, in many instances, the mechanical effects of music, vocal, or
instrumental, have been equally surprising and wonderful. -- Diseases, that
have defied the power of medicine and baffled the physicians's skill, have not
been able to resist its charms. -- And if the best accounts do not deceive us,
in some cases, it is the best, the only remedy -- Poisons are expelled, senses
restored, and even life itself has often been saved, by the powerful energy and
reviving charms of music. A remarkable (...), we have, in the only effectual
remedy for the Bite of the Tarantula; which is chiefly and generally effected
by music.
-- To say the least, it must be allowed, from what every one, who has an ear
and taste for music, must frequently experience in himself, that it has a
natural and most happy tendency, to soften the roughness of our spirits, to
calm the passions, and to compose our minds, and thus to prepare us for hearing
and receiving instruction, and for meditation, contemplation and acts of
devotion.

When music, therefore, is well adapted and applied to a divine use, it can
scarcely fail of having a proportionably good effect, to the purpose of our
edification. -- When such compositions; such Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, as, in themselves, breathe the true spirit of religion, and are well
adapted, at once, to lead, assist, excite and express the devotion of the heart
and soul to our GOD and King, are set to music; and the parts of music are well
adapted to the sentiments therein expressed, and well performed; it is not easy
to conceive, the powerful influence it will have upon us, or the happy effects,
it will have a natural tendency to produce. -- The attention is roused, the
passions are composed, the affections are engaged, the devotion is enlivened,
and the whole soul is sweetly drawn forth into the exercise of gratitude, and
in most devout acknowledgments of praise to GOD. Our hearts are disposed to
receive the great truths of religion, our minds are prepared to digest and
improve the instructions we receive, and thus our faith is confirmed, our love
increased, our trust encouraged, our hope strengthened, a more endeared intimacy
and communion with GOD established, more lasting impressions are made upon us,
and a more solid foundation laid for the flourishing growth of all the virtues
and graces of the divine life, which are to the praise and glory of GOD.

Do we consider it, then, as a way pointed out by GOD, in his word, as well as
rational and natural in itself, to express our devotion to him: -- Do we view
it as a suitable method, of expressing all the pious affections of the soul, to
that GOD, to whom we are indebted for life and favor, and upon whom we depend
for every blessing, it must appear a most rational and delightful part of
religious worship -- And more especially, will it appear a duty most engaging
and obliging, if to these things we add, that this is a way, in which, a
gracious GOD is pleased, not only to admit his sincere worshippers to a blessed
nearness of communion with himself, but also to account himself glorified, by
the devotion and adoration of his people so expressed. For he is expressly
said, not only to be delighted in, but even to inhabit the praises of his
Israel. Psalm 22.3.


GOD is our creator, preserver, benefactor, redeemer and king; -- in him is all
our hope. -- Is it not just, that we should seek his face, and sing his praise?
Is it not right, that we should, with our voices, in loudest accents of
gratitude, ascribe the glory that is due to his name? -- and is it not
altogether reasonable, that we should make it our concern and earnest
endeavor, not only to be sincere in our devotion, but in the external acts, to
show forth his praise, in a manner worthy his great and glorious name, and
becoming our characters as intelligent creatures -- to sing with the spirit,
and with the understanding also. -- Surely it become us then to be upon our
guard, least we bring the torn, the lame and sick for a sacrifice, in this part
of divine worship, -- Should we thus approach the LORD with unhallowed lips and
the hoarse accents of irregularity and confusion, pretend to sing to his praise
(when we have the means of being better instructed) would not a justly incensed
GOD, challenge us, as he did his people of old, saying -- who has required
this at your hands? -- If I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a
Master, where is my fear? Isa. 1.12. Mal. 1.6.


IN a word: To sing praises to our GOD and King, is a duty which we owe to him,
in consequence of our relation to him, as his creatures, created, preserved and
redeemed by him, dependent upon him and accountable to him -- a duty of express
divine appointment -- a duty, to which we are obliged by every engaging
argument -- a duty rational and natural in itself, and wisely adapted to
excite, assist and express our devotion -- a duty in which we may have
communion with the saints on earth and angels in heaven -- and a duty, in a due
attendance upon which we may, by the divine blessing, begin the work of heaven
upon earth, have some ravishing fore-tastes of the joys of the blessed, and be
furthered in our preparations for the more exalted services of GOD's temple
above, and rendered meet to sing, in more exalted strains, the high praises of
GOD and the Lamb, in the paradise of the LORD, forever and ever! -- Well might
the holy Psalmist, then in full belief of the use, excellence and importance of
this delightful service, exhort and enjoin, as in words before us -- Sing
praises to GOD, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises: For GOD
is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with understanding.

UPON the whole, and to draw toward a close: What has been said may fitly be
improved, to excite all to the exercise of greater care and concern, than ever,
to a right discharge of our duty, in singing praise to the LORD; -- to consider
it as a part of divine worship, and to attend upon it in such a manner, as
shall be more to his glory and our own edification. Several things, suggested
in and deducible from the preceding discourse, are particularly worthy our
special notice and serious attention.

FIRST, we are taught the great condescension and goodness of GOD, in
permitting us, sinful, unworthy creatures, to approach his presence, to
worship, adore and praise his great and glorious name: and especially, that he
is pleased, not only to accept, but also to be well pleased with, and to
account himself glorified by, the sincere services of his people, in singing
praise to his name. -- It is condescension in the majesty of heaven, to behold
the things that are done therein, to receive the worship, adoration and praises
of the heavenly host -- well may we then with grateful wonder, cry out -- LORD,
what is man, that thou art mindful of him; or the children of men, that thou
have any regard unto them! -- Often let us reflect upon this amazing instance
of the goodness and condescension of our GOD and king; and as often let our
souls be humbled within us, that we have been no more affected with a sense of
the greatness of the privilege we have so long enjoyed and so greatly abused.
-- And let our past neglect and abuse of so high a privilege, be an argument,
effectually to awaken us, to a sense of our high obligations, and excite us to
the greatest concern to improve our time, and employ our tongues, in
celebrating the praises of that GOD, to whose goodness and grace we are
indebted, for the opportunity we still have allowed us, to sing praise to his
name -- Yea, with the pious Psalmist, let us resolve, that we will sing to the
LORD as long as we live. Psalm. 104.33.


SECONDLY, Is singing praises to the LORD, a duty so rational and delightful,
and so essential a part of the worship of GOD; hence we see the peculiar
obligations we are under, for the wise provision he has made, for our direction
and assistance herein. -- As "GOD has not left himself without a witness",
respecting his providential care of the world of mankind, in that he has all
along, done them good, and given them rain from heaven: so neither has he left
himself without a witness, in the care of his church and people, and the
religion and worship, he has called them to observe. The gracious care of a
merciful GOD, was early manifest in a divine revelation of his will, relative
to faith and worship, and, in all succeeding ages, down to the present time, in
preserving his word, in its purity, for the use and direction of his people, in
both these respects, as a standing and unerring rule of both faith and worship.
-- That we have this word, in our own language, for our directory, is a
standing proof of the divine care of the church, and of our obligations to
gratitude and thankfulness.

BUT, in regard to that branch of our duty and divine worship, of which we have
been speaking, we are under peculiar obligations to GOD, for his goodness, in
providing for our direction and assistance in our attendance upon it. This
constant care of a faithful GOD, for his church and this part of his worship,
appears, more especially, in the following instances.

1st. In raising up and qualifying, in spiriting and enabling, some of his
saints and servants, so faithfully and intelligibly to translate, and reduce to
suitable poetical measures, the Psalms and various other passages of the sacred
word, for the use of his church and people, in public and private, to assist in
devotion, and especially in singing the praises of GOD -- Without such a work,
it would scarcely have been possible, for GOD's church and people, in a public
social way, to have attended this part of divine worship -- In this we see the
providence of GOD, in his care for the support and continuance of so delightful
a part of his worship; which demands a grateful remembrance and should be the
subject of our frequent praises.

2dly ANOTHER instance of the divine care and providence, in this important
affair, appears in his raising up and encouraging men, possessed of a genius
for music, with great care and pains, to search out and form such an excellent
system of rules, for the direction of music, in its various parts -- and to
compose such a variety of Tunes, so happily adapted, as to time, measure and
harmony, to a divine use, in public worship, upon all occasions, that whole
assemblies, however numerous, may join, and with one voice, as well as heart,
sing praises unto GOD.

THIS was a work of no small importance to the devotion of the church, in this
part of worship: -- Yea, it was necessary; as hereby the harmony of Zion, as to
deceney and engaging sweetness, as well as use, becomes more general, and is
raised to higher degrees of perfection.

GOD is not the author of confusion, says the apostle -- and therefore he
exhorts -- Let all things be done decently, and in order. -- 1 Cor. 14, 33, and
40.
Though it is granted, that there is no such thing, as Holiness in one sound
more than another; yet no one can deny, that there is such a thing as Decency
and harmony, in singing that is correct and regular -- or that there is such a
thing as confusion and discord in singing, that is without rule and order --
where every one follows the dictates of his own humor and inclination. It is,
therefore necessary, that such steps should be taken and such provision made,
as those but now mentioned, to assist and direct, as to matter and manner of
praising GOD -- to enable the people of GOD, in a manner becoming their
character and his worship, to sing praises to his name. -- Happy for us, and
the church of GOD, these things are done to our hand. -- And such are the
helps, with which we are furnished, that by a careful improvement, the harmony
of Zion, might rise to a degree of perfection, scarcely to be parrallel'd by
any ages past.

A Genius for Poetry -- and a Genius for Music, are gifts of GOD. -- It is of
GOD to possess these gifts. -- It is of GOD and under the influence of his
providence and grace, that any of his servants have improved them to a divine
use, and for the service of the church, and sanctuary, in these important
instances. -- To GOD our most grateful acknowledgments are due. -- To GOD for
these instances of his constant care, for his church and his worship, let our
voices be raised, in grateful hymns and songs of praise. --

3dly, THE preceding discourse affords proper encouragement, to such as have
improved, or are desirous of improving the means for their direction and
assistance, in the divine use of music, in the worship of GOD. It is, most
certainly, a laudable ambition, in all, but especially in youth, of both sexes,
to strive to excel, in a study so pleasant, in an art so profitable, and in
that, which, by divine grace, may qualify them to glorify GOD, in his house, to
lead and assist in his service, and to shine as examples of improvement, in so
delightful a part of his worship.

WE rejoice that there are any, who are engaged in so laudable a work, and who
are taking those steps which may be of use to teach them, to sing praises to
their GOD and King with understanding. -- To such we would say -- We bid you
GOD speed -- and with all our hearts, we wish you a blessing out of the house
of the LORD, this day. -- May you go on in improvements to higher degrees of
perfection, in the devotion of the heart, as well as the music of the voices,
until, by praising GOD in his temple here below, you shall be fully prepared,
with angels round the throne and the spirits of just men made perfect* in
loftier strains, to sing the praises of GOD and the Lamb, in his temple above,
for ever and ever! --

FOURTHLY, this subject and what has been offered upon it, severely reprove the
negligence of all, who have gifts and talents to enable them to sing praises to
their GOD and King, and improve them not.

IT is readily granted, that some have not talents for this external act of
devotion: some, that have neither ear, voice, nor genius for music. -- But is
it not well known, that too many that might, with decency, at least, attend and
bear a part in singing praise to the LORD, who, either through pride, or
bashfulness, or from some other cause, neglect it -- How such can excuse
themselves, or answer it to their consciences and unto that GOD, whose praise
they refuse to celebrate, and whose name they neglect to glorify: -- I know not
-- to their own master they stand or fall! -- Would to GOD, they might be led
to think seriously of their neglect, before it is too late! -- But permit me,
further, to ask -- Are there not some, yea, many, that are culpable, in a still
higher degree, in this matter? -- Some, that not only neglect to improve, but
even abuse and profane these gifts of GOD, to purposes of wickedness? Is it not
amazing, to observe, how pleasant and melodious the voices of many are, and how
readily employed, in singing vain and foolish, if not vicious songs, to the
profaning of GOD's holy name; and to the depraving their minds, and debauching
their morals, who, perhaps, have never once employed their tongues, to sing
their great Creator's praise! -- Alas, how guilty, -- how inexcusable, must
such appear, in the sight of that GOD, who searches all hearts, -- who cannot
be deceived, -- who will not be mocked! --

IN the church of GOD, under the former dispensation, there were singing men
and singing women, who praised the LORD, for his goodness and for his mercy,
which endures for ever. -- Why should so many, who are equally capable of this
divine and delightful service, be silent in the gospel day? -- HAVE we not
equal reason of praise -- yea, are we not under greater obligations to sing the
praises of GOD and the Redeemer! -- In particular, let me ask -- why should
there be so general a neglect of this, most agreeable and engaging part of
divine worship amongst the Female Sex? Is it modesty, bashfulness, pride, want
of attention to the nature of the duty, or want of love and reverence to the
Deity? -- or what is it, that prevents them from honoring GOD, from being
ornaments to religion and shining examples of devotion? -- Certainly no voices
are so pleasant, none so sweetly melodious and engaging, as those of singing
women, when rightly tuned to hymns of praise. And shall they be the last to be
persuaded to engage in a duty, for which they are the first in capacity, and
for which they have the richest gifts and highest qualifications? -- Have they
no mercies to celebrate, no cheerful notes to raise, no joyful songs to sing,
in praise of their GOD, their redeemer and King. -- But I forbear --

MAY we all seriously recollect what has now been (imperfectly) suggested, and
carefully apply it to our own souls, for awakening; quickening, encouragement
and confirmation, as we find our state requires. Let all be persuaded to comply
with our duty, in this part of divine worship, both in the internal devotion
and external attendance, upon this divine institution.

LET those that have genius and voices for music, stir up the gift that is in
them, and be awakened to improve, to the glory of GOD, and to the praise of his
distinguishing goodness and grace.

MAY those that have neither genius nor voices, for musical performances, be
yet concerned to praise (...) -- Many, it is to be feared, who cannot, with
their voices, (...) the a^^^^bly, in singing praises to GOD, are but too apt to
(...) idle spectators of the devotion of others, and suppose they have ^o
concern in the matter. But verily, they are grossly mistaken: For they are
under as much obligations to the devotion of the heart, and of consequence to
attend to the subject matter of the heavenly song, as if their voices were
music, and the moving of their tongues was harmony itself. -- It is theirs,
therefore, to contemplate the hymns that are sung by others, and embibing their
spirit and adopting their sentiments, to lift their souls to GOD, and make
melody in their hearts, to their Redeemer and King. Here it is natural to
observe, that it might greatly assist the devotion of such, as cannot join the
congregation, in singing, to have the books of devotion with them, and the
psalm or hymns, appointed to be sung, under their eye. This would be an happy
means of preserving the attention, exciting the affections, employing the
meditation and enkindling devotion. Whereas, without this help, the devotion is
broken* the thoughts are wandering, and the whole space employed in singing is
spent to but little purpose, or wasted away in some vain amusement. And even
those that do bare a part in singing, it is humbly conceived, would find no
small advantage, to the same purposes, by having the psalms or hymns they sing
before them -- they must be more likely to enter into the true spirit of the
song, and of consequence, more likely to exercise true devotion of heart. --
For these, and several other reasons, It cannot but be lamented, that carrying
the psalms and hymns, out of which the portion to be sung are chosen, to public
worship with us, is so generally neglected. And it is earnestly recommended to
all, to reform this neglect, where it has prevailed, by procuring and keeping
by them, the books of devotion, for this part of worship, that are in common
use.


TO shut up all: May we all be cautioned against resting in the form of
godliness, in the outward show of religion. If the heart is not engaged, our
worship and external acts, will avail us nothing; unless it be to enhance our
guilt. -- "The LORD sees not as man sees: Man looks on the outward
appearance, but the LORD on the heart. -- The LORD searches the hearts, -- He
tries the reins." -- Our songs of praise unless attended with true devotion,
with the spirit, as well as understanding, will be deemed no better than vain
oblations, which are an offense to GOD. Yea, though we are ever so well skilled
in music, and though the sound of our voices, in the external acts of worship,
have been pleasant and engaging, as harmony itself -- and though we have shone
in the church, as bright examples of highest seize in this part of divine
worship, all will be in vain, if our hearts are not right in the sight of GOD:
-- Our expectations will fail, when GOD shall take away the soul; and our hope
shall be like the spiders web, which, in death, will yield us no support. -- To
alarm, awaken, and put us upon our guard, against a mistake so dangerous and
fatal, let us be persuaded to look forward and consider how awful, how
distressing it must be, at death, to change the scenes; and from being engaged
in the delightful service of music and singing praises with GOD's people, in
his temple on earth, to pass to join the haters of the LORD, in cursing and
blaspheming his name in regions of despair for ever and ever! -- An awful
thought! -- may it be deeply impressed on every heart! --

BUT are we sincere, in our devotion to GOD, and in praising his name; then may
we hope from praising him imperfectly on earth, to pass to sing in perfection
above: and with angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, and with the
whole multitude of the redeemed of the LORD, to ascribe praise, and blessing,
and honor, and glory, and power, to him that sits upon the throne, and unto
the lamb, forever and ever. Which GOD, of his infinite mercy grant, for his
mercy's sake, in Christ Jesus. AMEN.

Errata -- In several places for greatful r. grateful. P. 13, l. 16, r. gospel.
P. 14, l. 8, r. gratefully. P. 16, l. 17, r. Obededom. P. 17, l. 20, f. His r.
The. Ib. l. 29, r. his saints.


