A SERMON UPON MATTHEW V. 23, 24.

BY WILLIAM TENNENT, A. M.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER, at the New Printing-Office, in
Beaver-Street.

PREFACE.
IT was far from the Author's Intention or Desire, to appear in Print upon this
Subject. The earnest Importunity of a considerable Number of Clergymen, for
whom he has great Respect, and who were present at the Delivery of the
Discourse, was the only Thing that made him consent. Diffident of his own
Judgment, he has ventured on theirs. As to the Style and Manner, he makes no
Apology, more than for the Appearance of his Person; it is such as is natural
to him. Yet so much with Justice he may say, that when he wrote it, he did not
dream but that it was fated, with innumerable more, to lie and moulder in the
Oblivion of his own Desk.

An abused Text.
MAT. V. 23, 24. Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has aught against thee; leave there thy Gift
before the Altar, and go thy Way; first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift.


AS Ignorance and Inattention is often apt to misapply Texts of Scripture, so
an evil Temper is ever ready to catch at any Plea that may seem to warrant the
Neglect of Gospel Ordinances: It is therefore the undoubted Duty of Ministers
of the Gospel, to vindicate every Part of the sacred Record from Abuse, and as
much as possible, to prevent Men from turning into Poison that which was
designed for their Nourishment.

The Words which I have read in your Ears, are some of the Number which require
our Attention, to prevent a Misimprovement of them, to the Hurt of many. I take
this Opportunity therefore to call your Attention to a calm Consideration of
their true Intent and Meaning.

To view them in their Connections, and to show you their Import as relating to
the Jews, shall be our first Part.

An Application to Christians, shall be our Second.

To point out the Abuses to which these Words are liable, we shall endeavor in
the last Place.

I. If you consider the Connection of these Words, you find they make a Part of
that astonishing Sermon which the Son of God preached to his Disciples on the
Mount. A Sermon, in which he seems wholly to aim at overthrowing the
Corruptions of human Nature, and particularly to knock down the base Props of
them which the wicked Pharisees had set up under Color of the Law. He begins
by blessing and pronouncing happy those whom Men naturally account most
unhappy. After rectifying their Judgment in these Respects, he proceeds
directly to oppose the corrupt Glosses which the Scribes and Pharisees had cast
over the Law: He aims to arouse and alarm his Hearers, by assuring them that
unless their Righteousness was of a superior kind to that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Men of whom they had such an high Opinion, they should in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Unless they came to see more of the
Spirituality and Extent of the Laws of God, than the Pharisees either did or
taught, they must assuredly perish. Now the Pharisees made the Laws of God
extend only to the outward Conduct, and seemed not to imagine that they
referred to the inward Disposition and Thoughts of the Heart.

Our Divine Lord begins, -- he goes through a Number of the moral Precepts: He
gives Instances first in the Law of killing; then in that of Adultery, of
Divorces, of Swearing, of Revenge, and so on. Our Text is a consequential
Instruction upon the first of these. The Pharisees usually introduced their
Lectures upon the Law, with this Expressinn; "It has been said of them in old
Time." As if it was more respectable that these Laws should come under the
Appearance of a Tradition from Men, than of the immediate Command of God. It is
by Way of Remark upon this Arrogance, that our Lord tells his Hearers, -- Ye
have heard, it has been said of them in old Time, THOU SHALL NOT KILL. The
Pharisees had made this Addition of their own, " but whosoever shall kill,
shall be in Danger of the Judgment. Now Jesus Christ enters into the spiritual
Latitude of this Command; and teaches them that it extends to our Words, and to
the Feeling of the Heart, as well as to the Action of Murder. He makes the Man
in a Degree chargeable with Murder, who lifts his Tongue against his Brother.
Nay, if he is only angry at his Brother without a Cause, he finds him guilty of
the Breach of the sixth Command. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry
with his Brother without a Cause; whosoever calls him Raca, thou Fool, or any
such hasty idle Names, in a Fit of Anger, has broken this Command, and is in
Danger not only of temporal Punishment, but of Hell Fire. And it must be so;
for if Men suffer their Passions to rise to such a Degree, as that they
entertain the least Desire of private Revenge, and testify this their
Disposition, by calling Names, or reviling; they show, that they have in their
Hearts the Seeds of Murder, or those Beginnings from which Murder usually
springs.

Now mark what follows; for it is our Text* "Therefore, if thou bring thy Gift
to the Altar." It is introduced within "Therefore," because it follows from
what has just been said. As much as to say, -- from what you have heard, you
may learn, that if you bring your Gift to the Altar, and remember that your
Brother has aught against you. Since, therefore, rash Anger and abusive
Language, has somewhat murderous in it; and while you continue in that Frame,
you live in the Breach of the Command we have been considering; when you come
to make an Offering to the Lord, and remember that your Brother has a Right to
accuse you of any Thing of this Kind; has aught against you: If you remember
that your Neighbor might justly lay it to your Charge, that you have within
you the Seeds of Murder, or an angry vengeful Spirit; if you are conscious of
it, that you entertain such a Disposition, and that in Justice he might accuse
you of it did he know it; never think that this is a proper Frame of Mind to do
any Duty acceptably in: Never suppose, that while the Spirit of Murder rests in
your Bosom, God will accept your Offering. If you remember it, if you call to
mind, if you are conscious of that wicked Frame of Soul, think not that any
Oblations can be accepted. While you live in Anger with your Neighbor, God
will never be pleased with you: Unless you pardon, God will never Pardon,
Unless you love, God will never accept.

"If therefore thou bring thy Gift to the Altar."

We beg Leave to remark, that these Gifts, or Free-will-Offerings, were much
pressed upon the People by the Pharisees. The People were taught, that these
were the most important and acceptable of all their Services; that without
these, every Thing else availed nothing; and especially they were taught, that
these Gifts would atone for all Sins not punishable by the Judge. Whitby in loc.
It is for this Reason our Lord makes mention of Gifts, rather than of any
other Kind of Service. As if he had said, "No Act of Religion, however
important, however costly, not even those Free-will-Offerings or Gifts, which
your false Teachers tell you, are able to atone for your Crimes, can themselves
be accepted of God, while your Brother might justly accuse you of having a
Spirit of Anger or Revenge in your Breast." If you are conscious therefore,
that this is your Case, and have brought your Gift to the very Altar; if you
are ever so near approached to a religious Action, pause -- reflect upon what
you are about -- think how vain to approach God with an implacable Heart
toward Man.

"Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy Way." Here it is proper to
observe, that this Advice was given to the Jew, and to him it was literally
practicable. It was customary with them, as some tell us, when they came to the
Altar, and remembered any Thing, which at that Time might prevent them, to
leave there their Gift until another Time; perhaps the next Day; and then come
and formally offer it. In such Case, it was no Detriment to them, nor to the
Sacrifice. Whether that particular Gift is offered Today, or deferred until
Tomorrow, is a Matter of no Importance, so be it is offered or given. To defer
a Day, does not hinder any other Offering due at the Time. And in this Respect
it differed from the spiritual Duties of the Christian. With us, if deferred,
the Duty in most Cases is not done. A Christian Duty, deferred until next
Season, is in most Instances, left undone. My praying Today, will not answer
for my not praying Yesterday; and so of all other spiritual Duties. But of this
by-and-by. It was however literally practicable by the Jew. Leave there thy
Gift, and go thy Way."

"First be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift."

From the Scope of the Text, you see, that the Reconciliation here intended,
was to be within his own Heart. It is the spiritual Breach of the sixth Command
that our Redeemer is here opposing. Now, if the Man's Heart was thoroughly
sweetened toward his Neighbor, when he came to make the Offering, then he
could not be chargeable with this Crime. Nor can it be imagined, that our Lord
designed to forbid the Jew to make any Offering, so long as one of his fellow
Creatures was displeased with him. To reconcile the Hearts of others, is not in
our Power; and if we must defer Duties until this is done, we may defer
forever. Our Business is not so much with others, as with our own Hearts; and
the improper Frame of no other Man upon Earth, can be a Reason why I should not
perform my Duty. It is a great Mistake to suppose, that the Reconciliation here
spoken of, intends the Settlement of all Matters in Debate between him about to
offer, and his Neighbor. It was, it most certainly is, a desirable Thing, that
the Worshippers of the same God, should unite in Heart with each other: Happy,
if, when we approach the God of Peace, in the solemn Duties of Religion, we can
view ourselves at Peace with all Men, and all Men at Peace with us. Nay, it is
the undoubted Duty of all, to give their Neighbor Satisfaction, wherein they
are conscious they have injured him. Nor need they expect to meet with
Acceptance from God, in any Duty, however important, unless, at least, they are
disposed to give Satisfaction, and repair any wilful Wrong they may have done.
But it is plain, that what our Lord here refers to, is the Temper of the Heart;
"Go thy Way, first be reconciled to thy Brother. Let your Heart be thoroughly
sweetened toward him, before you can expect that God will accept your
Offering. Come not with a Breach of the sixth Command burning in your Breast.
While in that Frame, the Lord will look upon you as a Murderer, notwithstanding
the most costly Offering you can bring. Be therefore reconciled in Heart to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift. Where you observe,

The Command is to perform the Duty still. The Jew must not omit the Offering,
though he is permitted to withdraw for a Time, to subdue his Heart to a soft and
charitable Frame; No, -- the religious Act is not to be left undone. It was not
left to his Option, whether he would perform it or not. He must be reconciled
to his Brother, and he must come and offer his Gift.

We proceed to show you the Application of this to ourselves.

II. The Application of this will affect our Judgment and our Practice.

It serves to rectify our Judgment in several Particulars.

1. It shows in the first Place, with irresistible Evidence, that he who will
not be reconciled in Heart to his Neighbor, need not think of being reconciled
to God. Sure if God will not accept the Sacrifice, he will not accept the
Person. Object not here, that he who believes shall be saved. We grant that
such an one is justified freely by the Grace of Christ, and has Peace with God.
But a Gospel Temper of Mind, and an Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel, is
the only Evidence of a true Faith. You may assuredly know that your Faith is
not genuine, if it does not produce a gospel Temper, and an evangelical
Conduct. That Man never had true Faith, who will not be reconciled to his
Neighbor. That Man can never be reconciled to God, who refuses to be at Peace
with his Brother. Nothing can be more positive than our Savior's Declaration
to this Purpose. Matthew. vi. 15. But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses. You see, there is no Pardon
of Sin for those who will not pardon. When our divine Master gave his Disciples
(not a Form, but) a Directory for Prayer, he commanded them to pray for
Forgiveness, only upon the Condition of their forgiving those who had
trespassed against them. Our Forgiveness must not be merely in Part, such as
you exercise when you only refrain from returning the like Injury, though your
Heart feels unkind, -- it must not be merely such a Forgiveness as will permit
you to say Things to the Disadvantage of the Person, or at least will suffer
you to withold your Hand from a kind Office, to which you would have been
disposed, had he not offended you. While such is the Disposition of your Mind,
think what it is you ask when you pray, forgive us our Trespasses, as we
forgive those who trespass against us! As we forgive. O Sirs! were God to
forgive you by Halves, as you forgive your Neighbors; were he only to punish
you in some other Way, -- were he to withold his divine Favor, and not do you
kind Offices, (and this is what you pray for) what would become of you? The
Forgiveness which the Gospel demands, is entire and complete. Not only are we
to pardon, but we are to love. Not only to forgive, but to love sincerely, --
to love our Neighbor as ourselves. And without this Charity, all other
Accomplishments in the World are nothing; are no Evidences of true
Christianity. It is therefore a certain Truth, that he who will not be
reconciled to his Neighbor, need not think of being reconciled to God.

2. It informs us also, that the Duty of Forgiveness and Charity, is much more
acceptable to God, than the most costly Sacrifices. Nay, he will not accept of
the greatest Gift we can present him, where these are wanting. The Jew was
ordered to lay aside his Free-will-Offering, until he had brought his Mind to
submit to Forgiveness and Love, to signify to him and us, that were we to give
all we have to God, he would not accept where Reconciliation and Love was
wanting. Let us never think, therefore, that God will take any Notice of our
Resentments, unless our Hearts are right toward our Neighbor. Could I speak
with Ten Thousand Tongues, and could I converse like an Angel; could I astonish
the World with Miracles, -- were I so generous as to give all I possess in
Alms; nay, so attached to the Religion I profess, as to give my Body to be
burned in its Vindication; yet, if I have not Charity, I am nothing.

But, to apply this Direction to our own Practice. Though we are not literally in
the Circumstance of the Jew, and are not therefore literally to practice this
Command; yet are we to act up to the Spirit of the Precept, as far as
practicable in our Circumstances.

1. When we approach God in any Duty, and reflect that our Neighbor might
justly accuse us of a malicious unchristian Spirit toward him, we ought
immediately to pause, -- accuse ourselves of it, judge ourselves that we be not
judged; be humble under a Sense of our Sin, and immediately bring our Hearts to
consent to a perfect Reconciliation with him. The Moment we recollect the Evil,
we should put it from us; forgive without Delay, and love without Reserve; nor
dare to approach God with a Spirit of Murder in our Bosom.

The Case is supposable in which a Duty may be innocently omitted, a sufficient
Time to give us the Opportunity of leisurely reflecting, and exercising our
Minds upon the Evil of an unforgiving Temper; and of bringing it to a complete
Submission to the Commands of the Gospel. But in most Christian Duties,
especially in the common Ordinances of our Religion, a literal Omission of them
for a Time, cannot be done without Guilt. Now, in each of these, we bring
ourselves and all we have, and are a Gift to the Altar. Prayer is nothing less
than a solemn practical Acknowledgment, that all we have and are, came from
God, and is dependant on him, -- and an Offering made of the same to his
Service. Here then is a Gift brought to the Spiritual Altar. Here is a Duty
which cannot be omitted. We are to pray always; "pray without ceasing." But
shall we dare bring this Gift: -- shall we dare approach God to ask his Pardon,
while we refuse to pardon? Shall we dare to come near the Tryer of the Reins,
with an Heart filled with Rancour against Man? And yet, we must approach him,
-- and yet the Duty must not be omitted. Here then you see the Heart must be
brought to bow without Delay. No sooner, therefore, does the Evil arise, than
it ought to be crushed. Extinguish the Spark ever it becomes a Flame.

If therefore, you will act up to the Spirit of this Precept, you will oppose
the first Risings of a vengeful Spirit, and bring your Hearts directly to
Benevolence and Love; and remember, that you are utterly disqualified for
Attendance upon any one Christian Duty, until this is done.

"You cannot" -- say you? You have endeavored, but find it impossible to be
perfectly reconciled, after such egregious Abuse.

And is this brought as an Excuse for your continuing in a malignant Frame of
Mind? The Excess of your Iniquity brought as an Apology for it? To say, we
cannot, in such a Case, is an Abuse of Language. Thy obsti-Heart is averse to
the Thing; it will not yield. Speak the Truth, and you will say, that after
such ill Treatment, you will not, your Heart will not consent to the mortifying
Proposal of Christ. The eternal God commands, and you will not obey. The Lord
Jesus insists upon it, as a Trial of your Allegiance to him, and you will not
submit. There is no Excuse. The Greatness of the Injury received, is no Reason
why we should disobey God, and consent to be abandoned by Jesus Christ. But,
know ye, that unless you submit to this Proposal, you shall never be accepted
in one Duty; nay, you shall never meet with Mercy. --

III. The Abuse to which this Text is liable, is a third Consideration.

1. Many Professors of the Religion of Christ, think themselves warranted by
this Text, in absenting from Ordinances, when they have met with an Affront or
ill Usage from any of their Brethren. This is the first and most common Abuse.
An Abuse by which the Text is turned upside down. They do not enquire, whether
their Neighbor has aught against them, but whether they have aught against
their Neighbor. Upon the slightest Review of what has been said, you must see,
that these Words give no Warrant for their Absence. The Question is not,
whether you have been ill-used by a Brother, or not? The Question is, how do
you feel upon it? Whether you retain in your Heart an unforgiving unkind Temper
toward him? Not whether he has injured you? But whether on that Account you
injure your God and your Redeemer? Whether if he could see your Heart, he might
not accuse you of a Breach of the sixth Command? Not whether you have aught
against him? but whether he has aught against you? If a Man has abused you,
this cannot unfit you to attend on God. Let him be who he will, suppose it even
the Man by whose Hands the Ordinance is dispensed; if he has injuriously
treated you, this cannot prevent your finding Acceptance with God, in the
Discharge of your Duty, unless your abominable Temper prevents you. And if Men
do us wrong, must we therefore wrong our God? Why then displease him by
neglecting his Command, when a Worm of Dust has displeased us?

2. To refuse to join in the Ordinances of Religion, until such an Offender,
whether real or imaginary, has given Satisfaction, and a Reconciliation thereby
brought about, is another, or rather an Improvement upon the former Abuse.
Horrid Abuse indeed! by which this Precept which was directly levelled against
our own Corruptions, and insists upon our mortifying them immediately, is
perverted to procure their Gratification. You will not bring your Gift to the
Altar of God, until his Creature has humbled himself, and thereby reconciled
himself to you? Unreasonable Man! Thou do not ask, whether thy Heart has the
Seeds of Murder in it, and whether thou have not need of Humiliation? but
whether thy Neighbor is in the Wrong. But pray; -- when we draw near to God,
is it our Neighbor or ourselves that we are to examine? In Attendance upon
Ordinances, what Business have we with the Qualifications of our Neighbors? Is
not our Business with ourselves? The Reconciliation which we should insist
upon, is it not in our own Breast? In Attendance upon God, what Business have
you to insist on Satisfaction from others? What though a Brother never gives you
Satisfaction; must you therefore deny yourself the grand Privileges of a
Christian? If he never gives you Satisfaction, must you therefore be the less
reconciled in Heart? If he never gives you Satisfaction, must you therefore
deny God the public Honors which you are bound to pay him? Is it to God or to
Man that we attend on Ordinances? What mean you, Christians, by this strange
Perversion of the Counsel of the Son of God? No more plead Conscience on this
Head; it is an Insult on that faithful Monitor within us, to make him give his
Suffrage to Iniquity.

3. To refuse to join the public Ordinances of Christianity, because there may
be one or more there whom you dislike, or of whom you have a bad Opinion, is
another Abuse; which, though it has no Color of Plea from our Text, yet has its
Place among Professors. If it should be that your angry Resentments against the
Person of a Brother is at the Bottom; and your Desire to testify your Dislike,
the whole Cause of your Refusal to join with him; without need of a single
Argument to prove it so, we pronounce it a base and criminal Cause. Your own
Conscience confirms it. Nothing can be more unchristian, nothing more opposed
to our Text. It is this Temper which it demands to be subdued. Now, if instead
of this, you will make your private Picque a Reason why you should disobey God,
and refuse to own him before Men; if instead of this, you will debase a public
Ordinance, by making it the Means of testifying to the World an ungodly Temper:
How criminal do you render yourself? Is this a Way to show private Resentment?
Shall Men dare to make a solemn Transaction with God the Means of supporting a
Quarrel with Men? But,

Should it be that your Judgment is really wrong in this Matter? Do you really
think, that we are held not to communicate with one whom we esteem vicious? Is
it Sentiment and not Temper? Sure our Text does not in the least Degree tend to
support this Notion, as it has nothing to do with our Neighbors Characters,
but with our own. The Sentiment is absurdly wrong. For in the first Place; my
good or bad Opinion of my Neighbor, is not to regulate my Conduct in immediate
Duty toward God. Because I think the Man who sits down with me, a Villain, and
that he ought to be deprived of the Privilege, is it reasonable that on that
Account I should deprive myself of the Privilege? Because he sins, shall not I
therefore do a commanded Duty? Shall we omit positive Duties, because there
will always be Sinners in the Church? Upon this Plan all the social Duties of
Religion must cease. Sure I may confess my Savior in Company with an
Hypocrite, and yet not be an Hypocrite. I may sit down with an impious Man, and
yet not patronize his Iniquity.

But,

A Church, say you, ought to bear Testimony against scandalous Persons. We
grant it: But am I a Church? Am I to be both Judge and Jury in this Case? Sure
a Church ought to be its own Judge, when a Person is scandalous: I am not to be
its Judge, and to determine when it shall proceed to Censure. An Individual
shows great Arrogance indeed, when he presumes to act as Judge and Executioner
in any Case of that Kind; and, if the Church does not coincide with him, to
censure both the Church and the accused too. A Church cannot censure until the
Crime is made manifest to their Consciences; they cannot condemn a Man until he
is proved Guilty. Now though I know him to be so, but cannot make it appear to
the Church, it is not my Province in this Case to take the Business of a Church
upon me. I have no Right to bear my public Testimony against him, by
excommunicating him, or rather myself on his Account. If God has made me the
Judge, and given me the Right to punish by myself, any Crimes that I know to be
committed, then let me act in this Office, and absent myself in Testimony
thereof. But I have no more Right to execute upon my own private Opinion, in
ecclesiastical than in civil Causes. You know that a Man has committed Murder;
-- but you cannot make it appear so to the Court: Will you in this Case presume
to put the Murderer to Death? No, -- you yourself would become a Murderer in
the Eye of the Law. What is he then who will persist in passing public Censure
upon a Brother, by absenting himself from Ordinances, in which his Brother
joins; even though he knows him guilty; when he either has not, or cannot make
him appear so the Church? What are you to say, M. H. who presume to take the
Keys of Discipline into your own Hands? How is it, that one Man will thus take
the Place of a whole Church, and that too under Pretense of Duty? And how
audacious especiallly, and how contrary to the Laws of Christ, and to all Rules
of good Society, does that Man act who absents himself with a View to Censure
the Church of which he is only a Member; or dare to threaten the Body of
Christ, with leaving it, unless it conforms itself to his Judgment? And how
often do Men attempt to make Church Discipline the Means of avenging private
Quarrels? How often does mere Temper influence in this Matter! O Sirs! it is
tremendous trifling with the Things of God. Let us get our Views of these
Things settled, and act as before him, who converses with our Consciences.

Whatever may be our Judgment of a Man, it does not dispense with our Duty to
God. Though a Judas was sitting down with us, before he was proved a Judas, it
need not alter our Conduct. Jesus Christ was present with his Disciples; he
gave them the first Sacrament by way of Pattern for all Ages, and blessed them,
though he knew that one of then was a Devil. But he was not proved so at that
Time to his little Church. So he may be present with us and bless us, though
there be more than one Traitor among us. And if the little Church, of which
Jesus himself was the Minister in Person, was not free from such; how vain, how
infinitely absurd for any Sect of Men to pretend to, or hope for a pure Church
here!

4. It is another Abuse of this Text, when a Church omits the Lord's Supper on
Account of some Quarrel or Disaffection among them. To give Way to the Omission
of public Duties, because of the sinful Temper of Individuals is to give Way to
the Devil, who foments Confusion; not to comply with the Command, which is to
cause such a Temper to subside immediately, and then to proceed in the Duty.
The Jew was to offer his Gift notwithstanding; and is a Christian, is a whole
Church permitted to omit the Ordinances of Religion, and that from Time to
Time? If ever there was an Ordinance calculated to promote Peace and Love, it
is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and methinks it is a wretched Attempt to
procure these Blessings, in the Neglect of God's Institutions, and of such in
particular as are designed to promote Brotherly Love. Strange that whole
Churches should run into so gross a Perversion of the Will of God!

5. It is, in the last Place, a grievous Abuse of this Text, to apply it to the
Lord's Supper, more than to any other Ordinance or solemn religious Duty of
Christianity. That it was ever applied particularly to this Institution, more
than to others, is strange. It is plain, that our Lord mentions the Duty of
Gifts or Free-will-Offerings, because they were considered among the Jews as
the most important and meritorious of all their Services: That hence they might
naturally conclude, if in the most important they could not meet with
Acceptance; sure not in the less important. But what nearer Affinity these
Gifts had to the Lord's Supper, than any other Institution of Christ, it is
hard to tell; and how so many of us persist in applying the Injunction to this
Sacrament more than any other Ordinance, is surprising. And yet the Man, who
with this Misapplication withdraws himself from the Lord's Supper, does not on
this Account withdraw from the Baptism of his Child, where one would think the
Offer of a Gift is still more formal, -- he does not absent from Prayer, etc.
Perhaps the prejudice may have originally arose from a Romish Superstition, --
(the infinitely absurd Remains of which we still see upheld in a Protestant
Church, To have an Altar, when you declare, that there is no Sacrifice to be
made upon it; to have a Priest under the Christian Dispensation, when you
confess that Christ has once offered himself up for us all, and made an End of
Sin; to fall down in a Posture of Adoration, when you confess that it is only
Bread and Wine, and not the adorable Savior, is infinitely more absurd, than
these Things among the Roman Catholics, whose Belief corresponds with their
Practice.
) I mean that of having an Altar in the End of the Church, which looks toward
Jerusalem, and the Order of Priesthood -- [a Name which should not be known in
the Gospel Ministry;] to offer up Sacrifices of the Body and Blood of our
Savior, into which they suppose the consecrated Bread and Wine is really
converted: At the Time of which Sacrifice, it is customary with them to bring
some Gift and lay it upon the Altar, for the Use of the Church. Hence, I say,
might possibly arise that Prejudice, by which this Text is considered as more
Applicable to the Lord's Supper, than to other Christian Duties. But as the
same Reasons hold good; so in all our Approaches to God in every Duty, it must
be observed as a Rule, that it cannot be acceptable to him, if our Heart is not
disposed to love our Neighbor. They therefore, who omit this holy Sacrament
from such a Plea, ought, if they are consistent, for the same Reasons, to omit
all Christian Duties whatever.

We have now gone through the Abuses; it remains for you to avoid them. Let us be
exhorted, to lay aside all Malice and Guile, and Evil-speaking, and as newborn
Babes, receive the sincere Milk of the Word. We would not have God deny us
Pardon; let us love our Neighbor. Let not Temper influence us in Matters of
Religion. See! what Havoc it makes all around us! And as we are about to give
up our Bodies and Souls and all, a Sacrifice to God, in the Ordinance
approaching; let us strive to have our Hearts sweetened toward all Men. O that
the Love of God might constrain us, and the Love of Man warm our Bosoms. And as
we all hope in the same Lord Jesus, and wish to go to the same Heaven, so let
us be of one Heart, and live like Brethren. AMEN!


