THE American Traveller: CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS ON THE Present State, Culture
and Commerce OF THE BRITISH COLONIES in AMERICA, And the further IMPROVEMENTS
of which they are capable;

WITH An Account of the EXPORTS, IMPORTS and RETURNS of each Colony
respectively, -- and of the Numbers of BRITISH Ships and Seamen, Merchants,
Traders and Manufacturers employed by all collectively:

TOGETHER WITH The Amount of the Revenue arising to GREAT BRITAIN therefrom.

IN A SERIES OF LETTERS, Written originally to the Right Honorable the Earl of
********

By an OLD and EXPERIENCED TRADER.

Printed in the Year MDCCLXX.

TO THE SOVEREIGN OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE, THE FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE, WHOM HEAVEN
HAS BLESSED WITH INCLINATION. AND TRUSTED WITH POWER, TO PROMOTE THEIR GENERAL
WEAL AND HAPPINESS,

These Labors of a private Individual, humbly directed to that great End, are,
with all Deference and Duty, Inscribed by HIS MAJESTY'S Most faithful Subject
and Servant, THE AMERICAN TRAVELLER.

CONTENTS.
Letter Page IandII. General Introduction, etc. 1 III. Observations on Hudson's
Bay, 8 IV. Continued, 12 V. Continued, 17 VI. Continued, 20 VII. Observations
on Labrador, 27 VIII. -- on Newfoundland, 30 IX. -- on Canada, 34 X. -- on Nova
Sootia, 41 XI. -- on St. John's and Cape Breton, 45 XII. -- on New England, 47
XIII. -- on Connecticut, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, 50 XIV. -- on New
York, 56 XV. -- on Pennsylvania, 59 XVI. -- on Virginia and Maryland, 61 XVII.
-- on North Carolina, 45 XVIII. -- on South Carolina, 69 XIX. -- on Georgia, 73
XX. -- on East Florida, 77 XXI. -- on West Florida, 79 XXII. Recapibulatory
Remarks, 83 XXIII. Total Amount of the American Trade, etc. etc. 87
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE present Situation of Affairs between Great Britain and her American
Colonies will justify this Publication. Mutual Advantage is the most solid
Basis, the strongest Cement of Union, in all Connections, whether political or
private. To show such Advantage therefore, must be the most effectual Means of
preserving that Union, so much and so wisely wished for, by every Friend of his
Country.

THE AMERICAN TRAVELLER: CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS ON THE CULTURE and COMMERCE OF
THE British Colonies, in America.
Written in a Series of LETTERS.

LETTER I.
MY LORD,
THE last Time I had the Honor of conversing with your Lordship, you intimated
a Desire, that I, should draw into one Point of View, the several Hints which I
had at different Times, taken the Liberty to suggest to your Lordship, on the
present State of the British Colonies, and the Improvements possible to be made
in the Culture, and Commerce of them, to their and the Mother Country's mutual
Advantage, that you might be able with the greater Ease and Accuracy to form a
Judgment yourself, and convince others of the Reality of such Advantage, and
the Feasibility of the Means proposed to obtain it.

Every Intimation of your Lordship's Pleasure is a Law to me; because I know
from Experience, that it is founded in Wisdom, and tends to the public Good. I
shall therefore enter readily upon the Task you have prescribed, without any
ostentatious Parade of Diffidence in my own Abilities, (which would be an
Insult to your Lordship's Judgment, rather than a Proof of my Modesty) and in
the plain Words of Truth, and good Intention, lay before your Lordship those
Observations, which much Experience has enabled me to make on this important
Subject, together with the Facts upon which such Observations have been formed;
without studying any of those Ornaments of Writing (a Study indeed, which my
Life has been too closely employed in other Matters to spare Time for) that are
oftenest used to gloss over a bad Cause, and mislead rather than inform the
Judgment, fully sensible that your Lordship, in Things of this Nature,
considers the Matter more than the Manner; and will never turn your Face away
from Reason, for not being introduced in the most fashionable Dress.

In the Execution of this Attempt (for by no other Name can the Labors of any
one Man to investigate a Subject of such immense extent be properly called) I
have made Choice of this Method of conveying my Thoughts to your Lordship, in a
Series of Letters, for several Reasons.

The first, and most applicable personally to myself, is, that having been
mostly, if not solely accustomed to the epistolary Style, in a Life of
Business, I can express my Thoughts more readily, and perhaps more clearly in
that, than in any other. Though were not this the Case, there are abundant
other Reasons to determine me to this Choice.

By this Manner of writing, I have an Opportunity of dividing my Work, so as to
avoid the grievous Disadvantage of having the Reader break off, perhaps in the
Middle of my Argument, because he does not see a resting Place prepared for
him; the most indolent, or inattentive, seldom having so little Curiosity, or
being so soon tired, as to stop before they reach the End of a Letter of
moderate Length.

Beside, in this Method, I may myself take the Liberty of stopping a little,
while or going a few Steps out of my Way, now and then, to take Notice of any
Thing that may illustrate my Subject, or enforce my own Sentiments, without
Fear of giving that Offense, which might be taken at such Freedoms; in a Work
of a more regular Nature; and also of recapitulating my Argument in proper
Places, so as to keep it always in View, and upon Occasion collect its Force
into one Point to face any Opposition.

I mention these Particulars, my Lord, not as unknown to your Lordship, but to
obviate the Objection of Vanity, which may probably be made to my using this
Mode of Writing, as if I intended to insinuate by it, a greater intimacy with a
Person of your Lordship's high Rank, and higher Character, than I really am
honored with, or ought to disclose, if I am.

In like Manner, it is my Duty to observe, that in the Course of these Letters,
I shall frequently have occasion to mention, and often to dwell upon the Proof
of many Things, which are already sufficiently known to your Lordship; but
this, as I said in the former Instance, is not done with the most distant
Insinuation of informing you; but solely to convey that Information to others,
who may not have had the same Opportunity of acquiring it; to which Knowledge I
must also beg your Lordship's Pardon, and Indulgence for taking the Liberty of
appealing upon many Occasions, where I apprehend that the indisputable
Authority of such a Voucher may be necessary to support my own Credit.

Having thus, my Lord, given the Reasons both for my presuming to address my
Thoughts on this Subject to your Lordship particularly, and in this particular
Manner, I shall in my next Letter give an Account of the Matter, which I
propose to submit to your Judgment, and the Method in which that Matter shall
be arranged; and then proceed to obey your Lordship's Commands, without
trespassing upon you with any farther Preface, or Apology. I am with Attachment
and Respect, My Lord,

Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant.

LETTER II.
MY LORD,
IT is an old Remark; that the Value of a Friend is seldom known, till he is
lost. I most sincerely with, this may not be the Case of Great Britain with
Regard to her American Colonies. While we went on smoothly together, we enjoyed
the Advantage of our Intercourse, unequal as it was to what it might have been
rendered, without ever considering the Quarter it came from, or the Means of
improving, or even preserving the Continuance of it, as is too often the Case,
in Respect to the greatest Blessings of Heaven.

I would not be understood to limit this Remark to either Side. It is unhappily
too applicable to both. But as the first Object of every Man's Thoughts, who
turns them to Matters of public Concern, is, or at least should be, the
immediate Advantage of his native Country, I shall first consider how far the
Colonies are advantageous to Great Britain; as also how that Advantage may be
still farther improved, and then the reciprocal Advantage received by the
Colonies will follow of Course, and prove the mutual Interest of both to
preserve that good Agreement, and Unanimity, by which alone such Advantage can
be preserved; in the Discussion and Proof of which Points, the Means necessary
to obtain that great End, and accomplish the many Improvements of which that
Advantage is capable, will naturally, and obviously be included.

When I say, that "the first Object of a Man's Thoughts should be the Advantage
of his native Country," I do not in any Sense mean that he should do, or devise
any Thing unjust in itself, or injurious to the just Interest of any other
Country to procure that Advantage. All I intend, is, that where the opposite
Interests of his own and another Country are balanced in the Scale of Justice,
he owes a Duty to the former, which will necessarily make it preponderate in
his Thoughts; a Duty of the same Nature, and derived ultimately from the same
Origin, with that so strongly enforced by Reason, and Revelation, which we owe
to our Parents, the Place where, as well as the Persons through whom we are
called into this Life, being appointed by the Divine Giver of all Life, and
consequently entitled to the same filial Attachment and Affection, though in a
lesser Degree, as the Force of Filiation, by being centered in one Point is
preserved entire, whereas that of Patriotism is divided perhaps between
Millions, and thereby lessened on each Individual; not to insist upon the
obvious Reason of the more immediate and intimate Connection in the former,
than in the latter. And this shows the Error in the general Application of the
ancient Philosopher's saying, that he was a Citizen of the World, as if it
implied, that all Countries ought to be equally dear to a Man of Sense, the
true Meaning of it being only to inculcate Philanthropy, or in the sacred
Style, Good Will toward all Mankind; and not by any Means to deny, or
invalidate the natural, and indispensible Attachment, by which every Man is
bound to his native Country.

How universal the Sense of this Attachment has ever been, and in what high
Estimation the Exertion of it held, is sufficiently proved by the Honor paid
to those, who even sacrificed to it the nearest Connections of Nature, as in
the Instance of the Roman Brutus, and the first Principle of human Action,
Self-preservation, in those of the Decii, with many others, both Romans and
Athenians, unnecessary to be enumerated here; and this among the most civilized
Nations; those more ignorant carrying the Point still farther, and in the
enthusiastic Ardour of their Gratitude, thinking human Honors too little, and
therefore confering divine, on such general Benefactors of Mankind.

Your Lordship will pardon this little Digression in Elucidation of a Point so
dear to you, as to be made the evident Rule of your public Life, for the
Necessity of it to obviate the Imputation of Partiality, in these Researches
into a Subject of so delicate a Nature in itself, as the Intercourse between a
Mother Country, and her Colonies; and more particularly so at this Time, and in
this Instance.

In Order to give due Weight to what I shall say on this important Subject, it
is necessary that I should explain the Origin and extent of that Experience,
which I hinted at in my first Letter, as the Reason that induced your Lordship
to prescribe this Attempt to me.

I have had the Honor to inform your Lordship of the Discoveries I made in the
Year 1744; as also that since that Time I have traversed the whole Coast of
America, from Lat. 68. North, to Cape Florida, and penetrated some thousands of
Miles westward, into the Wilderness, many Parts of which were never before
trodden by European Feet.

The Accounts therefore, which I shall give of these, I had almost said
boundless Regions, are not taken upon Trust, on the Relation of others. They
are the Result of real Experience, on the Testimony of my Senses; as the
Observations I shall offer on them are founded on the unerring Evidence of
Facts.

The same Foundation of Experience also supports what I shall offer in in
Respect to the Commerce of the West-Indian Islands, as well as of the Colonies
on the Continent.

In the Course of more than thirty Years, which I have been closely and
constantly engaged in mercantile Business, in all its various Extent, I have
had Intercourse in dealing with the Colonies of Hudson's Bay, Newfoundland,
Quebec, New England, Pennsylvania, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and
Georgia -- With Barbados, Grenada, St. Vincents, Dominica, Antigua, Montserat,
Nevis, St. Christophers, and Jamaica. -- The Commerce therefore of these Places
cannot reasonably be supposed to be unknown to me, or my Remarks upon it, only
the chimerical Dreams of groundless Speculation, as has most shamefully been
the Case with too many of those who have written on this most important Subject.

A clear but concise Account of what particularly struck my Observation in the
different Parts of America, with which I propose to begin, will be the best
Introduction to those Hints of Improvement, which I would humbly suggest to
your Lordship, in the Culture and Commerce of our Colonies there, and the most
solid Basis, upon which to found the Expedience, and Practicability of them;
and at the same Time afford the most convincing Proof of the inestimable Value
of those Colonies to the Mother Country; and the indispensible Necessity in
every Sense of political Prudence, of healing those unhappy Differences, which
seem so alarmingly to threaten an Interruption at least, if not a total Loss of
Intercourse with them, at this most critical Period.

It must not be expected though, that this Account shall include Descriptions
of the Appearances of those Countries, or of the Persons, Manners, Customs,
etc. of the Inhabitants. These Points have long been sufficiently set forth; or
if any Curiosity concerning them still remains, it may soon and easily be
gratified, by Recourse to the many Accounts extant of every Particular of this
Kind in them. The Nature of the Soil, and its Aptitude by Climate and Situation
for Agriculture and Commerce, in the Production of the Necessaries and
Conveniences of Life, both for the immediate Support and Use of the
Inhabitants, and Communication and reciprocal Interchange with other Countries;
and for the Transportation of them for such Interchange, and receiving the
Returns of it, were the Objects of those Observations, which I here propose to
submit to your Lordship's and the public Consideration; and from the Discussion
of which, as I have said before, the Improvements that may be made in them,
will naturally follow.

No more would I be understood to intend entering into the Disputes agitated at
present between the Mother Country, and her Colonies, as a Partizan of either.
I am too conscious of my own Insignificancy to obtrude my Sentiments on a
Subject so much above my Sphere. Such Officiousness much oftener prejudices,
than serves a Cause; the Pride of the human Heart turning away with Disdain
from the Advice of an Inferior, however just and wise in itself, because the
very Act of giving Advice implies a Superiority in that Instance.

I do not by this, my Lord, preclude myself absolutely from either of these
Topics, when in the Course of my present Undertaking, they shall fall
naturally in my Way. Wherever the Manners and Customs of the present
Inhabitants, Native or European, appear to me to influence the Interest of the
Colony, either to its Advantage or Prejudice, I shall hold it my Duty to point
out such Influence, and to suggest any Alteration of Manners or Customs, which
I shall conceive likely to remove that Prejudice, or extend the Advantage.

The same Liberty I shall think myself entitled to, with Respect to the Systems
of Policy adopted in the Administration of our Colonies both here, and on the
Spot, Wherever they shall obviously appear to promote or clash with the
Interests and Advantage of both in any Instance, for separated they cannot be,
I shall not hesitate show that Instance, and the Manner in which it is so
affected, nor to suggest with proper Deference and Submission to better
Information and superior Power, what Means I think most efficacious to improve
the former, and to remedy the latter.

I have the Honor to be, etc. etc.

LETTER III.
MY LORD,
I SHALL shall begin this Review with one of the least noticed, but far from
the least important in itself, of our Settlements, were the Advantages,
obviously, and most easily to be made of it, properly attended to, which is
that of Hudson's-Bay.

The Time, Manner, and Occasion of the Discovery of this vast Sea, and the
Regions bordering on it, so far as they are yet discovered, are so well known,
that it is unnecessary to recount them here.

Though the Design, which first led our daring Countrymen into the dark
Recesses of the North, failed in its first Object, the Discovery of a Passage
that Way to China, the Attempt failed not of producing other Consequences which
well repaid to their Country, if not immediately to themselves, the Fatigue,
Danger, and Expense of it to the bold Adventurers, by laying them under a
Necessity of stopping, when the Severity of the Climate made the Seas no longer
navigable, to explore their inhospitable Shores, for the Support of Life, till
the Return of the Season proper for pursuing their Project, whereby they opened
with the Inhabitants an Intercourse of Commerce, unthought of before, and which
but for this Cause, would never have been sought for through so many and such
discouraging Difficulties.

The Seclusion of these Inhabitants from the more informed Part of Mankind by
their Situation; and the Sterility of their Country, which confined their Cares
within the narrow Circle of the indispensible Necessaries of Life, without
supplying a single Article, that could suggest, much less gratify a Thought of
any Thing farther, necessarily brought Commerce with them back to its original,
of immediate Barter, or Exchange of one Commodity for another, without the
Intervention of Money, the artificial Medium made use of in Countries of more
extended Intercourse, and Produce, to supply the Defects, and remedy the
inconveniences of such Barter.

The Advantages of such a Commerce to a Country able to avail itself of them
are sufficiently obvious. It takes off such of its Produce and Manufactures as
are most plenty, and cheap, at their real Value to those who want, and not
being able to procure them elsewhere, beat not down their Price on Account of
that Plenty, nor require such Accuracy and Ornament in the manufacturing of
them, as make them come dearer to the Vender, without being of greater Use to
the Purchaser; and for any Deficiency in which they would be rejected by other
Purchasers; and brings in Return the Produce of the Country of the Barterers,
at the low Rate set upon it by those who do not want it, who have no other Vent
for it, and consequently are glad to exchange it at any Rate for what they do
want, and cannot obtain otherwise; not to dwell upon the great national
Advantage of its being unmanufactured, and thereby affording Employment to the
various Artificers, who prepare it for Use.

These Circumstances were too striking not to be immediately perceived; but
their Effect was circumscribed in such a Manner by the very Means injudiciously
taken to improve and extend it, that what would have been a most important
Advantage to the whole Nation, was, by the Grant of an extensive Charter,
confined to a few Individuals, who actuated by the most selfish, sordid an
short-sighted Policy, or rather Cunning, restrained, instead of extending that
Commerce, for Fear of its becoming an Object of public Consideration, and the
Monoply of it taken from them, should the ( comparatively immense) Profits
which it might produce, be known; and thereby with the grossest Dishonesty
defeated intentionally, the express End for which such Charter had been
originally granted, on the most plausible Pretenses, and strongest Assurance to
the contrary, and was still from Inattention, or Misrepresentation, suffered to
remain with them.

This will be best explained, and proved by the following List, and Estimate of
the several Articles exported from England to, and imported into England from
this Settlement, which are drawn with the utmost Exactness, and from the best
Authority.

COMMODITIES exported from ENGLAND to HUDSON'S-BAY.
Coarse Woollen Cloths -- Checks -- Cottons -- British Linens -- Fowling Pieces
-- Birding Guns -- GunFlints -- Cunpowder -- Shot -- Cutlasses --
WroughtLeather -- Salt -- Wheaten Meal -- Oaten Meal -- Barley -- Peace -- Beans
-- Malt -- Bacon -- Beef -- Pork -- Butter -- Cheese -- Biscuit -- Molasses --
Wrought-Steel -- Iron -- Brass -- Copper -- Powter -- Pipes -- Tobacco --
Hosiery -- Hats -- Tallow Candles -- Ship-Chandlery -- Stationary Wares --
Bugles Groceries -- Oil -- British Spirits -- Wines -- All which cost at an
Average of three Years L 16,000 COMMODITIES imported into ENGLAND from
HUDSON'S-BAY.
Thirty-four thousand Beaver Skins -- 16,000 Marten -- 2000 Otter -- 1100 Cat
-- 3000 Fox -- 5000 Wolf -- 7000 Wolverine -- 650 black Bear -- 40 white Bear
-- 500 Fisher -- 250 Mink -- 3000 Musquash -- 30cwt. to 50cwt. Bed-Feathers --
20cwt. to 30cwt. Whale-bone -- A few Tons of Oil -- 150,000 Goose-quills --
2000lb. Cut Beaver -- 1000 Elk -- 2000 Deer Skins -- 250lb. Castoreum -- Worth,
as bought at the first Hand at QUEBEC, at a like Average of three Years L
29,340

The first View of these Lists, and Estimates will most probably be thought to
contradict what has been advanced before of the Importance of this Settlement;
but when it is considered that in the above List of Exports is included all
that the Company sends for the Support and Maintenance of their Settlements,
and for which consequently there can be no Return, as it is immediately
consumed by their People -- When it is proved that the Commerce of it is kept
thus low by Design, and the Means taken to accomplish that Design are shown,
the Truth of my Position will appear in its full Force. But this must be the
Subject of another Letter.

I have the Honor to be, etc.
P. S. Your Lordship will observe, that in estimating the Imports from
Hudson's-Bay, I strike the Price of them by that paid for the same Articles at
Quebee.

The Reason of my doing this is, that the Hudson's-Bay Company conduct all
their Affairs with such impenetrable Secrecy, that it is not possible to know
at what Rate they exchange their Goods for those of the Natives; an Oath of
Secrecy being imposed upon their Servants; and the Observation of all, upon
whom they cannot impose such an Oath, prevented by the molt brutal
Inhospitality and Exclusion from every Kind of Intercourse.

Nor will the gross Quantity of the Exports open any satisfactory Insight into
this Mystery; as it is not known, nor can for the above Reasons be discovered
with any Degree of Precision, how much of that Quantity is consumed by the
Company's Servants; and consequently no Return for it brought Home in the
Imports.

This much I know from my own Experience, that there is no fixed Rate for the
Barter of any Commodity, the Company allowing just what they please at that
Time; in which Allowance, they are so equitable and reasonable, that I myself
have seen Instances of their being conscientiously content a Profit of not
above one thousand per Cent. upon particular Articles.

These Lists therefore only show what Advantage the Nation reaps at present,
from the Commerce of this Settlement, under their Monoply. What it would reap,
were there no such Monoply, with a more particular Account of the curious
Methods taken to keep it in its present State of national Insignificancy, shall
be shown in the proper Place.



LETTTER IV.
MY LORD,
I HAVE shown the present inconsiderable State of the Commerce to Hudson's-Bay.
I have asserted that it is capable of such Improvement as would make it a
considerable Advantage to the Nation. It remains now that I prove this
Assertion. In doing this it will be necessary for me to look back for a Moment
to Circumstances not attended to at present, but which have influenced this
Commerce, from its very first Institution, and do still Influence it, in the
most pernicious Manner.

At the Time when the Hudson's-Bay Company was established, in 1670, the Minds
of all People of Power, or Property, were so fixed upon the Intrigues of the
Court, and the Consequences immediately apprehended from them at Home, that
they would not spare a thought for any thing so remote in Situation and Effect,
as foreign Colonization, by which Means that most Important of political
Enterprises fell to those, who were in every Respect least qualified to pursue
it to Advantage.

Under these inauspicious Circumstances, an exclusive Charter for trading to
the Countries confining on the Sea, called Hudson's-Bay, was without enquiring
into the Consequences, granted to a Set of Private Adventurers, who without
Support or even Countenance from Government, undertook upon the narrow
Foundation of their own Fortunes to establish a Trade, attended with such
difficulties in Appearance, as would have discouraged any Men not fully
persuaded of the Certainty of Success. Nor were they disappointed; the Event
exceeding their most sanguine Expectations, in their very first Experiment.

Such Success from so weak a Beginning, showed to what an Height it might be
carried, on a more extended Foundation. But the Scheme it suggested was very
different: Instead of extending their first Plan, and making their Success
known to procure an Enlargement of their Capital, the Company turned all their
Care to conceal the whole, (which the distractions of the Times gave them too
good an Opportunity of doing) and keep the Profits of the Trade entirely to
themselves, contracted as it was, rather than run the Hazard of their being
shared in by others, should it be pushed to its natural Extent; a Care, which,
as I before observed to your Lordship, has never been relaxed since.

For this sordid Purpose, they contented themselves with proceeding on the low
Capital, which Necessity had at first obliged them to set out upon, and making
a few paultry Settlements, barely sufficient to carry on the restrained Trade
which such a Capital could support. The Event has in this also too well
answered their Design. The inconsiderable Amount of their Exports, and
consequently of the Returns, have kept the Trade in such Obscurity as to seem
beneath the Attention of Government, whereby it has remained, according to the
Letter, however contrary to the Spirit of their Charter, exclusively in their
own Hands.

It must be owned that the Temptations to this Conduct were powerful. Without
hazarding, or even advancing more than a comparitive Trifle, they have long
reaped, and do still reap a Profit, which a Capital tentimes as large could not
produce, in any other Channel of Commerce; a Reason, which too many instances
prove sufficient, in the present Times, to over-balance national Advantage, and
justify breach of Faith: for by no other Name can so manifest a Violation of
the Professions of promoting that Advantage, upon which all such Charters are
granted, be called, without as manifest a Violation of Truth.

I am aware, that it will be objected to this, by those who are interested to
keep these Affairs in their present State of Darkness, that the Imports prove
the Sufficiency of the Capital for the Trade, and that it is absurd and
unnatural to think any Men should be so blind to their own Advantage, as not to
make large Exports could they have adequate Returns for them. The latter of
these Objections has been already obviated. I shall now show the Fallacy of the
former, and in what Manner the Imports are kept down to their present low
Stand: low, I mean as to what they might be, for they are high beyond all
parallel, considering what they cost.

Though the Natives of the vast Countries around Hudson's-Bay, with whom the
Traffic of the Company is carried on, are still in that State of natural
Ignorance, which People more informed, have arrogantly presumed to call savage,
Heaven has not denied them the Knowledge necessary for the few Purposes of
their narrow Sphere of Life. They were not long engaged in this Traffic,
therefore, before they discovered some of the gross Impositions practiced upon
them, though they could not possibly form even a Conception of the whole.

I have observed to your Lordship, that the Commerce of Hudson's-Bay Company
consists in bartering some of our Manufactures and Commodities, the cheapest
and worst of their Kinds, with the Natives, for their Furs. The first Thing,
which Reason would suggest to be done in such a Traffic, by those, who had the
Lead in it, must be to fix the Rates of the several Articles to be brought by
them for Barter, at such a Standard, as should obviate their being ever under a
Necessity of altering it, and thereby raising a Suspicion of Injustice in the
others, who being neither able to judge of these Terms, nor of the accidental
Circumstances, which might at particular Times make an Alteration in them
necessary, were they struck with exactness, would certainly take Offense at
such Alteration, though they could not avoid submitting to the first
Establishment, in the making of which I have not presumed to mention the least
Regard to Justice.

But instead of this, a new Standard is arbitrarily imposed by the Company
every Season, not on Pretense even of any Alteration in the Value of their own
Commodities, or those of the Natives; but solely according to the Quantity of
the latter, the whole of which be it more or less than on other Years, they
calculate so as to get for their own, whose Quantity is nearly the same every
Season. Such an Imposition was too glaring to escape unnoticed even by Savages,
who though they could not show their Resentment of it, in the same Manner, as
People in other Circumstances, by discontinuing the Trade, yet did not fail to
take the obvious Means of preventing it for the future, by bringing no more
Furs, than their little Experience had taught them would suffice to procure in
Exchange all the Commodities of the Company, the Quantity of which they also
knew by Experience. The Remainder, for in their huntings for Food they slay
many more of the various Animals, than they bring the Furs of to Market, they
either consume themselves in Uses they might dispense with, could they turn
them to any better Use, or actually throw away; practicing out of Resentment
the same Policy with the Dutch, in Regard to their superfluous Spices.

The Effects of a different Conduct must be the Subject of another Letter.

I have the Honor to be, etc.

LETTER V.
MY LORD,
THE Cause and Consequences of the Conduct, which has been invariably pursued
by the Hudson'sBay Company, ever since it was established, having been
considered, let us now consider what would be the Effect, had they adopted a
different System, or rather had no such Establishment been made from the
Beginning, but the Trade left open in its natural State; indeed the only State
in which any Trade can prove beneficial to a (...), all Monopolies by their
Principles counteracting the public Interest, and setting up a private one in
Opposition to it. The only Trade (or at least the only one worth taking any
Notice of) carried on at present by the Hudson's-Bay Company, is the Fur-trade.
But beside this, there are others already discovered, which if pushed to their
proper Extent, would very soon not only equal, but most probably even exceed
that; not to mention the Probability of discovering still more.

The first of these which I shall mention; and which, to the Surprise of
Reason, has not hitherto been thought of any Consequence, is the Fishery. I
will take upon me to say, that the Whale and Seal Fisheries in Hudson'sBay, and
Baffin's-Bay, are capable of affording sufficient, and sufficiently profitable
Employment to several hundred fishing Vessels. Nor is this a vague Assertion. I
speak it from Experience, having been some Years personally engaged in the
Greenland Fishery, after my being at Hudson's-Bay, and gained a clear Insight
into every Branch of it.

The Advantages which would necessarily result from this are most obvious. It
would increase the Numbers of our Seamen and Shipping, and every Branch of
Commerce which does that, increases the essential Strength of the Nation. And
it would not only supply us with a Sufficiency of the Produce of these
Fisheries for Home Consumption, but also give us the Command of the Trade so
effectually, as to enable us to undersell all Rivals in it, at foreign Markets.
That it is impossible for such a Trade to be carried on properly under the
unnatural Restraints of an exclusive Charter, even were the Company to make the
Attempt, is too evident to require Proof; and how much the Nation suffers by
being secluded from it, may be judged from this one Circumstance, that instead
of several hundreds of Vessels, and Thousands of Seamen, which this single
Trade would employ if laid open to public Emulation, the whole Trade of the
Hudson'sBay Company employs no more than four Ships, and one hundred and thirty
Seamen.

Another most valuable Article of Commerce, which those Countries could supply
in the greatest Plenty, is Copper. In the Year 1744, I myself discovered there
several large Lumps of the finest Virgin Copper, which in the honest Exultation
of my Heart at so important a Discovery I directly showed to the Company; but
the thanks I met, may be easily judged from the System of their Conduct. The
Fact, without any Enquiry into the Reality of it, was treated as chimerical
Illusion; and a Stop arbitrarily put to all farther Search into the Matter, by
the absolute Lords of the Soil.

The Advantages which would arise from a sufficient Supply of this Metal, are
also obvious to every Capacity. It would afford Employment to all our various
Artificers who work in it; and enable us to undersell all Competitors at
foreign Markets; and this at a Time, when our internal Supplies of it seem to
be nearly exhausted, and the Use of it is daily increasing in all Parts of the
World.

I have said that Copper is to be found in Plenty in those Countries, for this
Reason. Wherever any Metal is found in Lumps, on or near the Surface of the
Earth, it is a certain Proof that the Earth abounds with it deeper down; such
Lumps being protruded from the Body of the Metal, like Sparks from a large
Fire. Nor is it unreasonable to expect, that Metals still more valuable might
be found in the Pursuit of this; the richest Gold-mines in the East being
intermixed with those of Copper, as Copper itself is with Gold in Proportion to
the Fineness of the former; and finer than the Lumps I found there have I never
seen.

It must not be objected to what I have here advanced, that the Intensity of
the Frost in those Climates would defeat all Attempts of mining, or at the best
render them so difficult and destructive to the Lives of the Miners, as to make
it not worth the Attempt. This is only a vulgar Error. It is known that Frost
penetrates but a little Way into the Earth; no farther than the immediate
Action of the Atmosphere; where the Sphere of that Action therefore ceases,
Frost ceases of Course; and the most ignorant Labourer knows that the deeper he
can work into the Earth, the warmer Air he will breath.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER VI.
MY LORD,
HAVING traced the present State of the Trade to Hudson's-Bay to its Cause, in
the Conduct of the Company, and shown some of the Consequences which would
follow a different Conduct, the next thing is to show what that different
Conduct should be.

The Impossibility of attaining to a just Knowledge of any Country, without
first conciliating the Confidence of the Natives, is clear to reason, and has
been proved by invariable Experience, as also that such Confidence is not to be
conciliated, especially among less informed People, any Way but by long
Acquaintance, much Intercourse, and many good Offices, to wear off the natural
Shyness and Suspicion, inseparable from their seeing Actions not only new, but
also incomprehensible to them. -- In the Knowledge of a Country, I include its
various Products, and Connections, as well as the exterior Face of it.

In order to this, the first Thing necessary (indeed indispensibly so) is to
settle Colonies, to which the Natives may resort at all Times, to gratify
Curiosity, carry on Commerce, or implore Assistance in any Circumstances of
accidental Distress; and where they should always be received in an humane, and
friendly Manner, without any Appearance of immediate Distrust, though at the same
Time, without appearing to relax the Vigilance and Care necessary to preserve
Respect, and obviate their being tempted by too great Secutity, to meditate any
Thing hostile; which Colonies should be planted in as many different Parts of
the Country, as consistent with Convenience, to make the Acquaintance with the
Natives as general as possible, and prevent the Misrepresentations, which are
always made, by those who go between different People, for the Purposes of
Trade, in order to enhaunce the Merit of such Mediation, and keep it
exclusively to themselves; and this as well among savage as civilized Nations,
from the same interested Views.

The Effects of such an Intimacy of Intercourse are most obvious. The
hospitable Natives would communicate to their beneficent Guests, all the
Knowledge which Nature had learned from Experience. They would show them the
Secrets of the Land, and assist them with their Labor to turn every Thing to
their own Advantage.

These Reflections, my Lord, are applicable to the first Principles of
Colonization. In the present Case, the Conduct here recommended, would have
these particular good Effects. It would, in all human Probability, enlarge the
Fur-Trade, the only Trade, as I have observed before, now carried on there, by
the Discovery of Animals, not sought after at present by the Natives, because
their Flesh is not esteemed by them for Food, but whose Skins might be a
valuable Addition to their Commerce; it would increase the Consumption of our
own Manufactures, in Proportion to the Increase of our Acquaintance with the
Natives; and it would be the most certain Means of discovering that Passage to
India, which first led our Mariners into those Seas, if any such Passage there
is, or else put an End to the Trouble and Expense of making farther Attempts
for such a Discovery; and so accomplish the first Object proposed by their
Charter.

Nor are these the only Advantages which would result from the Establishment of
such Colonies. They would necessarily extend to every other Branch of Commerce
capable of being pursued here by habituating our People to the Climate and
keeping them upon the Spot, by which Means they would be ready to commence
their Work earlier, and able to pursue it longer in the Season, than they can
at present, coming from afar, and obliged to get away soon, to save their
Passage home.

The only Objections which can possibly be made to this, are the want of People
at Home to spare for planting Colonies; and the Improbability of their thriving
in so severe a Climate. But upon the least Examination, both these Objections
will vanish.

The Numbers of Beggars, who infest our Streets, show that we have more People,
than we can give Employment to, or at least, than will apply themselves to the
Employments proper for them; and consequently, who can be well spared, to be
sent elsewhere. It will be said perhaps, that while the Streets of our great
Cities swarm, our Fields and Villages are thin; but this alters not the Case.
Their Labor, not their Number is an Advantage to the Public; and when that is
discontinued, they become an Encumbrance to Industry, like Drones in a Hive,
and had better even not be at all, than to be supported at a Loss. 'Till it is
thought proper therefore to put the Laws against such Vagrants, in Execution,
or to frame others, if the present are insufficient to restrain the laboring
People from leaving their own Settlements, where their Work is wanted, and
crowding to the Cities, particularly the Metropolis, where there is not proper
Work Sufficient for them; every Scheme for removing them to Places, where they
can get such Work, makes an Addition of that Work to the general Stock, and
saves the Value of their present un-earned Consumption. Beside the Notion, that
planting Colonies depopulates as Country has been long refuted, it being proved
by Experience, that in the Countries where Industry is encouraged properly,
there will always be as many Inhabitants, as there is good Room and Employment
for, an increased Generation, like Bees, supplying the Place of those who go
away; and it is the Want of this Industry, the Necessity of which is seemingly
removed, by the Treasures returned from her Colonies, that has depopulated
Spain, not the Numbers of the People sent to form those Colonies.

As to the other Objection of the Climate, it is no more than a mere vulgar
Error, derived from the ancient one of uninhabitable Zones, it having been long
proved, that there is no Climate under Heaven to which the human Constitution
cannot be reconciled by every little Care; the Necessity even of which Care
would cease with the first Settlers themselves, as the Climate would be natural
to their Children born and bred up in it.

Nor is their greater Weight in the Miscarriage of the poor Attempts hitherto
made to raise Corn, and Vegetables for the Support of these Colonies, in those
Parts of the Country which lie near to the Company's Forts; such Miscarriage
being far from proving that better Success might not attend more judicious
Attempts made in other Parts, particularly on Mouse and Albany Rivers, which
lie nearly in the same Latitude with London. Or even should all Attempts fail;
Meal, Flour, Cheese, Butter, and esculent Roots may be carried thither at an
easy Rate, and Fish and Flesh, particularly that of Fowls, are most excellent
in their Kinds, and so plenty, as to be below Price.

Having thus, my Lord, shown the Loss suffered by the Nation, from the
injudiciously granted, and more injudiciously (not to give it an harder Name)
conducted Monopoly of the Trade to Hudson's-Bay, and the natural and easy Means
of preventing such Loss for the future, on a Revocation of that Monopoly, I
must beg Leave to trespass upon your Lordship a little farther, while I lay
before you a short View of the present and proposed State of that Trade,
brought together for Comparison.

The Hudson's-Bay Company employ four Ships, and 130 Seamen. -- They have four
Forts, which contain 186 Men. -- And they export Commodities to the Value of L
16,000 a Year, and bring Home Returns to the Value of L 29,340 -- which yield
to the Revenue L 3734.

If the Trade were laid open, the Fishery alone in Hudson's-Bay, Baffin's-Bay,
and Davis's Streights (in the last of which the Dutch find Fish as Plenty as in
Japan, where they kill them solely for their Bone) would afford Employment for
800 Vessels of every Kind, and 16000 Men. --

The Trade would require and support Twelve Colonies, consisting of 3000
settled Inhabitants of both Sexes. -- And, the Exports would in the Course of
seven Years at the very farthest, amount to L 320,000. the Returns to L
586,800, which would yield to the Revenue L 74,680, being twenty Fold the
present Amount of each, with a certain Prospect of farther Increase. But so it
is, that all these national and great Advantages are sacrificed to fatten a few
worthy Individuals. --

I need not pursue the Subject any farther. The inference from what has been
shown, is obvious; and must open the Eyes of all, who are not determined to
keep them shut. Happy for the Nation that such is not your Lordship's Case!
That you hold not yourself above receiving Information from your Inferiors; and
that Heaven has blessed you with Ability to turn that Information to the best
Advantage.

I have the Honor, etc.
P. S. Among the Things neglected by the Hudson'sBay Company, and what will
always be neglected be every monopolizing Company, as foreign to their
immediate Profit, I have not made any Mention of civilizing the Natives, and
instructing them in the Christian Religion, though to pass over the moral Duty
of doing it, the great Advantages in Point of Interest, which the French have
reaped from their Labors in this Way, in other Parts of the World, should be
an Incitement to other Nations not to neglect it. --



LETTER VII.
MY LORD,
THE Country, I wish I could say Colony, that comes next under Consideration,
in our Return from the North, is Labrador.

The strange Neglect of forming any Settlement in this Country, is one of these
glaring Instances of the Blindness of Man to his best Interest, which prove the
Insufficiency of his boasted Wisdom, and the indespensible Necessity of a
ruling Providence to lead him right in the plainest Road. For though this Land
does not immediately yield Gold, Silver, precious Stones, or those Foods for
Luxury and Ostentation, which are in such mad Request, it would yield a
Treasure much more solid, permanent, and advantageous to the Commonweal, in
the Fruits of Industry, which increases the Strength along with the Wealth of a
Nation; Labor rewarded by Plenty invigorating the present Race, and increasing
Population, in its happiest Appearance, an healthy and vigorous Progeny.

The Climate on the Coast of Labrador is less severe, than that of the
Countries confining on Hudson's-Bay. The Country is covered with Forests of
valuable Timber, abounding with various Animals, whose Furs would be a most
profitable Addition to our Trade in that Branch, and whose Flesh, in the
general, is most wholesome, as that of the various Fowls with which the whole
Country also abounds, is most delicious Food. The Soil, with proper
Cultivation, is capable of producing Corn, and most Kinds of esculent Roots,
and Vegetables; and the Rivers and Seacoasts yield Fish, excellent for Food,
as well as Trade, in a Plenty that almost exceeds Conception. All this is
immediately on, or near the Seacoast; our Discoveries extending but a very
little Way farther. Were the interior Parts of the Country known, it is more
than probable, that many other Advantages would be discovered in them; and of
this the Fewness of the Natives hitherto seen gives the strongest Presumption;
it being much more agreeable both to Reason and Experience to suppose, that
those few we see are only Vagrants, and that the Body of the People find
Attachments to fix them the Center of their Country, than that such a Country
should be thinly peopled throughout.

The only Attempt hitherto made to carry on any Trade here, has been in the
Fishery; which makes the following Exports yearly to Great Britain, Portugal,
Spain, and Italy.

Whale-Oil 1500 Tons at L 15 L 22,500 00 Seal-Oil 310 Tons at L 15 4,650 00
Whale-bone 72 Tons at L 300 21,600 00 Seal-Skins 12000 at 6 d. 300 00 L 49,050
00

There are no Exports from Great Britain, that can with any Propriety be placed
against this. With the Natives we have no Trade. In the Country we have no
Settlement; and the Consumption of the People, employed in carrying on the
Fishery, is supplied by the different Places whence they come every Season, and
whither they return at the End of it; and for the Time they stay, consists of
the bare Necessaries of Life, and Implements of their Business, without
entering at all into our Manufactures.

How different would the Case be were these Colonies established. The
Advantages of such Establishments have been explained in the preceding Instance
of Hudson'sBay. All those enumerated there (except the local one relating to
the North-west Passage) are applicable to this Country, in the strictest Sense.
They would be filled with People of our own, whom it were a saving to the
Public to send abroad; or with People of other Nations, who allured with the
Advantage, would settle with us, and become our own. They would turn to proper
Advantage the Articles of Commerce already discovered there, and most probably
discover still many more. They would take off our Manufactures, and send us in
Return the Produce of the Country to be manufactured by us; and they would
necessarily increase the Numbers of our Shipping and Seamen, the best Wealth,
and Strength of Great Britain.

The Number of Colonies proper to be planted here, is not for me to determine.
If we would begin with only two, or even one, the Experiment would soon prove
its own Utility, and show where, and in what Manner we should proceed farther.

I have the Honor, etc.
P. S. Another (and that a most important) Advantage that would arise from the
Establishment of Colonies, on this Coast, is the convenient Opportunity it
would afford of boiling down the Blubber, and making the Whalebone merchantable
on the Spot; by which Means they might be carried directly to Market, and the
Loss of Time and Expense of bringing them Home in the Gross, as at present,
saved.



LETTER VIII.
MY LORD,
CONTINUING our Course from the North, we come next to the Island of
Newfoundland. The Climate of this Island differs not very much from that of
Labrador; and that Difference is still less to its Advantage, the heavy Fogs
which hang over it, for so great a Part of the Year counter-balancing any
little Abatement in the Intensity of the Frost. The Country is well stocked
with Timber fit for the most valuable Purposes of Ship-building. It has many
fine Rivers; and on the Coast are several large, commodious, and safe Harbors.
But, on the other Hand, the Soil is so poor, and unfit for the Purposes of
Vegetation, that the Heat of the Summer, though very great, cannot force it to
produce any Thing in Plenty, or Perfection.

This is on, or very near the Seacoast, to which our Knowledge of the Country
has been hitherto confined. When the interior Parts of it shall be known also,
it is far from being in the least improbable, that this Complaint may in a
great Measure cease, and many Advantages, a yet unthought of, be discovered.

But it is not the Island, or its Produce, that is the Object of our Attention.
It is the Cod-Fishery on the Coast, or as they are called, the Banks of
Newfoundland, the greatest, and the best Fishery in the known World.

The Importance of this Fishery to Great Britain has been long and well known
to the People of this Nation. Would to Heaven, it had been as well taken Care
of by its Governors. At the Peace of Utrecht it was ceded to us by the French,
and discontinued by the Spaniards; but both soon broke through their
Engagements, and resumed the Trade, not indeed avowedly in the Names of the
respective Nations; but in private, and seemingly clandestine Attempts of
Individuals, which were taken so little Notice of here, if they were not even
connived at, that the French in particular before the breaking out of the last
War, had gradually worked themselves, into a great Share of it, which has been
since confirmed to them, at the Peace of Paris.

I must not, my Lord, indulge my Thoughts upon this Subject! It is too late!
The Deed is done, and all that remains now is, to remedy its Effects, as far as
possible; in order to do which, it is necessary to take a distinct View of the
present State of this Trade.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain and Ireland, to Newfoundland.
Coarse Clothing -- Cottons -- Checks -- British -- Linens -- Guns --
Gunpowder -- Shot -- Gun Flints -- Fishing-Tackle -- Wrought-Leather --
Wrought-Steel -- Iron -- Brass -- Copper -- Pewter -- Pipes -- Hosiery -- Hats
-- Tallow Candles -- Ship-Chandlery -- Stationary Wares -- Grocery -- Oil --
Bacon -- Beef -- Pork -- Malt -- British Spirits and Wines -- All which at an
Average of three Years cost L 273,400

In carrying the foregoing Articles to Newfoundland from London, Pool,
Weymouth, Dartmouth, Tynemouth, Topsham, Bristol, Liverpool, and different
Parts of Ireland, and in bringing the Fish and Oil to the several Markets, in
Portugal, Spain, and Italy; as also in catching and curing the said Fish, there
are employed

Ships 380 - with Twelve Men in each Boats 2000 - with Eight Men in each,
making together 20560 Men.

In the foregoing List of the several Articles sent to Newfoundland, I have not
included Salt -- Wheaten-Meal -- Oaten-Meal -- Barley -- Peace -- Beans, etc.
carried from Philadelphia; and our other American Colonies thither; which
though they do not go immediately from Great Britain, yet as they increase the
Trade of those Colonies, their Profits consequently center with her.

EXPORTED from Newfoundland.
Cod-Fish 30,000 Tons - at L 10 L 300,000 Oil 3000 Tons - at L 15 L 45,000 L
345,000

The Balance of L71,600 in the Favor of GreatBritain, which appears upon the
Face of this State, is by no Means to be taken for the whole Amount of the
Profits of the Trade. The Prices here set upon the Cod-fish and Oil, are only
what they are worth upon the Spot. At the several Places where they are
disposed of, they bring much more than twice that Sum; so that at the most
moderate Computation, this Trade adds annually a clear Profit of more than half
a Million to the Wealth of the Nation.

The Importance of such a Trade proves itself at the first View; and the
Variety, as well as the Amount of the Articles exported, shows how extensively,
and deeply it enters into our Manufactures; and the Numbers of the Seamen bred
up in it, to every Hardship of that laborious Life, make it the Nursery of our
Navy, and therefore one of the main Sinews of our most natural, most essential
Strength.

Nor is this Importance bounded by its present State, prosperous as it is. The
Prospect extends still farther; and I will be bold to say, that the Advantages,
reaped from this Fishery, may be doubled within the Course of a very few Years,
if the proper Means are taken, and pursued with proper Vigilance, and Vigor.

I have observed to your Lordship, that the Coast of this Island abounds with
large, and safe Harbors. The first Thing to be done to improve the Trade to
its natural Extent, would be to plant Settlements on such of these Harbors as
lie most convenient to the Banks, for curing the Fish, where Stages, etc.
should be erected of Strength sufficient for long-continued Use, and preserved
for it, so as to save the Expense, Inconvenience, and Loss of Time, experienced
from the temporary ones now used.

As the Quantity of Fish upon the Banks is inexhaustible, by having such
Settlements established, ready prepared for curing them, we should immediately
be able to supply all our West India Islands, with Fish for the Support of
their Negroes, so much cheaper than the Way they are supported at present, that
they would be able not only to supply the Mother Country with Sugars for Home
Consumption, infinitely cheaper than at present; but also to undersell every
other Rival in the Trade at foreign Markets. --

Let Britain ever preserve its hitherto unsullied Honor of keeping inviolable
the Faith of Treaties! -- Let the French enjoy what they have gotten; but give
them no more, nor let them encroach beyond the Bounds (too extensive already)
indulged to them.

I have the Honor to be, etc.

LETTER IX.
MY LORD,
WE will now, if your Lordship pleases, quit the Coast of the main Ocean, for a
few Moments, and make a short Excursion up the great River St. Lawrence, to our
newly-acquired Dominion of Canada.

The Advantages that must necessarily arise from this Country to Great Britain,
have been so lately, and so fully canvassed, as is the Case of all new
acquisitions, that it cannot be necessary to enter into the Proof of them here.
A bare Recital of a few of the most considerable for Reference, is all
therefore which I shall trespass upon your Lordship's Time with at the present.

By expelling an inveterate, active, and insidious Enemy from the Center of our
Colonies, on that vast Continent, we secure them from the Danger of being
attacked from behind; and enable our People to attend with proper Spirit, and
Industry, to the Improvement, and Extension of their Settlements in the
interior, and more remote Parts of the Country, where the Fertility of the
Soil, or any particular Production, or Convenience, may induce them to settle.
It removes a rival Power out of the Sight of the Natives, and leaves them
without Assistance, or even Hope of Impunity in any hostile Attempt against us.
It brings their Resource for all the Conveniences of Life solely to ourselves,
and thereby puts us in the sole Possession of their Commerce. It gives us an
Opportunity to push that Commerce to its full Extent, and to enlarge it with
those farther Discoveries of new Articles, which the little Experiments we have
hitherto been able to make, give us just Reason to expect there. It affords
Employment for a great Addition to the Numbers of our Ships and Seamen; and
thereby increases our national Strength. -- And lastly, it doubles all these
Advantages ten-fold, in our Hands, by taking them out of the Hands of our
Enemies.

Your Lordship will observe, that in summing up these Advantages, I suppose all
proper Means to be taken for making the most of our Acquisition. On the
contrary Supposition, the whole will be reversed. The Advantages will slip out
of our Hands, and arm the Hands of our Enemies against us. Nor must this be
looked upon as only mere Speculation, or raising Phantoms of improbable Danger.
The Pertinacity, with which the French Crown insisted on the Restitution of the
Island of CapeBreton, when taken from them in the War before last, -- the
enormous Sums expended in fortifying it for, and defending it in the last War,
-- and the Reluctance with which they gave up their Claim to it, after it had
been again taken from, and was evidently impossible to be recovered by them,
prove, beyond a Doubt, their Conviction of the Importance of this Country, for
keeping in their own Hands the Command of the Navigation to which, as well as
for the Support of their Encroachments upon us in the Newfoundland Fishery,
these Fortifications were built, and defended; as our unvaried Experience of
their political Faith, and Regard to Treaties sufficiently shows their
Intention in the Infringements already made by them upon the Bounds set them by
the Treaty of Paris; and must open our Eves to what we are to expect, whenever
they shall find a favorable Opportunity for setting up a Claim of Right to
what they shall get hold of by such Infringments,

The best Means therefore of obviating such Intentions, are the proper Objects
of our present Consideration; as the Efficacy of those Means will best appear
from a Representation of the present State of our Commerce with that Country.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Canada.
Woollen-Cloths -- British-Linens -- Cottons -- Checks -- Callicoes, -- and
sundry India Goods -- Paisley Lawns -- Guns -- Cutlasses -- Gunpowder -- Shot
-- Gun-Flints -- Haberdashery-Wares -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Wearing-Apparel
-- Cotton-Velvets -- Stuffs -- Hosiery -- Hats -- Gloves -- Books -- Stationary
Wares -- Drugs -- Glass -- Wrought-Leather -- Wrought-Steel -- Iron -- Copper
-- Tin -- Brass -- Pewter -- Pictures -- Painter's Colors -- Beeswax --
Vermillion -- Millenary Wares -- Blankets -- Sadlery Wares -- Sail-Cloth --
Cordage -- Fishing-Tackle -- Cheese -- Tobacco-pipes -- Strong Beer -- British
Spirits -- Wines -- All which cost at an Average of three Years L 105,000
COMMODITIES imported from Canada into Great Britain.
Nineteen thousand Beaver Skins -- 9000 Bear -- 11,000 Otter -- 4000 Fisher --
36,000 Marten -- 350 Wolf -- 4000 Cat -- 2000 Mink -- 2000 Fox -- 50,000
Musquash -- 100,000 Raccoon -- Elk and Deer 24,000 -- And 2000 lb. of Castoreum
L 76,000 Whale-bone -- Whale, Porpus, and other Fish-Oil 3,500 Wheat 12000
Quarters at 20 s 12,000 Gensing -- Snake-root, and Capillaire -- Sundry 3,000
Timber -- Plank -- Deals -- Lumber, etc. 11,000 105,500

Which Trade is carried on by 34 Sail of Ships, navigated by about 400 Men.

The foregoing View of the Nature, and present Amount of this Trade proves
beyond a Doubt the Practicability of pushing it to such an Extent, as must make
it of the most essential Importance to this Nation. The Commodities it takes
off are all, except the India-goods, immediately of our own Produce, and
Manufacture; and the Returns it makes are in the unmanufactured Produce of that
Country; which single Circumstance of their being unmanufactured, doubles their
Value to us, by the Employment it affords to our Manufacturers, whose Labor is
one of the chief Sources of our national Wealth. As to the Quantities both of
those Commodities, and the Returns for them, the least Attention to the
Circumstances of the Country will show how short they fall of what they may be.

In all our Conquests, the Inhabitants naturally have a Diffidence and Dread of
their Conquerors, however humane in their Manner of waging war, and beneficial
in their Measures of governing after. If it should be objected in the present
Instance, that the only Inhabitants of this Country, who can properly be said
to have been conquered, are the French, the Natives only exchanging one Master
for another, it alters not the Case. The Dominion, which the French had
acquired over the Minds of the ignorant Natives, as well those apparently free
and independent of them, as their immediate Subjects, by the Arts of their
Priests and Friars, always successful in Proportion to the Ignorance of those
upon whom they are practiced; and the Animosity and Abhorrence which they
instilled into them against us, have been severely experienced in too many
Instances, during the whole Course of the War: While any of these Priests and
Friars therefore are permitted to remain among them to keep up those
Prejudices, and sow the same pious Seeds of Discord and Hatred, it is in vain
to expect, that the Natives should enter into sincere Amity, and Confidence
with us.

The first Thing therefore to be done, in Order to conciliate their Confidence,
is to banish effectually the French Priests, and Religious of all
Denominations, and to send in their Room a laboring Clergy of our own, who
breathing the true Spirit of Christianity themselves, and practicing it in its
most sacred. Fruits of universal Benevolence, and Philanthropy, or in the
Phrase of holy Writ, in Charity to all Men, should set such an Example to their
Flocks, as could not fail to eradicate their Prejudices against us, and implant
in their Stead, Confidence, Respect, and Brotherly Love.

The common Reproach brought even by ourselves against our Clergy, that they
follow only the Loaves and Fishes of the Church; and are too lazy, and too much
attached to the present Enjoyment of the good Things of this World, to labor
in the Vineyard of their Lord; and bear the Heat and Burden of the Day, in
converting savage Nations to his Laws, must not be opposed to what I have here
offered. The Pains taken to this End by some Individuals, in other Parts of
America, and the Success with which Heaven has blessed those Pains, prove that
our Religion gives not a Sanction to such Neglect of Duty; and that Protestants
can be as indefatigable in propagating the Gospel of Christ, as Papists of any
Denomination whatsoever.

By Protestants, my Lord, I mean Christians protesting against spiritual
Tyranny in all its Exertions, and obeying in the Freedom of Conscience the Laws
and Doctrines of Christ, as explained by the best Power of Reason, without
stooping to enter into the nominal Distinctions, into which the Restlessness of
human Imagination, more than any real Difference, has divided that Name.

I must not, my Lord, be understood by thus urging the Banishment of the Popish
Clergy to contradict myself, and propose a Practice opposite to the Principles
of Christian Liberty which I profess. Where the Principles of any Set of Men
are professedly subversive of that Liberty, and expressly contrary to the most
essential Principles of that Religion which they profess in common with us, the
most, indeed the only effectual Way to preserve both, is to drive them out from
among us; and that such are the Principles of those who assume to themselves a
Right to put Shackles on the human Mind, and limit God's Mercies to the
Profession of their own Opinions, is too evident to require Proof.

The Secular Advantages to ourselves, which must necessarily follow from this
Attention to the Spiritual Welfare of these People are most obvious. Informed
in their Minds, they would become civilized in their Manners. They would soften
from that Ferocity, which prompts them to those barbarous Wars, and Murders,
that have almost desolated their Country, and increasing in their Numbers would
proportionably increase in their Demands for the Conveniences of Life, with
which our Trade supplies them; and would consequently apply themselves to
procure an equivalent Increase of their own Produce to give in Exchange for
them. They would assist us with their Strength and Experience of their Country
to improve the Trade at present carried on between them and us, and to
prosecute with better Prospect of Success our Endeavors to enlarge it by the
Discovery of new Articles. And by their Intercourse with us in the fraternal
Amity of Religion, they would acquire Knowledge of the Excellence, and be glad
to put themselves under the Protection of our Laws, and so in the End make
their Numbers our Strength, and become one People with us.

In enumerating these Advantages, your Lordship may possibly be surprised at my
confining myself to such as are immediately secular. But in this I conform to
the Humor (if I may so call it) of the Times, to which Proposals for Practice
must never run counter: But I live, my Lord, in Hopes of seeing better Times,
when the Advantages of this Life shall be held in Esteem only as they are
conformable to the more valuable ones of that which is to come; and no Means
pursued, at least professedly, to procure the former, which shall not also
conduce to the latter. And in this Hope I am, humanly speaking, confirmed by
the Experience of all Ages, in which it has been invariably observed, that when
Things arrive at a certain Point, they always change; and if Immorality and
Irreligion are not arrived at their Height among us, Lord have Mercy upon those
who are to behold their Advance! --

The next, and only Thing farther, which I would propose for the Improvement of
this Important Acquisition, is Agriculture. The other Branches of its Trade are
in the Hands of the Natives, and should be left undisturbed with them, as best
qualified to pursue them with Success, I mean the Fur, and Peltry-trades, for
any Increase that can possibly be made in the former of which, either in this,
or any other Part of our Dominions, or in any of the Countries where we have
Settlements, we can never want advatageous Vent; and for a large Increase in
the latter we have sufficient Room, and sufficient Reason to expect that
Increase, particularly in the Article of Deer-Skins, a much greater Quantity of
which than is now imported could be brought with the greatest Advantage into
our Manufactures; but as for Tillage, they do neither understand, nor are yet
sufficiently settled in their Dispositions to attempt it.

The internal Advantages of pursuing Agriculture, are sufficiently known. It
supplies Employment, and plenteous Support to the People, and that Plenty
supplies more People to be supported and employed. Nor is this Article liable
to be carried too far, as most others are, it being impossible that Bread
should ever be too plenty; the Mouths to eat it increasing in Proportion as
there is Bread for them to eat; and externally it would enable us to supply
with the Overflowings of our own Plenty, those Countries which might stand in
Need of such Supplies; and this without Danger of ever interfering with the
Corn-Trade of Great Britain, or our other Colonies, there being, as I have
before observed, a sufficient Demand for both, and that nearest hand being
always the first taken off.

The Quantity of Corn at present exported from Canada, has been shown to be
12000 Quarters; but this is rather a Proof that the Country can produce Corn,
than any Measure of its Production; as I will be bold to say, That Fifty Times
that Quantity may be produced annually without neglecting proper Attention to
any other Branch of Commerce.

In a Word, my Lord, by proper Application to this single Article of
Agriculture, Canada may be made within the Compass of a few Years, to reimburse
to GreatBritain, all the Blood and Treasure, expended in the Conquest of it.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER X.
MY LORD,
FROM Canada, we will descend with the Stream to Nova Scotia, a former
Acquisition from the same Power, situate on the Mouth of the River St. Lawrence.

Though this Province has been in our Possession above half a Century, since
the Peace of Utrecht, little or no Advances were made in the Settlement of it,
'till after the War before the last, when a most numerous Colony, amply
provided with every Thing necessary, was sent and settled there, and an
excellent Dock-yard, etc. built for the Service of the Navy, stationed in those
Parts of America, with good Houses for the Officers and Artificers employed in
it, and Barracks for the Army, composing together the handsome Town of
Hallifax, all at the great Expense of Government. But the Success has no Way
answered this Expense, except so far as it respects the particular Service of
the Navy; the only Advances made in cultivating and improving the Country,
being confined within the narrow Limits of the immediate Environs of the Town,
all at any Distance remaining in the same unprofitable State as before; so that
there is not a sufficient Supply of the poor Products of the Place even for the
Inhabitants, who instead of being able to make any Exports, are obliged to
depend for their own Support upon our other Colonies; which they would not be
able to pay for, but for the Money spent among them by the Navy and the Army;
the only Benefit received by them from the latter, who are found totally
incapable of defending them from the Outrages of the Natives. How far this
Benefit may be equivalent to the Expense; and whether Part of that Expense
might not answer the End better, if applied in another Manner, not to mention
the Loss of so many Men's Labor and Lives, the Scurvy carrying them off in
Numbers, are Points well deserving the Attention of Government.

As to the Navy, the Advantage to that is very great, as the Shipping have not
only a safe and convenient Harbor to be laid up in, during the Winter Season,
when all Navigation is impracticable in those Seas; but can also be repaired,
and supplied with any Thing they may want, without the Fatigue, Danger, and
Loss of Time of coming Home upon every Occasion of the Kind, as heretofore.

The Miscarriage in the Settlement of this Province, must not be attributed
solely to any insuperable Incapacity in the Province itself. The Climate,
though far from being the best, or most agreeable, is yet equally far from
being unwholesome, or unfit for the Purposes of Vegetation, if taken timely
Advantage of, nor is the Soil so poor, but that with proper Cultivation and
Care, it would produce the most valuable of all vegetable Productions, Wheat in
great Plenty; and many of the esculent Plants and Roots in Request among us, if
not in so high Perfection as other Countries, yet wholesome and good for Use.

The true Reason of this Miscarriage, is the inveterate Hostility of the
Natives, who though very few in Number, yet by lying in wait always, and in all
Places, frequently find Opportunities of committing the most horrid Cruelties
and Murders upon the Settlers; and even where they fail of this, they keep them
in such a State of continual Alarm and Dread, that they cannot apply themselves
to make any lasting or considerable Improvement.

An Enquiry into the Cause of this Malignity in the Natives toward our People
is not so immediately to the present Purpose. The first Thing necessary to be
done is to guard against the Effects of it; and for this, sad Experience has
proved that European Soldiers are utterly unqualified, being neither active
enough in themselves, sufficiently acquainted with the Country, nor
sufficiently inured to the Severity of the Climate, to watch and pursue an
Enemy possessed of all these Advantages, and actuated by the keenest Hatred and
Animosity. Instead therefore of sending Soldiers from hence, the most effectual
Means to put an End to the Inroads of these Savages, obviously, is to procure a
Body of the Natives of some of the neighboring Colonies, most firmly attached
to us to encounter them. These from the natural Ferocity of their Disposition,
might be brought at a very trifling Expense, comparatively to what we are now
at to no Purpose; and when once let loose upon the others, would in a very
short Time establish the Country in a State of Safety, by cutting off all those
actually engaged in Hostilities, and whom Experience has proved it to be
impossible to reconcile to us; and taking the rest of all Ages and Sexes
Prisoners, to be dispersed among other distant Colonies, where they should not
imbibe, nor have an Opportunity of practicing such Prejudices.

I am very far myself, my Lord, from approving of the Extirpation of the
Natives of any Country, by their Conquerors; and even if I did, have the Honor
of knowing your Lordship too well to venture such a Proposal to you. But here
the Case is very different. The Country is so large, and so very thinly
inhabited, that our Settlements upon it can hardly be called an Intrusion, and
are by no Means even an Inconvenience to the Inhabitants; notwithstanding
which, and notwithstanding all the Advantages held out by us to them, we have
ever found it impossible to subdue their Savage Hatred in the least; so that
this Severity against them is sanctified by the great, and eternal Law of
Self-preservation. The Safety of the Settlers being once established, they
would be able to seek out, and establish their Settlements in the Places, most
fertile in themselves, and most convenient for their different Purposes of
living and Commerce; and soon make such Returns, particularly in Wheat, Hemp,
and Flax, for the Production of which, the Soil of the Country is in most
Places excellently adapted, as would amply reimburse the Expense of sending
them thither.

Our Exports to Nova Scotia at present consist of the following Articles.
Woollen-Cloths -- Foreign and British Linens -- Wrought-Iron -- Steel -- Brass
-- Pewter -- Tin -- Hats -- Hosiery -- Haberdashery -- Millenary, and
Turnery-Wares -- Sail-Cloth -- Cordage -- Ship-Chandlery-Wares -- Fishing
Tackle -- Saddlery-Wares -- Gold and Silver Lace -- British Spirits -- Wines,
and Medicinal Drugs, which cost at an Average of three Years -- L 26,500 The
Articles exported from Nova Scotia, are
(...) and Shads, 3000 Barrels at 20s. L 3000 (...) 2500 Tons at L 10 25,000
(...)-Oil, 300 Tons at L 15 4500 (...) ^5 Tons at L 300 1500 (...) and (...)
Timber, Masts, Lumber etc. 4000 L 38,000

By this State, the Trade of this Country appears to (...) entirely of Timber,
and the Produce of the Fishery; but if it were once well settled, not only
these might be advanced (the latter to more than double its present Amount, and
the former without Bounds, as the Forests cover the whole Face of the Country)
but also a new and most advantageous Trade be opened in the several Articles of
Tillage before enumerated; beside what more might be struck out, upon
Experience, and a better Knowledge of the interior Parts of the Country.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XI.
MY LORD,
WE will now take a Trip, for a few Moments from the Continent to the adjacent
Islands of St. John's, and Cape-Breton.

The Island of St. John's differs very little in Climate, but most materially
in Soil, from Nova Scotia; the latter being much fitter for Tillage, and the
former for Pasture. But this Difference is far from a Disadvantage to either,
as it gives Rise to an Interchange of their respective Products, in its Nature
necessarily attended with Advantage, which their Nearness to each other frees
from all Inconvenience, or Danger of Interruption.

While the Inhabitants therefore of Nova Scotia apply themselves to
Agriculture, those of St. John's may turn their Lands to Pasturage; and thereby
not only have their Time more at Command to pursue their own Fishery; but also
be able to supply those engaged in the other Fisheries with Beef for their
Support, and to establish a most profitable Trade in that Article, with the
West Indian Islands, where it will always meet abundant Vent. -- I do not mean
by this, that Nova Scotia is utterly unfit for Pasturage; or St. John's for
Agriculture. I only speak of the Produce, for which each is most fit, and which
consequently it must be their Interest to pursue principally, as a Point of
Commerce.

The Spirit, with which the Settlement of this Island was undertaken
immediately at the Conclusion of the last War, and the Numbers, Rank, and
Wealth of the Persons engaged, gave Reason to expect a farther Progress by this
Time, than appears to have been yet made in it; but whatever has been the Cause
of the Delay, it is to be hoped that the bad Consequences of it are
sufficiently seen; and that the Undertaking will be reassumed with Effect.

As to the Island of Cape Breton, its Importance consists solely in its
Situation, of which the French took sufficient Advantage, while it was in their
Possession, for the Protection of their own and Annoyance of our Fishery upon
the Banks of Newfoundland. But that Importance has ceased upon its falling into
our Hands, who are in the acknowledged Superiority of Possession of the whole
Fishery; and therefore the Fortifications erected by them for their Purposes,
have been demolished by us, as not being of Use equivalent to the Expense of
maintaining them.

The Island though does not thereby lose all Use to us; for as the Cod-Banks
extend up to, and all along the Coast of it, it affords a convenient Station
for curing the Fish caught there, without the Trouble, Delay, and Expense of
carrying them to any other Place for that Purpose; not to dwell upon the
Importance of its Harbor, to the Navigation of the River St. Lawrence.

Other Purposes it can answer but very few; the Climate, being still worse than
that of Nova Scotia, and the Soil more unfit for Vegetation of every Kind, both
on Account of the Rockiness of the Island itself, and its Exposure equally to
the Cold of Winter, and Heat of Summer, there being no Forests to shelter
Cultivation from them, as on the Continent. To attempt making any permanent
Settlements therefore on this Island, must be in vain, as they can never
succeed sufficiently to induce the People to stay, or to reimburse the Expense.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XII.
MY LORD,
I AM now come to New England, a Country that well deserves that Name, as being
both the first and greatest Colony established by us in America.

The Climate, Soil, and Produce of this Country are so well known, that any
Account of them here must be utterly unnecessary: It Is Importance to the Mother
Country will sufficiently appear in the following State of the Trade carried on
between them.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to New England.
Wrought-Iron, Steel, Copper, Brass, Pewter and Lead -- Woollen-Cloths --
Stuffs -- Flannels -- Colchester-Bays -- Long-Ells -- British, Irish, and
Foreign-Linens -- Silks -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Millenary, Haberdashery, and
Hostery Wares -- Hats -- Gloves -- Manchester Goods -- Birmingham and Sheffield
Wares -- Hemp -- Sail-Cloth -- Cordage Upholstery, and Saddlery Wares --
Cabinet-Maker's Goods -- Painter's Colors -- Ship-Chandlery Wares -- Earthen
Ware -- India Goods -- Grindstones -- Fishing-Tackle -- Cheese -- Pickles --
Toys -- Seeds -- Tobacco-pipes -- Strong Beer -- Wines -- Spirits -- Medicinal
Drugs -- All which cost at an Average of three Years L 395,000 COMMODITIES
imported from New England.
Cod-Fish dried -- 10000 Tons at L 10 L 100,000 Masts, Boards, Staves,
Shingles, and Joists -- 45,000 Ships about 70 Sail -- at L 700 49,000 Pickled
Mackarel and Shads, 8000 Barrels at 20 s 8,000 Whale and Cod-Oil, 7000 Tons at
L 15 105,000 Whale-bone -- 28 Tons at L 300 8,400 Turpentine, Tar, and Pitch
1500 Barrels at 8s 600 Horses and live Stock 12,000 Potash -- 8000 Barrels --
at 50s 20,000 Pickled Beef and Pork -- 9000 Barrels at 30s 13,500 Beeswax, and
sundry other Articles, valued at an Average of three Years 9,000 L 370,500

The above Amount speaks for itself; but when the Nature of the Trade is
considered, and that most of the Articles exported from New England being
carried to other Markets, the greatest Part of the Returns made to us for our
Exports are in the Money for which their's are sold, the Consequence of it will
appear in a still stronger Light.

It is most delicate, my Lord, to mention any Thing that may seem to allude in
the remotest Sense to the unhappy Disputes at present subsisting between Great
Britain and her American Children. I shall therefore only observe, that if the
Trade of this Colony, on it is present Footing, is so advantageous, what must it
have been before those Disputes arose, when our Exports thither amounted to
near L 550,000 per Annum? And what should we not do to bring it back to that
Amount?

The Complaints made by the Colonies (this along with the rest) of the Scarcity
of Coin among them, must not be taken to invalidate what I have here advanced
of our being paid in Money, for the greatest Part of our Exports to New
England. The Fact is the very Reverse. That Money comes not immediately from
thence, but from the Countries where her Commodities are vended, whence it is
brought directly to us, the Imports of New England from all other Countries but
Great Britain, being too inconsiderable, to have any Weight in the Scale of
Commerce; so that the Scarcity of Coin there proceeds necessarily from their
paying us in Money, instead of preventing it.

If it should be enquired how this Colony can dispense with the want of the
several Articles of Commerce, their discontinuing to take which, as formerly,
has made such a Fall in our Exports thither, the Answer is obvious. It appears
from the foregoing State of these Exports, that by very much the greatest Part
of them consists of the Luxuries, or at best the dispensible Conveniences of
Life, the Country supplying the Necessaries in abundance. Now, as the
Inhabitants pride themselves more than any other People upon Earth in that
Spirit of Freedom, which first made their Ancestors leave their native Country
and settle there; and do really, as Individuals, enjoy more Independency, from
several peculiar Circumstances in their Manners, Laws, and Situation, it is
natural to conceive that upon the first Apprehension (whether justly founded or
not makes no difference!) of any Invasion of that Freedom, and Independency,
they should take Fire, and sacrifice to Resentment, (May I not say virtuous
Principle?) the Passions whose Gratification consumed those Articles of
Convenience and Luxury, and confine themselves to mere Necessaries. That they
have already begun to do this, is too well known and felt. How much farther
they may proceed in it, is far from being pleasing in the Prospect. Such
Principles gain Strength by Practice; and that Practice will soon make those
Wants, which at the first may have been most painful, become so familiar as to
be no longer felt.

I am well aware, my Lord, that this contradicts the Notion of a necessary
Dependence upon us for those Articles, which by artful and industrious
Propagation has become popular here. But upon a proper Enquiry, this Notion
will be found unable to support itself. The People of New England owe that
Independency of Individuals, in which the very Essence of true Liberty exists,
and which is the best Protection of it, to a particular Law of Inheritance, by
which the Possessions of the Father are divided equally among all his Children;
so that they are kept in that happy Mediocrity, which by obliging them to turn
their Thoughts to Industry, in order to avoid Want, exempts them from
Temptation to, as as well as denies them the Means of gratifying Luxury; and at
the same Time, by supplying them with a Foundation for that Industry to work
upon, exempts them also from the Necessity of submitting to any Encroachments
on their Liberty. A State, which they are known not to be yet refined enough in
their Taste, to hazard, much less barter, for any Gratification whatsoever; and
consequently the Necessity of their Dependence for such Gratification, is
merely imaginary.

I have before observed to your Lordship, that the Products of which this
Country is capable, are sufficiently understood. The only Articles in which
there is Room for Improvement are Hemp and Flax; Commodities for the Production
of which their Soil and Climate are peculiarly proper, and of which it is
impossible for us to raise too much, even for our own Consumption.

The Advantages which must necessarily arise from our having a sufficient
Supply of these most essential Articles offer themselves to View, at the first
Mention of it; nor can the Interest of any Set of Individuals engaged in that
Channel of Trade by which they are at present supplied, deserve to be put, but
for a single Moment, in Competition with that of the Nation in General, so
nearly concerned in having this Trade brought home thus to ourselves.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XIII.
MY LORD,
THE Colonies of Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire come naturally
under Consideration next after New England, of which they originally were, and
still in most Respects may be considered as a Part; the Observations therefore
made upon that are all necessarily applicable to these it is younger Brethren.

The Produce of these Colonies is mostly the same as that of New England; and
their Trade with Great Britain carried on in the same Articles, and so blended
with it, that it is more difficult, than it may seem necessary, to draw the
Line between them in many particulars. However, in order to throw as much Light
as possible upon so interesting a Subject, I here lay before your Lordship a
State of their separate Trade, as far as it is carried on with any apparent
Separation.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Connecticut, Rhode Island and New
Hampshire.
Wrought-Iron, Steel, Copper, Brass, Pewter and Lead -- Woollen Cloths --
Stuffs -- Flannels -- Colchester-Bays -- Long-Ells -- British, Irish, and
Foreign-Linens -- Silks -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Millenary, Haberdashery, and
Hosiery-Wares -- Hats -- Gloves -- Manchester Goods -- Birmingham and Sheffield
Wares -- Hemp -- Sail-Cloth -- Cordage -- Upholstery, and Saddlery Wares --
Cabinet-Maker's Goods -- Painter's Colors -- Ship-Chandlery Wares -- Earthen
Ware -- India Goods -- Grindstones -- Fishing Tackle -- Cheese -- Pickles --
Toys -- Seeds -- Tobacco-pipes -- Strong Beer -- Wines -- Spirits -- Medicinal
Drugs -- All which cost at an Average of three Years. L 12,000 COMMODITIES
exported from Connecticut, Rhode Island and New Hampshire.
Masts, Boards, Joists, Staves, etc. L 30,000 Salted Beef -- Pork -- Hams --
Butter -- Cheese -- Callivances -- and Flax Seed, 15,000 Whale and other
Fish-Oil, 1500 Tons at L 15 22,500 Pickled Mackarel, Shads, and other Fish
7,000 Horses and live Stock 25,000 Potash -- 6000 Barrels -- at 50s 15,000 L
114,500

The Difference between these Exports, and those of New England is evidently no
other than is always, and every where between different Parts of the same
Country, all the Articles in the above List being included in that of the
Exports of New England, as Part of an Whole.

As to the Balance against Great Britain, upon the Face of this State, it is
only in Appearance. Their Trade directly with us has been shown to consist
almost totally in the Conveniences nearest to being absolutely necessary to
Life. Is therefore it may appear that they do not take from us a Quantity of
these, proportioned to their Numbers, the Reason is, that they get them nearer
at hand from the other Colonies, particularly New York, and New England, who in
a great Measure carry on their Trade for them; so that the Produce of the
Excess of their Exports over their Imports is to be placed to the Credit of
those Colonies, and centers ultimately with us, as I have had the Honor to
intimate to your Lordship in the preceding Letter.

And now, my Lord, as the four Colonies of New England, Connecticut, Rhode
Island, and New Hampshire, are so inseparably connected with each other in
every Sense, I shall here lay before your Lordship some farther Hints
concerning them, which will probably be found to affect the general Interest of
them all; and consequently that of Great Britain, which is as inseparably
connected with them.

As the Importance of the Colonies arises solely from the Numbers of their
Inhabitants, not from any Production of their own, or Advantages of Situation
for Commerce peculiar to them; the first Thing to be thought of, is how to turn
those Inhabitants to such Pursuits, as shall best supply their Necessities, and
at the same Time engage their Attention too closely to give them Leisure for
forming those Schemes, which Contemplation of their Numbers might, in a State
of Idleness, suggest to them.

For this Purpose the two Objects evidently most proper (if not solely so) are
Agriculture and Manufactures; but these are to be proposed to their Pursuit, on
very different Principles.

Agriculture, as has been hinted before, is impossible to be pushed too far,
Consumers increasing regularly with the Increase of the Subject to be consumed;
and a Foreign Demand being always certain for any Excess of Home Consumption.
But in respect to Manufactures, a very different Conduct is to be observed.
Instead of giving a general and indiscriminate Encouragement to every Exertion
of Art, as in Great Britain, their Endeavors should be delicately and
judiciously directed to such particular Objects, as there may be just Reason to
expect their succeeding in; and these are the immediate Necessaries, or at
least the almost indispensible Conveniences of Life.

I must not, my Lord, be understood to insinuate, by this, a natural Incapacity
in the Inhabitants of these Colonies for any Arts. The Contrary is well known.
All I intend by this Limitation is, that their Capacities should be applied to
such Arts as the Materials and Circumstances of their Country are proper for
bringing to Perfection; and as are exerted in producing those Manufactures,
which the poorer Part of the People are not able to purchase, or cannot or at
least will not dispense with the want of, without Discontent.

I am well aware, that selfish, short-sighted Politicians will instantly take
the Alarm at this; and exclaim that what I propose for the Benefit of these
Colonies must necessarily be an equal Prejudice to the MotherCountry. But I
hope to prove, that the Contrary is the Fact; and that the most effectual Way
of making them serviceable to us, and that in the most extensive and important
Sense, is by encouraging them first to serve themselves, by pursuing these two
Objects.

The sound and salutary Policy of promoting Agriculture is too well, and too
universally known to require Proof. The first and greatest Advantages arising
from it, are it is supplying Employment and Sustenance at the same Time. In the
present Instance the Application proposed to Manufactures effects the first,
and comes nearest to the second of these Advantages, there being many
Manufactures, scarcely, if at all, less necessary to Life, than Bread itself.
Where these therefore cannot be fabricated immediately by the Consumers
themselves, their Eyes are necessarily turned to those Places, where they may
be purchased; and if they want Money, the common medium of such Purchase, that
Want is supplied by Barter of the Things in their Possession.

Thus far it may appear that the Progress is on right Principles; and so in the
general it is. But particular Circumstances make a material Difference in the
present Case.

It has been said that the Importance of these Colonies consists solely in the
Numbers of the Inhabitants; and that these Inhabitants enjoy a State of
Independence in a Manner peculiar to themselves. But it must be observed also
that the very Means by which that Independence is preserved to them, by keeping
them at the same Time in a State of Poverty prevents their consuming a Quantity
of the Manufactures of the Mother Country proportioned to their Numbers, and
even confines their present scanty Consumption to those Articles on which the
Profit to the Manufacturer is the lowest.

To free them therefore from this Poverty, without undermining their
Independence, is the readiest and most effectual Method of turning their
natural Importance to our Advantage; and this can be done easiest, if not
indeed only, by the Encouragement here proposed to be given to Agriculture and
Manufactures; the former, by supplying them with Sustenance, and a Stock to
trade upon, which will never fail of a Market; and the latter by enabling them
to make a sufficient Quantity of those other Necessaries, for which they now
barter that Stock, and thereby leaving it in their Hands, to barter for other
Conveniences of greater Price, which they cannot reach in their present
Circumstances, though they repine for, and never will be content without them.

Let the Inhabitants of these Colonies, I say, be properly encouraged to raise
Flax and Hemp, to tan the Hides of their Cattle, to Spin the Wool of their
Sheep, etc. etc. and work them up into the most immediate Necessaries; and they
will then be able to apply the Price of their Exports, which now goes to
purchase those Necessaries, to the Purchase of Other Articles, less necessary,
but of greater Price and Profit to the Vender; and not only this, but they will
also exert their Industry to provide still more for Exportation, as soon as
they become acquainted with the Enjoyments thus procured for them.

Nor is this the only Advantage that will arise from this Measure. It will
divert them from the carrying Trade, the only Track in which they can possibly
interfere with us, and leave it entirely in our Possession, by turning their
Thoughts wholely to internal Pursuits; an Advantage, so obvious, and great that
the very Mention is sufficient to enforce every Means for obtaining it.

It must not be objected, that the Increase of Population, which would
necessarily follow such an Application to Agriculture as is here proposed,
might be an Encouragement to attempt shaking off Dependence upon Great Britain.
That is only the Fear of a most contracted Policy. Our Possessions on that
Continent exceed any Uses to which the Power of Imagination can assign them.
While the Inhabitants therefore find Room for extending their Settlements
interiourly, and a certain Vent and satisfactory Return for the Produce of
them, they will never think of breaking the Connection, from which they
experience such Advantage; and by the Breach of which they cannot expect even
to keep, much less to improve that Advantage. And this is that Commercial
Dependence, which has been so much talked of, and so little understood of late:
A Connection which, cemented thus by mutual Advantage would become
indissoluble, and make their Numbers our Strength, as I have observed in
another Instance.

These, my Lord, are some of the Hints, I proposed submitting to your
Lordship's Attention, under which I flatter myself that they may be improved to
the End for which they are humbly offered. Others, not less important, are
reserved for another Place, as being more general in their Nature, and equally
applicable to others of our Colonies.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XIV.
MY LORD,
THE next Province, that in Course offers itself to your Lordship's
Consideration, is New York, in every Respect the happiest for Habitation in all
NorthAmerica; the Healthfulness of the Climate vying with the Fertility of the
Soil; which not only produces aboriginally every Necessary of Life, but also
brings all the vegetable Productions of Europe, that have been tried there, to
perfection, and many of them in a much higher Degree, with little or no
Trouble, than they arrive at in England, under the most careful and expensive
Cultivation.

Our Acquaintance with this Country is in every Sense so intimate, that it must
be unnecessary to enter in o any particular Account of it here: I shall
therefore only lay before your Lordship the following View of the Trade at
present carried on between it, and Great Britain, as the most proper
Introduction to the few Remarks which I shall beg Leave to hint to you
thereupon.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to New York.
Wrought-Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Lead, and Brass -- Cordage -- Hemp --
SailCloth -- Ship-Chandlery -- Painter's-Colours -- Millinery -- Hosiery --
Haberdashery -- Gloves -- Hats -- Broad-Cloths -- Stuffs -- Flannels --
Colchester-Bays -- Long Else -- Silks -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Manchester
Goods -- British, Foreign, and Irish Linens -- Earthen-Wares -- Grindstones --
Birmingham, and Sheffield Wares -- Toys -- Saddlery -- Cabinet-Wares -- Seeds
-- Cheese -- Strong-beer -- Smoaking-Pipes -- Snuffs -- Wines -- Spirits --
Drugs -- All which cost at an Average of three Years L 531,000 COMMODITIES
exported from New York to Great Britain, and other Markets.
Flour and Biscuit, 250,000 Barrels at 20s. L 250,000 Wheat, 70,000 Quarters at
20s 70,000 Beans, Peace, Oats, Indian Corn, and other Grain 40,000 Salt-Beef,
Pork, Hams, Bacon, and Venison 18,000 Beeswax 30,000 lb at IS 1,500 Tongues,
Butter, and Cheese 8,000 Deer, and other Skins 35,000 Flax-Seed, 7,000 H^ds at
40s 14,000 Horses, and Live Stock 17,000 Timber, Plank, Masts, Boards, Staves
and Shingles 25,000 Potash, 7,000 Hhds at 40s 14,000 Ships built for Sale, 20
at L 700 14,000 Copper Ore, and Iron, in Bars and Pigs 20,000 The whole at a
like Average of three Years L 526,000

The high Amount of our Exports plainly shows the Importance of this Trade to
the Mother Country; but this Importance will appear in a still stronger Light,
when it is considered that the greatest Part of the Exports of this Province
are carried to other Markets, and consequently the Returns for ours made in
Money, the most advantageous System of Trade, that can be carried on with any
Country.

The flourishing State of this Province has led many to conclude that it is
come to it is Meridian. But the contrary is the Fact. The same Encouragement to
Agriculture, and Manufactures of the coarser and more immediately necessary
Kinds, that has been proposed in the preceding Letter to be given to New
England, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire, would be found to be
equally beneficial to New York, and through that to Great Britain. The Reasons
which irrefragably support this Opinion are obvious in themselves, and have
been so fully shown in those Instances, that a Repetition of them cannot be
necessary here. I shall therefore only observe to your Lordship, as a Proof of
what this Province can produce, above its immediate Exports, that there are
above 2000 Tons of Hemp and Flax, of it is own Growth, worked up annually for
it is own Use.

Nor are the Improvements of which this Province is still capable, confined to
the particular Channels abovementioned, highly advantageous as they are: The
Success of repeated Experiments, has proved that it abounds in valuable Metals.
Iron, and Copper, have already been raised in such Quantities, as to become
capital Articles of Commerce; and there can scarce be a Doubt, but other
Metals, still more valuable, will also be found, when properly sought for; and
so open new Sources of Trade, equally advantageous to the Colony and the
Mother Country, with whom all its Wealth ultimately centers.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XV.
MY LORD,
THE adjoining Colony of Pennsylvania equals NewYork in all the Gifts of
Nature, and perhaps exceeds it in those of Fortune, as we speak; it is Form of
Civil Government being better calculated to promote private Happiness, and
consequently Public Prosperity, than any other, with which we are acquainted,
under the Sun.

That this is not an Exaggeration in either Instance will appear from the
following State of the Commerce of this Colony with Great Britain.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Philadelphia, the only Seaport in
Pennsylvania.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Lead, and Brass -- Birmingham, and
Sheffield Wares -- Hemp -- Cordage -- Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloths --
Colchester-Bays -- Long-Ells -- Stuffs -- Flannels -- Manchester-Goods --
Hosiery, Haberdashery, and Millinery Wares -- Hats -- Gloves -- British,
Foreign, and Irish Linens -- Silks -- Gold, and Silver Lace -- Toys --
Painter's Colors -- Ship-Chandlery, and Saddlery Goods -- CabinetWares --
Earthen-Wares -- Grindstones -- Fishing Tackle -- Seeds -- Pickles -- Cheese --
Strong-beer -- Smoking Pipes -- Snuffs -- Wines -- Spirits, and Drugs, all
which cost at an Average of three Years. L 611,000 COMMODITIES exported from
Philadelphia to Great Britain, and other Markets.
Biscuit and Flour, 350,000 Barrels at 20s L 350,000 Wheat, 100,000 Quarters at
20s 100,000 Beans -- Peace -- Oats -- Indian Corn, and other Grain 12,000
Salt-Bees -- Pork -- Baoon -- Hams -- Venison 45,000 Beeswax, 20,000 lb at IS
1,000 Butter -- Cheese, and Tongues 10,000 Deer, and Sundry other Sorts of
Skins 50,000 Live Stock, and Horses 20,000 Flax-Seed, 15,000 Hhds at 40s 30,000
Timber -- Plank -- Masts -- Boards -- Staves, and Shingles 35,000 Ships built
for Sale, 25 at L 700 17,500 Copper-Ore, and Iron in Pigs and Bars 35,000 The
Whole at an Average of three Years L 705,500

The Nature of these Exports from this Colony shows that almost the whole of
them is carried to other Markets, beside Great Britain, and consequently the
Returns, for ours, are made in the Money for which these are sold there; a
Circumstance, the Advantage resulting from which, as well as from the Amount of
our own Exports in this Trade, has been observed in the Letter preceding this.

As this Colony is in every Respect circumstanced in the same Manner as New
York, it is capable of equal Improvement by the same Means, a Repetition of
which cannot be necessary here.

The Province of New Jersey is situated immediately next to New York, and
Pennsylvania, and yields to neither in the Blessings of Nature, but in other
Circumstances is yet far behind them.

The Produce of this Country is in every Instance the same with that of the
others, as is it is Trade; both of which are capable of much greater
Improvements than the former, for this Reason, that they are not yet nearly so
much improved.

The Cause of this Backwardness though being no other than the Impossibility of
attending to too many Things at one Time, it is to be hoped that it will soon
cease; and New Jersey, from the Example of it is Neighboring Countries, perhaps
from the Spreading of their Inhabitants, as the Means of Improvement are the
same, rise to that Figure in itself, and Importance to Great Britain, for which
it is so well and abundantly qualified.

The Trade of this Province being at present carried on solely with and from
New York and Pennsylvania, though it wants not good and convenient Ports of
it is own, is inseperably included, both inwards and outward, with theirs, to
which it makes no inconsiderable Addition, especially in the valuable Article
of CopperOre, the greater Part of which, exported by them, is raised here.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XVI.
MY LORD,
FROM New Jersey we come to Virginia and Maryland, two Colonies in all Respects
circumstanced so exactly alike by Nature, and so inexplicably connected with
each other in Trade and Intercourse, that though politically divided into
distinct Governments, they are in themselves to be considered rather as Parts
of one, than as different Countries, any Attempt at drawing a Line between them
in the Seal of their Commerce, being much more difficult to execute, than the
Execution of it would be advantageous.

I shall therefore lay before your Lordship a State of their Trade, as it is
jointly carried on by them at present, without entering here into any other
Specification of their Produce, or Proof of their natural Aptitude for still
further Improvement.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Virginia and Maryland.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Lead, and Brass -- Hemp -- Cordage --
Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloths -- Stuffs -- Flannels -- ColchesterBays -- Long-Ells
-- British, Irish, and Foreign Linens -- Silks -- Gold and Silver-Lace -- Toys
-- Millinery, Haberdoshery, and Hosiery Goods -- Hats -- Gloves -- Birmingham
and Sheffield Wares -- Upholstery, Cabinet, Ship-Chandlery, and Saddlery Wares
-- Earthen Wares -- Grindstones -- Painter's Colors -- Pickles -- Seeds --
Fishing Tackle -- Cheese -- Strong Beer -- Smoking Pipes -- Snuffs -- Wines --
Spirits, and Medicinal Drugs, all which cost at an Average of three Years L
365,000 COMMODITIES exported from Virginia and Maryland to Great Britain, and
other Markets.
Tobacco, 96,000 Hhds at L 8 L 763,000 Indian Corn -- Beans -- Peace, etc.
3^,000 Wheat, 40,000 Quarters, at 20s 40,000 Deer, and other Skins 25,000 Iron,
in Bars and Pigs 35,000 Masts -- Planks -- Staves -- Turpentine, and Tar 55,000
Sassafras, Saake-root, Ginseng, etc. 7,000 Flax-Seed, 7,000 Hhds at 40s 14,000
Pickled Pork -- Beef -- Hams, and Bacon 15,000 Ships built for Sale, 30 at L
1,000 30,000 Besides this Quantity of Hemp exported raw to Great Britain, they
raise 4,000 Tons more, and 2,000 Tons of Flax, which they work up at home for
their own (...).
Hemp, 1,000 Tons, at L 21 21,000 The whole at a like Average of three Years L
1,040,000

The first Thing, that strikes the View, in the State of the Trade of these
Provinces, is the Balance that appears upon the Face of it, against Great
Britain. But this, as has been observed in other Instances, is only in
Appearance. All the Articles exported from Great Britain to Virginia and
Maryland are of our own Produce and Manufacture, except a very few; and these
also are of our own Importation, in the most lucrative Channels of our Trade;
so that our Profit upon them bears a near Proportion to, if it does not equal
their first Cost to us: Whereas, not an inconsiderable Part of the Exports of
Virginia, and Maryland, goes to the neighboring Colonies, in Exchange for
Articles of their Produce, with which we could not supply them, but at second
hand, and consequently so much dearer, that it would be equally absurd and
oppressive, to expect they should take them from us.

But this is far from being the Circumstance of most Advantage in the Trade of
these Provinces. The capital Article of their Produce is Tobacco, a Commodity,
which, exclusive of the private Profits of Trade to the Merchant, yields
immediately to the Public a Revenue greater than any other, in the whole
Circle of our Commerce.

To prove this, I must beg Leave to observe to your Lordship, that of the
96,000 Hhds of Tobacco imported annually into Great Britain from Virginia and
Maryland, only 13,500 Hhds are consumed at home, the Duty paid by which, at the
Rate of L 26 10 per Hhd, amounts to L 351,675; the remaining 82,500 Hhds being
exported by our Merchants to the other Parts of Europe, and their Value
returned to Great Britain.

It must be unnecessary to enter into a Detail or Proof of the Advantages
arising from such a Trade, which from the Overflowing of a Non-necessary, keeps
in our Hands a Balance against those Necessaries, which we are obliged to
purchase from other Countries, indispensibly, and therefore at a Loss. They
prove themselves on the bare Mention of them. I shall therefore only add, that
this single Trade gives constant Employment to 330 Sail of Ships, and 3,960
Sailors, to show that it is Advantages are not confined only to our Wealth, but
extend to the most essential Part of our National Strength also.

It is natural to think, that Advantages so obvious, and so great, have not
been neglected. The Truth is, the Cultivation of this Commodity has been
carried as far as it will bear, there not being Vent for any greater Quantity
than is now raised. But this does not preclude these Provinces from
Improvements in other instances. Attention to their Tobacco has made them in a
great measure neglect the Tillage of Corn, and be too remiss even in the
Articles of Hemp and Flax, for all which they are most happily situated. To
these they should be encouraged to apply themselves with Spirit, as also to the
Manufactures of most immediate Necessity to them, and least Profit to the
Importer from other Countries.

The Evils indeed arising from the Neglect of these indispensibly necessary
Articles, at length begin to be perceived by the People of these Colonies, who
have accordingly made some weak Efforts in Agriculture to raise the Corn
necessary for their own Subsistence, and free themselves from the Expense and
Danger of depending for their daily Bread upon other Countries, when put so
bountifully within their Reach by Heaven. But the Attempts of Individuals are
liable to too many Interruptions, and at best will advance too slowly to remedy
an Evil, that has taken so deep Root it they are not both encouraged and
assisted by public Munificence.

I presume not, my Lord, to direct the Manner in which this is to be done. The
bare Hint is all that can come with Propriety from me to your Lordship; nor is
it to be doubted, but those to whom his Majesty has delegated the Care, will
with the Example of our TillageAct before their Eyes, soon see the Expediency
of what is hare suggested, and apply the most effectual Measures for carrying
it happily into Execution.

The Benefits which must necessarily arise from this Policy have been shown in
the former Instances, in which it has been recommended. To what has been there
said, I shall not trespass upon your Lordship with any further Addition, than
that in the Case of these Provinces, it seems in some Measure more immediately
necessary, than in any other, the Want of a Variety of internal Employment
having weakened the Spirit of Industry, and of course introduced a Turn to
Dissipation and Expense in the Inhabitants of all Degrees, that must instantly
affect, and if not corrected, in Course of Time totally overturn the Prosperity
of any Country.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XVII.
My LORD,
Next to Virginia and Maryland, lie the two Provinces of North and
South Carolina. The almost total Neglect, under which the former of these
Provinces lay, till very lately; and the very little Advances made even yet, in
the Improvement of it, can be accounted for only from this Observation, that
the first Settlement of Countries is directed by Chance, much more than by
Choice; and that even where such Choice can be made, all Things cannot be
attended to at one Time. Well it is, that our Eyes are at length opened to
Advantages, which Blindness only could overlook; and that Leisure begins to be
found to improve a Country, whose Soil and Climate court Cultivation with
Assurances of the most grateful Returns.

Under such Disadvantages, it cannot be expected that the (I had almost said
Infant) Trade of this Province can have arisen to any considerable Height. The
following Account shows it in it is present State. What it may be improved to,
shall be considered after.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to North Carolina.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Lead, Pewter and Brass -- Birmingham and
Sheffield Wares -- Hemp -- Cordage -- Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloths -- Stuffs --
Flannels -- Colchester Bays and Long Else -- Sadlery -- Haberdashery --
Millinery and Hosiery Goods -- Hats -- Gloves -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Silks
-- British, Irish and Foreign Linens -- Upholstery and Cabinet-Wares --
EarthenWares -- Grindstones -- Fishing-Tackle -- GardenSeeds -- Toys -- Cheese
-- Pickles -- StrongBeer -- Smoaking-Pipes -- Snuffs -- Wines -- Spirits --
Medicinal Drugs -- All which cost at an Average of three Years L 18,000
COMMODITIES exported from North Carolina to Great Britain, and other Markets.
Rice, 2000 Barrels, at 40s L 4,000 Tobacco, 2000 Hhds at L 7 14,000 Pitch, Tar
and Turpentine, 51,000 Barrels, at 7s 17,850 Boards, Staves, Joists, Shingles,
Masts and Lumber 15,000 Indian Corn, Peace and other Grain 7,000 Live Stock of
different Kinds, 5,000 Skins of different Kinds 5,500 The who^^ (...) an
Average of three Years L 68,350

The Excess of the Exports of this Province over it is Imports from Great
Britain, is to be accounted for in the same Manner, as the like Excess has been
in other Instances. Much the greater Part goes to the neighboring Colonies, in
Exchange for Commodities of their Produce, so that the Balance upon the whole
is in Favor of Great Britain.

But no Judgment can justly be formed of the Value of this Province from the
present Amount of it is Trade, as has been observed before. Every Article of
it is Produce might be pushed to many Times the Quantity it is now at; and many
new Articles introduced with a Certainty of Success, were the Advantages of
Nature properly pursued. Pitch, etc. and Rice, are the only Commodities which
North Carolina now sends to Europe. The two former must necessarily increase,
with the Increase of Inhabitants, from the Clearing of the Country, as the
Settlements are extended; and the Certainty of a good Market will encourage the
Cultivation of the latter, as an Article of Commerce, as well as for
Home-consumption.

The most obvious of the new Articles, which may be introduced into the Trade
of this Province, are Corn and Wine. No Argument can be wanted to enforce the
Cultivation of these first Necessaries, if not Indispensibles of Life, wherever
Nature will allow it. Bread (made of Corn) is " the Staff of Life:" and " Wine
makes glad the Heart of Man." -- All therefore that can be necessary for the
present Purpose is to prove, that this Country is not improper for their
Production.

And in this, my Lord, I have the Advantage of having Reason supported by
Experience. The Appearance of the Soil and Temperature of the Climate soon
tempted the European Settlers to try the Growth of Corn in various Parts of
this Country, in every one of which the Success has invariably answered their
most sanguine Expectations. But they have gone but little, or no further.
Satisfied with the Experiment, or unable to pursue it, at least with any View
to Commerce, they go on in the beaten Path, turning their Backs to an Advantage
so obvious and so great. That such Advantage must really arise from the Culture
of Corn for Exportation, will sufficiently appear from this single
Consideration, that this is the last of the British Provinces, to the
Southward, that will produce Corn, and consequently that it can supply the more
Southern Colonies at a cheaper Rate, than those at a greater Distance.

Though the Experiments hitherto made for the Culture of the Vine, have not,
for obvious Reasons, been so many, nor so extensive as the former, the Success
has been abundantly sufficient to encourage the Pursuit of them; and scarce
leaves a Doubt but this Country is capable of producing the Wines of
Switzerland, Germany and France, in Quantities sufficient to supply all our
Colonies, and of such Quality, as perhaps in Time to tempt the Mother Country
to give it a Share of that Trade with her, in those Articles, which is now
wholly in the Hands of Strangers.

The Advantages, which must result from this, are in a Manner self-evident.
Wine is in such universal Use, that the Countries which cannot produce, must
purchase it; as the Want of it will not be dispensed with by any.

That the Climate and Soil of Great Britain will not bring the Grape to such
Perfection, as to make it is Juice in Request, either for Health or Pleasure,
has been long known! That the Climate and Soil of several of our Southern
Provinces in America, beginning at this of North Carolina, will, has been
sufficiently proved by Experience! Why we should not then encourage our own
Subjects to produce a Sufficiency of it, not only for their own Use, but also
to supply us, and so give the Profits of the Trade to them, from whom it will
return ultimately to ourselves, rather than to other Nations, cannot be
reconciled with any Principles of common Prudence, much less of sound Policy.

I have mentioned only these two Articles, my Lord, not as all which may be
added to the commercial Stock of this Province, but as the most obvious, and
easiest to succeed in; and because I would not distract the Attention, by
proposing too many Objects at once. In the Pursuit of these, many others will
naturally open themselves, in Circumstances which will best point out the
proper Methods of pursuing them also; and these I have only just touched upon
here, as I shall have Occasion to pursue the Subject in other Instances.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XVIII.
MY LORD,
IN the Complaint of Neglect made by North Carolina, the next Province of South
Carolina has no Right to join in any Sense. Of all the British Colonies in
America, this has been cultivated with most Attention, Spirit and Expense; and
the Success has been answerable. The Country is well peopled, and wears a Face
of Improvement and Civilization, scarce inferior to any Part of Europe. It Is
aboriginal Products are cultivated with proper Care, and the Products of other
Countries introduced, and carried nearer to the Perfection of their Nature,
than Exoticks in any other Country we know.

The Advantages derived from this flourishing Colony (by the Mother Country)
will appear from the following State of it is Trade.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to South Carolina.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Brass and Lead -- Birmingham and
Sheffield Wares -- Hemp -- Cordage -- Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloths -- Stuffs --
Flannels -- Colchester-Bays -- Long-Ells -- Sadlery -- Haberdashery --
Millenery -- and Hosiery Goods -- Hats -- Gloves -- Gold and Silver Lace --
Silks -- British, Irish and Foreign Linens -- Upholstery and Cabinet-Wares --
Earthen Wares -- Grindstones -- Toys -- Garden-Seeds -- Cheese -- Pickles --
Strong Beer -- Smoaking-Pipes -- Snuffs -- Wines -- Medicinal Drugs -- All
which cost at an Average of three Years. L 365,000 COMMODITIES exported from
South Carolina to Great Britain, and other Markets.
Rice, 110,000 Barrels, at 40s L 220,000 0 0 Pitch, Tar and Turpentine, 8,000
Bar. at 6^ 8d 2,666 13 4 Pickled Pork and Beef 25,000 0 0 Deer and other Skins
45,000 0 0 Indigo, 500,000 lb. at 2s 50,000 0 0 Boards, Masts, Staves, Joists,
etc. 20,000 0 0 Indian Corn, Peace, Beans and Callivances 12,000 0 0 Live Stock
and Sundries 15,000 0 0 Ships built for Sale, 10 at L 600 6,000 0 0 The whole
at an Average of three Years L 395,666 13 4

The high Amount, and Nature of the Exports from Great Britain to this Colony
(all consisting of it is own Produce and immediate Manufactures) show the
Importance of it: The Excess of the Exports of South Carolina over these
Imports, is to be accounted for in the same Manner, as the like Excess has been
in other Instances. What Improvements this Country, and of course it is Trade,
is still capable of, comes now to be considered.

The favorable Representation which I have made of this Province to your
Lordship, must not be applied indiscriminately to the Whole, nor taken to
preclude all Necessity of farther Improvements of it.

The first Settlements being naturally made as near as possible to the Sea; the
Improvements of the Country of course begun there: But though they have been
extended from thence a great Way inwards, there still remains a much greater
Extent unimproved, at least comparatively to what it is capable of.

In Praise of the Spirit and Industry of the Inhabitants, and for the
Encouragement of their Successors to follow so laudable an Example, it is
proper to be observed, that by much the greater Part where the Improvements
abovementioned have been so successfully made, was not only the most difficult
to work upon, but also the least qualified by Nature to make a suitable Return,
the Country adjoining to the Sea, and from thence near eighty Miles inwards,
being mostly a dead Flat, and of a light, shallow, sandy Soil; though a late
Discovery has shown, that this very Soil is in a peculiar Manner adapted to
produce one of the most valuable Articles of Commerce.

But from the Commencement of the Hilly Country to the Extremity of the
Province, Heaven has bestowed it is Blessings with a most bounteous Hand. The
Air is infinitely more temperate and healthful, than nearer to the Sea. The
Hills are covered with valuable Woods! the Valleys watered with beautiful
Rivers! and the Fertility of the Soil is equal to every vegetable Production.
All that remains therefore is to turn these Blessings to our best Advantage.

From the foregoing State of the Exports of this Country, it appears that the
capital Article of it is Production is Rice. Great as the Quantity already
raised of this is, a still greater might be raised, to answer any new Demand.
The Quantities of Skins and Pitch, etc. would necessarily increase with the
Settlement of the back Country. The Importance of Indigo, the Produce of the
sandy Soil hinted at above, is already too well known, to require any
Illustration or Argument to urge Attention to it.

The only new Article, both of Commerce and Homeconsumption, obviously and
immediately necessary to be introduced into the Stock of this Country, is Wine.
The Expediency of making this, wherever Nature will allow it, has been
sufficiently shown in the preceding Instance of North Carolina. To what has
been there advanced, it is sufficient to add, in the present Case, that
SouthCarolina has been proved by repeated Experiments, to be capable of
producing the same Wines of Switzerland, Germany, France and Portugal, as her
more Northern Sister, and that too with an equal, at least, if not a greater
Degree of Perfection.

I am aware, that there is another Article, of which some Experiments have been
made, and speculative Men talked much, as capable of being cultivated with
Advantage in this Colony. This is Silk. The Importance of such an Addition to
the Trade of any Country requires no Proof. The only Question is, whether that
Importance, great as it is, may not be purchased at too high a Price. The
Thinness of Population, in all our Colonies, makes every Article, that requires
many Hands, come so dear, that it is found better to import than make them. Add
to this, that our next Colony of Georgia is in every Respect much better
adapted to the Production of this valuable Article, than South Carolina. Let us
then confine the Cultivation of it to the latter, and not, by seeking more than
we can compass, run the Hazard of neglecting what is in our Power, and so
losing, the Substance to grasp at the Shadow.

The same may be said with respect to Cotton, which, though possible to be
produced here, is yet the natural Produce of the more Southern Colonies, from
whence it may, of course, be had with more Advantage.

I have not, my Lord, said any Thing of the Probability of discovering valuable
Mines in either of the Colonies of North or South Carolina, for several
Reasons. Where the certain Advantages are sufficiently great, it is
unnecessary, if not dangerous, to propose such as are doubtful to the Pursuit.
Beside, that I really think the Riches earned by gradual Industry are in their
Consequences infinitely more valuable, than those which come upon us, as it
were, in an accidental Shower.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XIX.
MY LORD,
OUR next Province, to the Southward of the Carolinas, is Georgia. Though the
Necessity of establishing a Barrier between our's and the Spanish Colonies, the
first Motive for forming a Settlement in this Country, has been removed by the
Cession of the Floridas to Great Britain, the Attempt has opened other
Advantages of Weight abundantly sufficient to determine us not to relinquish
the Undertaking, the Soil and Climate being found to be particularly proper for
the Production of some most valuable Commodities, which our other Colonies
cannot produce in equal Perfection, nor at all without much more Labor and
Expense.

But before I enter into an Investigation of what this Country is capable of
producing, I shall first lay before your Lordship a State of it is present
Trade, according to the Plan I have pursued, through the Course of this
Undertaking.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Georgia.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Lead and Brass -- Birmingham and
Sheffield Wares -- Hemp -- Cordage -- Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloaths -- Stuffs --
Flannels -- Colchester-Bays -- Long-Ells -- Sadlery -- Haberdashery --
Millinery -- and Hosiery Goods -- Hats -- Gloves -- Gold and Silver Lace --
Silks, British, Irish and Foreign Linens -- Earthen Ware -- Grindstones --
Fishing Tackle -- Painters Colors -- Ship-Chandlery Goods -- Manchester Goods
-- Upholstery and Cabinet Wares -- Stationery Wares -- Books -- Toys -- Garden
Seeds -- Smoking Pipes -- Snuffs -- Strong Beer -- Wines -- Medicinal Drugs,
all which cost at an Average of three Years L 49,000 COMMODITIES exported from
Georgia to Great Britain, and other Markets.
Rice, 18,000 Barrels, at 40s L 36,000 Indigo, 17,000 1b. at 2s 1,700 Silk,
2,500 1b. at 20s 2,500 Dear and other Skins 17,000 Boards, Staves, etc. 11,000
Tortoise-Shell, Drugs, Cattle and Live Stock, etc. 6,000 The whole at a like
Average of three Years L 74,200

Inconsiderable as the Amount of this may at first View appear, yet when the
very late Establishment of the Colony, and the very many Difficulties it has
had to struggle with, are taken into the Consideration, it will appear more
worthy of Remark, that it should have risen so high. The Reason of the Excess
of it is Exports over it is Imports has been already explained in similar
Instances.

The capital Articles in the present Trade of Georgia are Rice Indigo and
Skins; every one of which may, and most probably will, for the Reasons given in
the preceding Instances of the Carolinas, be pushed to many Times the above
Amount, as the Settlement of the Country shall be extended.

But the Importance of this Province is not rested on these Articles alone,
important as they evidently are. In Addition to them, others of equal, perhaps
greater Weight in the Scale of Commerce, may be introduced. These are Wine and
Silk.

The Expediency, I may almost say Necessity, of cultivating the Vine, wherever
it can be brought to Perfection, has been already shown. To what has been there
laid down, it is sufficient to add in the present Instance, that this Province
of Georgia has been proved by Experience to be in every Respect proper for
producing the Wines of Portugal, Spain, Italy, Madeira and the Canaries, of
Quality at least not inferior to what we purchase from these Countries, and in
Quantities equal to our Demand for them.

The National Advantages which must necessarily result from bringing home such
a Trade to ourselves, from the Hands of foreign Nations, are self-evident. I
shall therefore say no more on the Occasion, than that if the Conduct of the
First of the Countries abovementioned, from whence we are now chiefly supplied
with Wine for our Home-consumption, for some Years past, is adverted to,
indignant and just Resentment will enforce the Pursuit of such a Measure.

The Arguments adduced in the Case of Wine, may, in a great Degree, be applied
to Silk. Use has brought it to be reckoned almost a Necessary of Life. At least
the Want of it will not be dispensed with by those who can possibly purchase
it, at any Price. The Production of this Article therefore, if only in Quantity
sufficient for our own Use, must be an important Saving; if sufficient to be
introduced into foreign Trade, a most important Addition to the public Stock.

The Climate of Georgia has been found to agree in every Respect with the
Silkworm; the Vegetables, which are it is natural Food, are indigenous to it;
and the Silk that has been produced there, has proved equal in Quality to the
best, that can be purchased any where. The only Obstacle then that appears to
oppose the Pursuit of so advantageous an Object, is the Want of a sufficient
Number of Hands to prepare it in such a Quantity as may deserve public
Attention. But even this Obstacle lessens, when taken into nearer Consideration.

The only Hands required to fit the Work of the Silkworm for Trade, are those
of Women and Children, before they arrive at Age and Strength for more
laborious Occupations. That the Application of these to this Branch will not
interfere with any other that can be of public Concern, is obvious; as it is
also a known Fact, that the Number of People increases in Proportion to the
Increase of the Support which they can earn by their Industry. While the Men
therefore turn their Attention and Time to such Business as they only can
execute, that Part of their Families, which would otherwise be a Burden to
their Industry, and keep them in continual Want and Depressure of Spirits,
will, by the Means here proposed, reverse the whole Scene, filling their
Habitations with Plenty, and their Hearts with Gladness, the true and
never-failing Sources of Population. That this is not visionary Speculation,
and that this Trade is capable of producing the Effects here ascribed to it,
appears in all the Countries where it is pursued, which, though laboring under
many Difficulties and Discouragements unknown in the Dominions of Great
Britain, are still full of an healthy and cheerful People.

I have thus, my Lord, endeavored to point out the Advantages, which may be
reaped from this, till very lately neglected Country. That in the Pursuit of
these many others may open themselves, is more than probable. But I have
religiously adhered to the Principle laid down at my Entrance upon this
Undertaking, to advance nothing upon mere Conjecture, or which I cannot vouch
upon my own Experience.

There are other Particulars, beside what immediately relates to the Produce
and Trade of this Colony, which in their Consequences must affect them, and
therefore well deserve Attention. But I shall reserve these for another Letter,
as they are applicable also to the Country which comes next under
Consideration; and this is already swelled to too great a Length.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XX.
MY LORD,
WE are at length arrived at Florida, the Boundary of the British Empire, and
consequently the End of our Travels on the Continent of America. A new
Acquisition of Territory is always the Subject of much Speculation and
Controversy. This of Florida has been so much and so contrarily described,
since it came into our Possession, that a Word on either Side of the Question
in sure of meeting Contradiction. In such Cases, the middle Way is generally
held to be the safest; in this it is certainly the right; the Advantages and
Disadvantages, the Praise and Dispraise of this Country being equally
exaggerated in every Particular, and that from the same Motive of
Self-Interest. This will appear when it is considered who the Persons are, who
have given such Descriptions.

The People, who have obtained Grants of Lands in Florida, and want to settle
or sell them, represent the whole Country as a Canaan, "flowing with Milk and
Honey," in order to tempt Purchasers, or allure Adventurers to go thither with
them. The Army, who have been sent there to take and keep the Possession,
exclaim against it as an Aceldama, "a Field of Blood," designed to be the
Burying Place of all Strangers, who are so unhappy as to go there.

Contradictory as these Representations are, it is not so difficult, as it may
appear, to reconcile them. The SeaCoasts, where the Fortresses, judged
necessary for protecting the Navigation and maintaining the Possession, have
been erected, are barren and unhealthy in an extreme Degree. The inland
Country, from the Commencement of the Hills, is healthful, and not only fertile
in all it is aboriginal Productions; but also sit to produce many exotic to it,
in the highest Perfection. All necessary therefore to decide between the
different Characters, drawn with equal Warmth and Confidence of Assertion, of
Florida, is to distinguish between those two Parts of it, and give to each it is
own. The Consequence in respect to the former is obvious. Of the latter, it is
not mine to judge. All that comes within my Province, being to point out the
Advantages, in a commercial View, which this Country is capable of producing to
Great Britain.

Florida is divided, like Carolina, into two Provinces of the same Name, and
distinguished only be their Situation on the Eastern or Western Sides of the
Country.

Most of the Disadvantages, indiseriminately imputed to the whole Country,
should be confined to East Florida, which is for the greater Part a flat,
sandy, and almost barren Desert. The most considerable Fortress and Port for
Trade in this Province is St. Augustine.

It is not to be expected, that a Settlement so new, and under such
Circumstances, can have yet made any very considerable Advances in Trade. Our
Exports to St. Augustine consist of the same Commodities, as those to the
neighboring Provinces of Georgia and Carolina, and amount to about L 7,000
annually. Imports from thence, we have yet received none worth bringing to
Account.

It must not be concluded from hence though, that the Country is incapable of
producing any Commodities proper for Exportation, or that it may not be brought
to take off much greater Quantities of ours, than it does at present. The
Contrary is the Fact, in both Instances. With proper Cultivation it will
produce Rice, Indigo, Silk, Wines and Cochineal, so as to be brought into
Commerce on advantageous Terms. The Importance of these Articles requires no
Proof. The last in particular will be one of the most advantageous Additions
that can be made to our commercial Stock, as it enters deeply into the
Manufacturing of some of our most valuable Commodities, for which Purpose we
are now obliged to purchase it from others, at what Price they please to
impose; whereas, if we produce it ourselves, we shall not only save the greater
Part of that Price, and there by be enabled to carry those Manufactures to
Market on cheaper Terms, than we can at present; but also to turn the Sc^^es,
and set our own Price upon it to other Countries.

The Importance of this Colony though arises not from the immediate Produce of
this or any other Article, however important in itself; but from the Advantage
of it is Situation, indeed of the whole Country of Florida, for carrying on a
Trade with the Spanish Colonies; it being certain, that a regular Intercourse
might be established with them, which would open a Vent for the Commodities of
Great Britain, and yield Returns for them in Gold and Silver, the most
profitable of all Kinds of Commerce, to an Amount superior to any Trade we have.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XXI.
MY LORD,
AS the Disadvantages under which East Florida has been shown to labor, extend
not to it is Sister Province of West-Florida, the latter consequently adds the
Importance of internal Produce, and Aptitude for Population, to that of
peculiar Situation for Trade with the Spanish Colonies, in which, as has been
observed before, it shares equally with it; there not being perhaps on the
whole Continent of America any Place better qualified by Nature to afford not
only all the Necessaries of Life, but also all the Pleasures of Habitation,
than that Part of this Country, which lies upon the Banks of the Missisippi.

Of this Difference between these two Provinces, the different Amount of their
respective Trades, occasioned by the Difference between their Population, is
the best Proof.

COMMODITIES exported from Great Britain to Pensacola, the Capital of West
Florida.
Wrought Iron, Steel, Copper, Pewter, Brass and Lead -- Birmingham and
Sheffield Wares -- Hemp -- Cordage -- Sail-Cloth -- Broad-Cloaths -- Stuffs --
Flannels -- Colchester-Bays -- LongElls -- Manchester Goods -- Hosiery --
Haberdashery -- and Millinery Goods -- Gloves -- Hats -- British, Irish and
Foreign Linens -- Gold and Silver Lace -- Silks -- India Goods -- Cabinet --
Upholstery -- and Ship-Chandlery Wares -- Painters Colors -- Pictures -- Books
-- Stationery Wares -- Earthen -- Wares -- Grindstones -- Toys -- Smoking
Pipes -- Cheese -- Strong Beer -- Wines -- Pickles -- Snuffs -- all which cost
at an Average of three Years L 97,000 The COMMODITIES exported from Pensacola
to Great Britain, are
Skins -- Logwood -- and other dying Woods -- and Silver in Dollars --
amounting annually to L 63,000

The Infancy of the Colony will sufficiently account for the Fewness of the
Articles in the above List of Exports; as it will also for the Balance against
them in Value; the Surplus being indispensibly necessary to effect the
Settlement, and keep a Stock in Hand for the Spanish Trade, till a sufficient
Fund shall be established for that Purpose.

Beside the Articles here enumerated, West Florida yields all the West-Indian
Produce naturally; and is also capable of producing many of the most valuable
Articles of other Countries, particularly Medicinal Drugs of several Kinds,
Wines, Indigo and Cochineal, all of which are of such known Importance in
Commerce, that no Argument can be necessary to enforce the Cultivation of them.

A Country so rich in commercial Produce, and so happily situated for the
richest Species of foreign Commerce, cannot want People. It Is Advantages only
want to be known to draw Men of Enterprise and Genius from every other Country
to the Harvest, especially under the Protection of such a Government as that of
Great Britain, which ensures the free Enjoyment of their Acquisitions to them,
and so makes every Son of Freedom it is own.

In what I had the Honor to suggest to your Lordship concerning the Province
of Georgia, I mentioned reserving some farther Hints to another Place. This, my
Lord, is the Place I meant.

It has been observed, that the original Motive of Great Britain for settling
Georgia, was to establish a Barrier between our other Colonies, particularly
the Carolinas, and the Spaniards and their Indians, in Florida.

The Acquisition of Florida, instead of taking away, has in reality heightened
the Necessity of such a Barrier, by changing the Place of it; as it is evident,
that the Spaniards will be doubly jealous of a Colony, advanced so much nearer
to their's, and situated so conveniently for a Trade with them, that
counteracts a fundamental Principle of their Government, that of keeping the
Supply of their American Dominions with European, Commodities entirely in their
own Hands.

That a military Force, and Fortresses, or Places of Arms, are indispensibly
necessary for the Purpose of protecting a Country that lies open to the Inroads
of Enemies, is evident; but though they may be the first, they are by no Means
the only Necessaries in the present Instance; where the Indians, the Enemies
principally to be guarded against, act entirely by Surprise, invading in small
Parties, like Robbers, murdering the People, and destroying all the Effects
which they cannot carry off.

The Inefficacy of Forts, and the Inability of European Soldiers to protect a
Country from such Ravagers, have been shown in former Page 43.
Instances; and the Page 23 and 24.
Remedy proper to be applied in the present Instance, pointed out. Against the
Indians, while Enemies, there is no Safety. They must be made Friends, to make
their Neighbors safe. Nor is this difficult. In their natural Dispositions
they are brave, honest, generous and friendly, and as grateful for Benefits, as
revengeful of Injuries. Honest, generous and friendly Treatment will therefore
evidently win them to our Interest; and this the more readily, as they know the
Difference between it, and that of the Spaniards, whose Oppressions and
Cruelties they have a most lively and indelible Sense of; and will eagerly and
cordially connect themselves with those, who shall not only use them better,
but also give them a Prospect of Protection and Assistance, whenever Occasion
may offer for their gratifying their darling Passion of Revenge.

I mean not by this, my Lord, to stimulate these uninformed People to Acts of
Violence against others, which we complain of ourselves. I only show how we may
avert this Violence from our own Heads, so effectually as even to turn it
against those of our Enemies, if we should be authorized by Necessity so to do.

Nor is this the only Advantage, to be proposed with moral Certainty of
Success, from such a Conduct toward the native Indians. They would soon learn
our Manners, and, incorporating themselves with us, become a Part of our own
People; I will confidently say, a most useful Part, as they would take that
Labor upon them, which, from the Difference of Climates, we are unequal to,
and so free us from the Necessity and Danger of importing the untractable
Negroes of Africa, whose Numbers hourly threaten the Safety of our Colonies, as
their Expense is an heavy Burden upon their Trade.

I shall not enter here into the Advantages and Duty of informing these Indians
in the Christian Religion; as it will properly come into another Place, where
the Application will be more general.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XXII.
MY LORD,
HAVING thus ran down the whole Length of the British Empire, on the Continent
of America, I shall beg your Lordship's Leave to stop here for a Moment, and
cast a Look back over the immense Regions we have traversed.

At our setting out on this Journey, I said it was the mutual Interest of
Britain and her Colonies, to preserve Harmony and good Agreement with each
other. To prove the first Part of this Position, the Interest of Britain, I
have distinctly and faithfully shown the great Advantages, which at present
are, and the greater which yet may be received by her from these her thriving
Children. The Advantages reciprocally received by the Colonies, require no
Proof. They appear self-evident, from the Nature of the Connection and
Intercourse between them. Their Wants are supplied! Their Weakness is
supported! They sleep in Peace, and the awake in Freedom, under the Protection
of a powerful and indulgent Parent!

It will probably be remarked, that in the Course of these Observations I have
universally recommended Agriculture and Extention of Settlement. The latter
establishes itself; it being evident, that the Wealth, Strength and Importance
of every Country are in Proportion to it is Population. As to Agriculture,
however strange it may appear to those, who search no deeper than the Surface,
to propose the same Thing, in so many Countries, differing, so widely from each
other in every Circumstance, it will be found, upon closer Inquiry, that this
is essentially and equally proper and necessary for them all.

The greatest Disadvantage possible for any Country to labor under, is not to
have the indispensible Necessaries of Life within itself; not only because of
the constant Danger of Delay or Miscarriage of Supplies from other Countries,
but also because those Countries always have it in their Power to distress the
Purchasers, by imposing what Price they please upon that, the Want of which
they know cannot be dispensed with. The first Thing therefore to be taken Care
of in establishing foreign Colonies, is to enable them to raise their own
immediate Subsistence at Home, without being obliged to depend upon other
Countries for it. Subsistence may be said to be a Term so comprehensive as to
include every Thing, that may be eaten; but in the present Case I use it in a
more limited Sense, and intend only that first Necessary of Life, Bread,
whether made of our Corn, or of Rice, the Corn of the Southern Hemisphere; any,
if not indeed all, other Kind of Food, animal or vegetable, being unnecessary,
in Comparison with this.

This sufficiently proves the general and indispensible Necessity of
Agriculture; a Necessity for which Heaven has made as general Provision, there
not being any known Country on the Globe, which will not, with proper
Cultivation, yield this Support, this Staff of Life. And this Necessity was so
obvious, that Tillage was the first Fxertion of human Industry, and that to
which the highest Honor was annexed, in the uncorrupted Simplicity of ancient
and true Wisdom. Nor was the Pre-eminence given only by Man. The Pursuit of it
has even been encouraged by Heaven above all others, with the Rewards of
Health, Strength and Increase, the first Blessings of Life.

I would not be understood by this to recommend Agriculture equally in all
Countries. Many Circumstances may vary the Degree, in which it should be
pursued. Climate, Soil, Inconvenience for Exportation may clog it with so many
Disadvantages, that to attempt more than acquiring a Sufficiency for immediate
Subsistence would be most imprudent. Let that be amply provided every where!
But let those only who can carry their Harvest to an advantageous Market, and
on Terms of Advantage, go further. Plenty of Corn at Home makes every Thing
necessary for the Support of Life plenty, and consequently cheap; but as an
Article of Commerce, too much will glut the Market, and make it of no Price; A
Caution applicable also to the Fisheries on the several Coasts of Hudson's Bay,
Labrador and Newsoundland, etc. of the Produce of which, taken in proper
Proportion, there may be found advantageous and sufficient Vent to establish
their Prosperity; but if pursued too far in any one Place, it would ruin not
only that, but also all the rest.

The same Restriction, my Lord, I must beg Leave to make in other Instances. In
the Accounts I have given of the several Provinces, which we have reviewed, I
have carefully and faithfully enumerated every Article, which I know, or have
just Reason to think them capable of producing. But I do not by this recommend
the Culture of every Article indiscriminately, every where. Those only, which
can be produced to best Advantage, would I have pursued, at least with any View
to Commerce.

An Instance or two will perhaps explain this more fully.

It has been shown, that South Carolina will produce Silk, and Georgia
Cochineal. This they most certainly can do, and that to Advantage, if we had no
other Places, which would produce them to greater; but as it is known, that
Georgia will produce Silk better than South Carolina, and Florida Cochineal
better than Georgia, what an Absurdity would it be to fly in the Face of
Nature, and pursue the Cultivation of either, where she has denied the
Advantage. It is right to know the Extent of every Country's Produce! It is
right to pursue only the most advantageous.

There is another Particular, my Lord, which I have just glanced at in one or
two Instances, but which I am convinced is the Means most essentially necessary
to be taken to push the Advantages of those Colonies, to their natural Extent.
This is cultivating, civilizing, christianizing, if I may so say, the Natives.

The Advantages of this in a political, and the Duty in a religious Light, are
equally obvious. Nor can it be attended with any Difficulty, that should
discourage the Attempt. Except in the single Instance of Nova Scotia, the
Disposition of the native and neighboring Indians of every Country we possess,
invites it. Their own Vices and Virtues are those of uninformed Nature. Like a
too luxuriant Soil, they want only proper Cultivation, to make the Produce
uniformly good, that is, as far as the weak, unstable Nature of Man can be so.
This much is certain, that they have learned their greatest Vices from us; and
therefore we surely have no Right to upbraid them with them. For Good they
naturally return Good, as they naturally return Evil for Evil; because they
have not been taught otherwise, either by Precept or Example. Ought we then to
complain, if the Measure, with which they mete to us our own, overflows? Was
their Respect, their Esteem, their Affection won by good Offices, by upright
and generous Dealing, they would return them an hundredfold. They would lie
down at our Feet; they would work for us by Day, and guard us by Night.

The Duty in a religious is still greater than the Advantage in a political
Light, as, beside the greater Excellence of the Object, it also includes that
Advantage. To explain this Duty to a People professing Christianity, would be
an Insult either upon their Principles, or their Understanding. If they know it
not, they have the Scriptures! If they will not believe them, "neither will
they believe the Voice of one risen from the Dead;" much less that of a Man
coming without Power or Authority to speak to them. I shall therefore only say,
that to expect Advantage from any Undertaking, without first striving to
conciliate the Favor of Heaven by such most obvious, most indispensible Means,
is to contradict the Light of Reason as well as of Religion, and slight the
Experience of all Ages.

I must not presume to say more. The Duty is sufficiently known. The Right, the
Power of enforcing it, with any Prospect of Success, is not in me.

I have the Honor, etc.

LETTER XXIII.
MY LORD,
THOUGH I hope I have clearly proved, by the unerring Evidence of Facts, the
mutual Advantages, which Great Britain and her Colonies reap from each other;
yet as Matter diffused over a large Space may not operate so strongly upon the
Mind, as when collected together, I shall beg Leave to draw the Whole into one
Point of View, and then leave Reason to from it is own Conclusion.

The first Ends proposed in planting Colonies, are to increase the Strength of
the Mother Country, by providing Room for an Increase of People, and to
increase it is Wealth, by establishing with them an Intercourse of Commerce,
mutually advantageous; Colonization in any other View than one of them, or
tending to them, being absurd, and subversive of itself.

That our Colonies on the Continent of America will abundantly answer the first
of these Purposes, has been proved by Experience, wherever the Experiment has
been made, and is clear to Reason in those others, where either Want of Time,
or other less justifiable Causes, have hitherto prevented the Trial in any
Extent, as at Hudson's Bay, Labrador, Nova Scotia, etc. etc.

The only Objection possible to be made to pushing this Advantage to it is full
Height, is the Danger of depopulating the Mother Country, on a Supposition of
it is not having People to spare for such Transplantations; but this
Supposition, and of course the Apprehension arising from it, are groundless.
The Overflowings of this Metropolis (London) who, for want of being properly
employed, are a dead Weight upon the Industry of those who are, and upon the
Trade of the Nation, their unearned Consumption being the real Cause of the
Scarcity and Dearness of the Necessaries of Life, which makes all our
Manufactures come so dear to Market, would afford a greater Stock to breed,
than would be requisite to plant every Colony I have proposed; and consequently
sending them out for that Purpose, instead of distressing the Mother Country,
would double the Advantage immediately to her, by delivering her from that dead
Weight, as has been already shown at large Pages 25 and 26.
. The quick Increase of Population, where there is proper Encouragement, and
Room for Industry to procure Plenty, is sufficiently known.

That the second of these Ends, the Establishment of an advantageous Commerce,
has been already answered by every Colony we have planted, will be proved to
Conviction by the State of the respective Trade of each. How much farther that
Advantage may still be carried, has been repeatedly and clearly shown in the
preceding Remarks.

Total Amount of British Ships and Seamen employed in the Trade between Great
Britain and her Colonies on the Continent of America -- of the Value of Goods
exported from Great Britain to these Colonies, -- and of their Produce exported
to Great Britain, and elsewhere --

Colonies Ships Seamen Exports from Great Britain. Exports from the Colonies
Hudson's Bay 4 130 L 16,000 L 29,340 Labrador American Vessels 120 49,050
Newfoundland (2000 Boats) 380 20,560 273,400 345,000 Canada 34 408 105,000
105,500 Nova Scotia 6 72 26,500 38,000 New England 46 552 395,000 370,500
Rhode Island, Connecticut and New Hampshire 3 36 12,000 114,500 New York 30 330
531,000 526,000 Pennsylvania 35 390 611,000 705,500 Virginia and Maryland 330
3,960 865,000 1,040,000 North Carolina 34 408 18,000 68,350 South Carolina 140
1,680 365,000 395,666 Georgia 24 240 49,000 74,200 St. Augustine 2 24 7,000
Pensacola 10 120 97,000 63,000 1,078 28,910 3,370,900 3,924,606

Let the Addition of the above Numbers of Ships and Seamen -- the Profits upon
the above Cost of the Goods exported from Great Britain, and upon the Value of
the unmanufactured Produce of the Colonies sent in return, with the Employment
given to the Manufacturers, be taken into Consideration! And then let him who
will presume to say, that our American Colonies do not pay an Equivalent for
every Benefit they receive, stand forth, and prove his Assertion, by the same
Evidence of Facts, as this.

Nor do I rest the Point here. I will be bold to say farther to your Lordship,
that when the Amount of the Revenue received by Government from these Exports,
and the returned Produce is added to the Account, it will incontestibly appear,
that, instead of being a Burden upon Great Britain, her Colonies do in reality
lighten her Burden, by taking fully their Proportion of it upon them.

But this, my Lord, must be reserved till we shall have continued our Progress
through the West-Indian Islands; as attempting to divide the Revenues arising
from their blended Trade and Produce would only cause Confusion, and embarrass
the Question.

I have the Honor, etc.

THE END
Speedily will be published, ( Price One Shilling)

AN Old Looking-Glass FOR THE LAITY AND CLERGY OF ALL DENOMINATIONS, Who either
give or receive Money under Pretense of the Gospel: BEING CONSIDERATIONS
TOUCHING The likeliest Means to remove Hirelings out of the Church of CHRIST.

Wherein is also discoursed of TITHES, CHURCH-FEES, CHURCH-REVENUES,
CHRISTNINGS, MARRIAGES, BURIALS, AND Whether any Maintenance of Gospel-Servants
ought, to be settled by Law.

By JOHN MILTON, Author of Paradise lost.

Our blessed Savior never rode in State but once, and that only upon an Ass.
His Apostles were Footmen, that trudged from Country to Country, being
destitute, afflicted and tormented. But the Case is wonderfully altered: For
his pretended Servants, the Clergy, ride triumphantly in Chariots, in Coaches,
and in Coaches with six Horses, by that very Gospel which commands its Votaries
to desert and forsake all earthly Things. Yea, verily, by that very Gospel of
Poverty and Self-denial, they have grasped and possessed all Things.

HICKERINGILL. Help us to save free Conscience from the Paw Of Hireling Wolves,
whose Gospel is their Maw.

JOHN MILTON.
