A SERMON, PREACHED AT Litchfield, in Connecticut, Before a voluntary
CONVENTION of the CLERGY of the CHURCH of ENGLAND OF Several Provinces in
AMERICA, JUNE 13, 1770.

By (...), a Native of the Province.

Ut novissima conferam primis. CIC. Me abs te immerito esse accusatum
rescisces. TER. Athenae sub regibus esse desierunt. PATERC. Aut aliquis latet
error: equo ne credit, Teucri;
Quicquid id est, timeo Danaos.
VIR. Published with NOTES, to gratify the very respectable Assembly before
whom it was delivered, and a Copy given, JULY 1770.

A SERMON, etc.
St. MATTHEW, Chap. xvi. Ver. 6. Take heed and beware of the Leaven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.


THE Religion of Jesus Christ is friendly to civil Government, advantageous to
every age, prohibits nothing but Immorality; it enjoins Obedience to the King
as Supreme, and publishes on Earth Peace and Good Will among Men; while the
Leaven of the Pharisee aims to frustrate every office of Love, and disunite the
World: for which reason, our High Priest and common Redeemer warned his
disciples to take heed and beware of the doctrines of those men, which
supplanted the Power of Godliness, by crying up with zeal Forms and Trifles to
expiate Wickedness by Force of Superstition. Christ upbraided those people not
barely for their exactness in tything Mint, Annis, and Cummin, but for
neglecting the weightier matters of the Law, Justice, Mercy, and Faith; and
because they had rendered void the Commandments of God, by their Traditions, in
legitimizing Hypocrisy, inward Impurities, feigned Prayers, and Destruction of
Widows Houses.

If we survey the Character of the Pharisees and Sadducees, we shall find them
meeting in the two extremes; one judging itself bound to persecute all who
differ in opinion from a supposed standard; the other, as if born in some
frigid zone* seemed unaffected with the power and charm of Religion, and wholly
indifferent about its doctrines, provided they once in seven days wore a Jewish
sabbatic devotion. -- The radical error of the first class lies in a confident
presumption of their own infallible judgment; therefore, zealously blind, they
give the dissenters from them liberty to conform or burn. The error of the
second class originates from a distrust of the Divinity of Christ; hence they
live without Faith, and the former without Charity. -- To avoid those two
dangerous extremes, which have long divided this world, let us copy the
behavior of Christ toward the various sects among the Jews.

The Essenes were numerous, and held many fantastical opinions, yet we find no
reflections made on them; while the Pharisees and Sadducees were severely and
justly exposed on all occasions. -- Behold the reason:

The Essenes, though mistaken in many things, were sincere and harmless, quiet
and peaceable, contented and easy to enjoy their own consciences, and to let
other men alone: they pretended not to be infallible and tumultuous, sought not
after the Dictator's Chair, nor the sole government of the World: they neither
planned nor executed mischief against the constitution; but were humble,
modest, and obedient to the laws. This good disposition rendered them capable
of being led from their mistaken opinions; while the Pharisees and Sadducees
were arrogant and self-sufficient, inslaved captives to their own imagined
perfections, too wise to learn, too sanctimonious to receive instruction;
subtle, sly, crafty, insidious projectors; men who would reign and tyrannize,
or by their golden cry of Liberty set the world on fire: -- therefore, of their
Hypocrisy take heed and beware.

In the beginning of the chapter is pointed out the reason of this important
and necessary caution. Those two sects had hitherto been at enmity one with the
other, like their masters Herod and Pilate, yet they became friends in a
conspiracy against the "Israelite in whom was no Guile." Having put on a solemn
Demureness, (the common livery of Hypocrites,) and pretending themselves
strangers to all the miracles wrought by Christ, they addressed him with
"Master, we wish to see a sign from thee;" and very likely their petition was
delivered with a tone, not to find conviction, but as a varnish to their
infidelity, as they asked a sign from heaven which they thought would not be
given. Christ, knowing their design, exposed their false pretensions by
pronouncing a truth, which for once silenced a gainsaying people, viz. "An
adulterous and wicked generation seeks after a sign from Heaven, and there
shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas:" then, turning
to his Disciples, said, "Take heed and beware of the Arts and Hypocrisy of
those men." Hence we learn, that Men's Principles guide their Actions; that, if
the Tree is good, the Fruit will be also good; and that evil Opinions are
productive of evil Practices. As to the Sadducees, they denied the Existence of
Angels and Spirits, and taught, that Matter was the only Composition of the
Universe; they denied also the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the
Body, and a future Life; they idolized the Letter, and mistook the Spirit, of
the Law of Moses: but the Pharisees held Opinions opposite to them, and
extolled oral Doctrines equal to the Law and Prophets, whereby their Creed
varied every day, and their Devotion was muffled with new Rights and
Ceremonies, totally different from their Neighbors. The event was truly
melancholy: one Sect had too much Faith, the other had none: one had no
Religion, no Charity; the other despised Morality, and depended on Faith. The
Leaven or Art of those Men was calculated only for this mortal Life, where
Temptation is in all its Pomp; it had no Cure for a Sigh, no Balm for a wounded
Heart, except what the Law of Moses, in the Sense of a provincial Code,
afforded. This Leaven induced men to comply with such Customs and Sentiments as
were most prevalent, in order to secure to themselves temporal Interest and
Dignity: and by it we find they did succeed; for the High Priest, and all the
Council of the Jews, were of the Leaven. Acts v.1.

Those men, by their Conduct, appear to be Descendants of Cain and Nimrod: for
the meek Preacher of Righteousness styles them a Generation of Vipers; and St.
Jude calls them filthy Dreamers, empty Clouds, wandering Stars, raging Waves,
foaming out their own Shame, despising Dominion in others, and speaking evil of
Dignities. A People thus disposed ought not to be trusted, seeing that they
contemn the Law of Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free: yet, to the
Astonishment of Historians, they have too often secured to themselves the
Admiration, if not the Government, of the World, by their insincere and
sanctimonious Pretensions; while the peaceful, meek, and truly pious men have
been neglected and set at naught.

Having thus far pointed out the Character of the Pharisees and Sadducees, and
the great Propriety of the Caution given in the Text, it appears to be the Duty
of the Ambassadors of Christ, in all Ages and in all Countries, to warn the
Multitude against the Leaven of such designing men: for Leaven is no less
infectious now than it was two thousand years ago; nor is it less baneful in
America, than it has been in Africa, Europe, and Asia. Of old it owned no
Superior, nor Equal; therefore would not suffer Christ to reign. Those Sects
were ever jealous, and fearful lest they should lose their Liberty of
governing: they were constant Fautors of Persecution; for, when they perceived
the Prevalence of the Humility, the Kindness, and the peaceable Doctrines of
Christ, they artfully alarmed the Multitude with what they themselves had no
fear of, viz. "If this Man is let alone, all men will believe on him, and the
Romans will come in and take away our Place and Nation." This patriotic
Pretense then succeeded with the Multitude, who soon preferred Barabbas to
their Savior and Defender Here is a remarkable Proof that the Vox Populi is
not always the Voice of Justice.
. The Leaven, having killed the Lord of Life, soon spread and pervaded all
States and Kingdoms, overthrew mighty Kings, and deluged the Earth with human
Blood. -- As soon as Christianity found its way to these western Climes, the
Leaven, infusing the Lust of Dominion and Liberty, appeared also; where, in
verity, as in the Eastern World, it has warred against the Doctrines of Christ,
and his Law of Liberty, with great Success; and Christianity, after struggling
many years, seems to have lost its Reputation, and is giving Way to human
Policy, and is likely to be banished from America, now half-ready to act a Part
which will disgrace the dead, intail War on ourselves, and Misery on our
Children.

Alas, my native Country! thy best Days are expiring -- thy glorious Sun of
Liberty is setting -- thy Virtue is dying! -- Yet how can I give thee up? Thou
have been unto me very pleasant; I will therefore seek to do thee good -- I
will weep Day and Night for the Transgressions of the People, and pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem.

I am no Politician, though I have long heard the Cry of Law, Constitution, and
Liberty; but if the Liberi mean Liberty to worship God in the Beauty of
Holiness, or according to the Law of Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
then may Heaven maintain their Cause! But, if they mean by their Cry to hold
the King's Protection, without yielding Obedience to his Authority and the
British Parliament, I would remind them of the Charters by which we claim a
legal Title to our Lands, and the Rights of English Subjects -- Gifts and
Privileges made to our Fathers, and us their Heirs, on Condition "of Obedience
to the Laws of England, which now are or hereafter shall be made" -- (Vide
Connecticut Charter, dated 1662) -- Words tantamount to the late obnoxious
Clause, which asserts the Supremacy of the British Parliament over the
Colonies, in all Cases whatever; a Doctrine owned by our Fathers, and by all
even in the present Day, except in the instance of Taxation; which Exception
seems trifling, after granting that our Lives [not our Money] may be taken away
by a British Act of Parliament. -- Our Fathers, though led by the great Charm
of Liberty, never claimed Independence on the Crown of England; nor did the
Israelites, in the Wilderness, make themselves a Calf, until Moses had
delivered them out of Egypt, and left them under the Guidance of Aaron Canada
was taken 1759.
. It is wonderful that Princes, in these last Ages of the World, have not
learned the Science of preventing Evils, from the History of former Times,
especially from the Story of the Calf. However, Aaron exculpated himself by
telling Moses, "Thou know the People, that they are set on Mischief; for
they said unto me, Make us Gods which shall go before us; for as for this
Moses, the man who brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we know not what is
become of him." Exodus xxxii.

We who are stigmatized with being Sons of Issachar, and Essenes in Perfection,
have a plentiful Crop of Misery to gather in, if we credit the Sermons and
Declarations of the multiformed Sects of Protestant-protesting Associators, who
have assumed a self-constituted Power of nullifying Acts of Parliament and the
Statutes of this Colony. How far they have succeeded in the latter Case, we
already know; but the former is yet pending on the Concorporation of the Civil
Magistrate and the Ecclesiastic Consociations. -- However, as Charity hopes all
things, and the General Assembly has adjudged as treasonable the revolutional
Principles of the Wallingsford Associators and the Bill-of-Rights-men, who took
the Liberty, by help of their strolling Fancies, to abrogate the County Courts,
and to pay their honest Debts, with the Cry of legal Resistance, we may
logically conclude they will not legalize Resistance against the Supreme Power
of the Nation, after declaring Resistance against colonial Laws illegal and
treasonable. But, should Matters turn out contrary to our Prayers and peaceable
Endeavors, we must either adopt the Policy prevalent at Benin Les Peuples de
Benin reconnoissent un Dieu, qu'ils croient inutile de servir parcequ'il est
bon; aussi tous leurs Sacrifices sont ils offerts au diable pour appaiser sa
malice.
, to secure Polish and Venetian Liberty The Peasants of Poland enjoy the
Liberty of being Slaves to their Lords, who exercise over them the Power of
Life and Death without a Jury: -- and in Venice the Pries cannot meet but in
the Broglio, and there only may speak of Business. Other People have no other
Liberty in the Government of this Republic, but to obey.
, with Madagascar Divinity Les Peuples de Madagascar n'ont aucun temple ni
autre divinite connue, qu'un insecte, qui est une espece de Grillon.
, or fight the good Fight of Faith, and war a good Warfare against spiritual
Wickedness in high Places. How soon this may be put to our Choice, must be left
to the God of Order. In the mean time, I must hint to you, without a prophetic
Spirit, the Part allotted to you and every loyal Subject between the Rivers
Delawar and Kennebeck: for the Children of Sardis dream not of expiating the
Sin of their Souls by the Fruit of their Bodies, knowing that sincere Love to
the Lord, and faithful Obedience to the King, is the Englishman's Liberty; a
Protestant Virtue, the strait Road to true and generous Christianity: they also
know Religion to be worthy of a serious Consideration, a perfect Knowledge, an
everlasting Devotion; and that men are nearest to their God, when they can best
vindicate themselves to themselves.

Were we less friendly to America, or the King's Supremacy, which is the
Bulwark of Protestantism, than our Dissenting Brethren are, we should not have
more Reason to complain of Grievances peculiar to the Church of England in
America, than they and all other Sects of Christians in the whole World Papists
secure Government by swearing that the Pope has no civil Jurisdiction in the
English Dominions; American Dissenters are installed Teachers without swearing
Obedience to the English King; yet these Sects have their Bishops and Synods,
and other Rights necessary for their respective Systems: while the Protestant
Episcopalians, who are one-third Part of British America, swear Obedience to
the King, and abjure the civil and ecclesiastical Power of the Pope; and, after
all, are denied a resident Bishop by their Protestant King, and the Liberty of
obeying God and the Constitution by their own Countrymen. -- Let common Sense
determine who has most Reason to complain of Grievances, among Protestants,
Papists, or Dissenters, in America.
; or, had we crossed a briny Ocean to import episcopal Tyranny Dr. Bellamy, in
his Sermon before the General Assembly of Connecticut, said, "Episcopacy was
like a Cancer deep rooted already, and was daily increasing, by the golden
Influence of an English propagating Society, over our ambitious Sons, who are
frequently crossing a briny Deep to import prelatic Tyranny, which our Fathers
could not bear, and which threatens speedy Ruin to our American Vine. To our
nursing Fathers we look for Protection against the Arts of those little Foxes.
The Ax must be laid to the Root of the Tree, lest Iniquity should abound in
Israel."
, under a pious Pretense of civilizing and christianizing Dissenters, at the
Expense of their Liberty and Property, which they hold more sacred than Loyalty
and Ordination Mr. Birdseye, in his Sermon before the College in Newhaven,
said, "That Ordination, which so many of you are seeking after, on the other
Side of the Atlantic, is but the greasy Hand of a drunken Bishop."
, we might have expected the Fate of our Fathers, who expelled the Natives from
the fertile Banks of Connecticut into a dreary Wilderness, a forlorn Home, by
similar Pretenses. Since our Crime consists only in not being Dissenters from
the Church of England, and in wishing to have a Bishop resident among us on
such Terms as cannot be detrimental to the Rights of Anabaptists, Papists,
Moravians, and other Dissenters, and which have been heartily laid before the
Public Vide the Candid Appeal to the Public, by Thomas Bradbury Chandler, D. D.
Rector of Elizabeth-Town, New Jersey.
; our Religion has taught us to hope for forgiveness in claiming such Liberties
as we have freely given to others.

I must say, that no Reason can be assigned why the People, who claim the
greatest Liberties for themselves, should at the same time compass Sea and Land
to deprive others of their civil, natural, and religious Liberties Vide Dr.
Wheelock's Narrative of Indian Affairs; -- a Plan which is designed against the
King and Parliament of Great Britain, the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel, and Sir William Johnson, who at present are said to have too great an
Influence over the Mohawks, and other Indians, for the Safety of New England
Liberties.
: -- but so it is; -- and if we fear God, and honor the King, we shall
patiently submit to this hard Lot of ours, until our Prayers and Tears prevail;
for our Religion is not carnal; it affords no Comfort to the wicked, nor Pardon
to the rebellious, but on Repentance; and no Repentance but on real Amendment
of Life. All who cannot conform to this Rule, must not be of our Communion;
yet, with Safety to their worldly Interest, they may join the Leaven which
prevails in Rome, the holy City, and claims Dominion in America, where Christ
is King elect It is a Maxim among those who style themselves Saints of the
Earth, that "Christ is King; but his Church is governed by his People."
without Authority. Since we are required to believe the Millenarians in this
howling Wilderness Howling Wilderness is a Term used in New England, in
allusion to the miraculous Salvation of the first Emigrants, who adopted it in
Compliment to the Israelites of old -- or themselves.
, we have a Right to expect Doctrines and Practices agreeable to Christ's
peaceful Reign; but, as the contrary appears every Day more and more, we have
Reason to fear that they are using Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, and
not as Subjects to their King elect, whose Laws as little please The President
and Socii of the College in Connecticut voted that the Bible was improper to be
read publicly in Meeting Houses on the Sabbath Day.
, as those of George, our rightful King.

Was natural or religious Liberty the Object of the Committees of Inspection,
formed from the Missisippi to St. Laurence In 1764 a general Meeting of
Protestant Dissenters was held at Newhaven in Connecticut, from many Provinces,
to form a Plan that might preserve the civil and religious Liberties of America
against the Encroachments or Growth of the Church of England, and to propagate
saving Knowledge among the Heathen in the dark Corner of this howling
Wilderness.
, we should before this Day have seen the Slave, stolen from his native
Country, discharged from his unpitied Loads and agonizing Groans, to taste the
Sweets of Nature's Law; an Indulgence which Humanity and Christianity have
given to all, while Defenders of Liberty take the Liberty of denying it to all
America has the Honor of dealing in human Flesh; of plundering and extirpating
the Aborigines of the Country; of stealing and receiving stolen Blacks from the
Coasts of Africa; of using them with more than savage Barbarity, not under the
same Pretense that Nimrod hunted Men, but under a pious Pretense of
Christianizing and bestowing on them natural and civil Liberty; -- glorious
Pretense, but most infamously executed!
. To plead the Constitution, and the written Laws of God, in behalf of real
Liberty, is all in vain; for their Spirit has overcome the Letter, and taught a
Freedom which has neither Bit nor Bridle. Whoever adopts this Freedom as the
Law of Liberty, will crown his King with Thorns, and introduce Anarchy, the
Beggar's Rise, but the Rich Man's Fall. To prevent such an unhappy Confusion
taking Place in this young and flourishing Country, which but a few years ago
was overrun by wild Nations leagued with our Enemies, to ravage and scalp the
unhappy Traveller, is the duty, and ought to be the aim, of every Protestant
Nation and Minister; and, should our Endeavors, our fervent Love for America,
our Gratitude and Loyalty to the House of Hanover, our great Deliverer, prove
ineffectual -- then let us hang our Harps on the Willows and weep. Should the
World arm against us, let us not be dismayed, but persevere in our sacred
Vocation, and contend earnestly for the Faith delivered to the Saints: hereby
our Light will shine before Men, though we may be spoiled of our Goods, exiled
from our native Home, and killed. Should our Faith equal our Profession, we
shall not faint in the Day of Trial, because we are Soldiers of the Cross, and
have Promises of a better Life.

I have Confidence in you all, that, though some weak Disciples may decline our
Communion, and go away, yet you will wisely consider to whom we shall go,
seeing that we have for our Guide the Words of eternal Life.

My Reverend Brethren, you cannot be unwilling to part with such Godliness as
is worldly Gain, when you consider the Certainty and Solemnity of a
Reckoning-Day, when you must give an Account of your Stewardship, either to be
blessed with the Smiles of your Judge, or be ruined with his Frowns: therefore,
let us grow in Grace, and hold fast the Form of sound Words; let us feed the
Lambs, let us feed the Sheep, with the Glories of the everlasting Covenant, and
the great Mystery of Redemption; let us dwell on the Excellencies of Immanuel,
and on moral Virtue; in a word, let us propagate the Doctrines of the Cross,
and be of good Cheer, seeing that Faith and Perseverance have overcome the
World.

Let the Priests of the Lord, let holy and humble Men of Heart, let all the
Children of Men, bless the Lord, and magnify him for ever; because the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns, and shall for ever reign!

FINIS.

