Dr. Chauncy's REPLY TO Dr. Chandler's 'APPEAL DEFENDED.'

A REPLY TO Dr. CHANDLER's 'APPEAL DEFENDED:' WHEREIN His Mistakes are
rectified, his false Arguing refuted, and the OBJECTIONS against the PLANNED
AMERICAN EPISCOPATE shown to remain in full Force, notwithstanding all he has
offered to render them invalid.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. Pastor of the First Church in BOSTON.

'When such as our Diocesans sprang up, the Church was presently broke into
Pieces, and by odious Contentions and Divisions became a Scandal and Scorn to
Unbelievers. To read but the Acts of Councils, and the History of the Church,
and there find the horrid Contentions of Prelates against each other; the
Parties which they made, their running up and down the World to Princes, and
Rulers, and Synods, to bear down one another; it will do as much to grieve and
amaze the Soul of a sober Christian, as almost any History in the World he can
peruse.'

Baxter's Treatise of Episcopacy, P. 165. BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND,
opposite the Probate-Office, in Queen Street, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in
Cornhill. MD,CC,LXX.

INTRODUCTION.
DR. Chandler proposes, at the close of his defense, (p. 266) 'that the debate
be reduced within a narrower compass, and that nothing that does not
immediately relate to the merits of the cause be offered on either side.' Had
he made this proposal, when he undertook to open the plan for an American
episcopate, saying nothing but what directly tended to give it admission into
the mind as reasonable, he would at once have lessened my labor, and prevented
the trespass that has been committed upon the patience of those who have been
our readers. If, in his 'appeal,' in my 'answer' to it, and in his 'defence' of
it, many pages are filled with have no more relation to an 'American
Episcopate,' than the dispute 'whether Aaron's linen Ephod was of blue, or a
sea-water-green,' the Doctor very well knows where the blame ought to be laid.
No one would have thought it an aspersion, if he had taken it wholly to
himself. The limitation he proposes though proper at first, does not now wear
so equitable an aspect, at least, as coming from him. He has taken the fullest
liberty, not only in his 'appeal,' but in his 'vindication' of it; and now he
would restrain others, keeping them within those bounds he has leaped over, and
putting it out of their power to remark upon the greatest part of what he has
been pleased to offer. This does not look fair. However, from a just sense of
that respect which is due to the Public, I shall endeavor to make the trial
of their patience as light as may be; still depending so far upon their candor,
as to say what may be necessary in justice to myself, though it should not
always immediately relate to the grand point in dispute.

THE Doctor further proposes, "that no invective or abuse, nothing that savors
of bigotry or barbarity, be suffered to mingle in the debate; but that
ingenuous, sober reasoning should decide it." He would have made this proposal
with a better grace, if he had more fully exemplified, in his own conduct, what
he has here recomended. It is true, his air in writing sometimes carries the
appearance of candor and mildness; nor is it generally misbecoming the
gentleman, or the christian. But will any pretend, that his manner is not too
often very like their's who are actuated by a spirit of 'bigotry?' Has he no
where treated his opponents with 'invective and abuse?' Are there no instances,
in which he has had recourse to evasive art, rather than solid argument? Has he
never substituted popular exclamation in the room of good reasoning? Do we
never find him 'disingenuously' endeavoring to make others think he has
answered powerfully, when he himself knew he had said nothing to the purpose?
Nay, has he never so dishonored his own character as only to laugh loud, when
so pressed as to be unable to make a just or sober reply? The intelligent
reader, I doubt not, has observed instances in all these kinds; and we shall
have occasion, in proper time and place, to hold them up to public view. After
all, the proposal here made is not objected to, so far as I am concerned in it.
I esteem it a christian as well as reasonable rule of conduct, and shall
accordingly endeavor to govern myself by it in what may follow. Should the
Doctor think fit to write again, it will be eminently proper in him not to
forget to do himself, as he proposes that others should do in this debate. I
would advise him to bear it habitually on his mind, that Episcopalians as truly
as other denominations of christians, may be so strongly biassed in favor of
their own side, as to be equally incapable of perceiving the force of the most
powerful argument; and that it may, with as much truth, be said of them, that
'in seeing they will not see,' and 'in hearing they will not understand.'

I SHALL not think it impertinent to subjoin here, that it ought not to be
looked upon as any fault of mine, if the reader should be detained from the
GRAND POINT in dispute, longer than he might reasonably expect. I choose
particularly to mention this, that the Doctor may be upon his guard for time to
come, and not act so unfair a part as to endeavor to fasten that blame, in
this respect, upon others, which he only, in justice, is accountable for; as he
has put them upon taking notice of what he has said that is foreign to the MAIN
SUBJECT, or to pass it over as impertinent.

I now go on to offer what I have to say in reply to the Doctor's 'defence;'
and in the doing of it, I shall follow the order in which he has given us his
thoughts.

Reply to Dr. CHANDLER's Introductory Observations.
HE complains bitterly, in this part of his defense, especially of the MANNER,
in which he has been opposed. As I am not the named person against whom these
complaints are made, and feel within my self a consciousness of not having
given any just occasion for them, it would be impertinent in me to remark upon
them. The Whig and Sentinel, who are particularly pointed out, ^e evidenced to
the world their ability to vindicate themselves; and, it is probable, the
Doctor will hear from them, if they should think it worth while to take notice
of the charges he has exhibited against them. I would not be taxed with
officiously going out o^ my own line to do that which is the proper business of
others, and for the doing of which they are much better qualified than I can
pretend to be.

NONE of the Doctor's observations have any special reference to me, until we
come to the last, which he calls "a most material one," and to which he
"requests the attention of every reader." I also, in my turn, could make a
request. It is only this reasonable one, that the reader, while he attends to
the Doctor's "most material observation," would impartially consider what may
be offered, wherein it relates to me, in answer to it.

AFTER a 'dead silence,' for a while, as to any 'dissatisfaction' relative to
the plan that had been proposed, 'it was at length discovered (says the Doctor)
that a number of persons had entered into a combination to run down the appeal,
and vigorously to oppose, at any rate, the residence of Bishops in America.'
The combination he here speaks of, with as positive assurance as though he
himself had been an associate, has not, taking me into it, the least foundation
in truth; but is wholly a phantom of his own imagination. I never heard of a
'settled plan of operation,' in which I was to bear a part, and make what, the
Doctor says, 'may, in some sense, be called a regular attack upon the appeal,'
till I had this information of it from him. The honest truth is, I undertook to
answer the appeal, because I could hear of no one at New York, Philadelphia, or
in any part of New England, who appeared disposed to engage in this work. Had I
then known what the Doctor says was 'at length discovered,' I should certainly
have stood by a spectator only. As it had been published, 'that if no
objections were offered against the proposed american Episcopate, it would be
taken for granted all parties were satisfied,' I was unwilling total silence
should be construed an argument of general satisfaction, when I knew nothing
was more contrary to the truth; and it was for this special reason that I
entered upon an affair, which I said, in the advertisement to my answer, 'would
expose me to much ill will.' This has been shamefully verified since by the
scurrilous treatment I have met with in some of the New York periodical papers,
occasioned by my attempting to comply with an episcopal desire publicly made
known; although the manner in which it was done has been complained of by some
as over-mild and candid.

IN consequence of the Doctor's imaginary plan of operation, a furious onset
has been made on the harmless well-meant appeal, begun by Dr. Chauncy in
'regular form,' and supported by the Whig and Sentinel in 'weekly skirmishes,'
in which they were assisted by 'occasional sallies of a number of volunteers,'
and the whole performed with 'as much spirit and warmth as the friends of these
adventurers could wish.' And what was the success? Shockingly bad on the side
of its opponents! For, says the Doctor, 'notwithstanding all their resolution,
alertness, and caution, they have been obliged to give up the grand object of
the contest as above explained.' And here he particularly brings me in as
giving up this grand point in dispute. Says he, 'Dr. Chauncy declares for
himself and his brethren (p. 180) in the following words; We desire no other
liberty, than to be left unrestrained in the exercise of our religious
principles, in so far as we are good members of society. And we are perfectly
willing Episcopalians should enjoy this liberty to the full. If they think
Bishops, in their appropriated sense, were constituted by CHRIST, or his
apostles, we object not a word against their having as many of them as they
please, if they will be content to have them with AUTHORITY ALTOGETHER DERIVED
FROM CHRIST.' So again, in p. 189, ' It is not SIMPLY the exercise of any of
their religious principles that would give the least uneasiness, nor yet the
exercise of them under as many PURELY SPIRITUAL Bishops as they would wish to
have; but their having Bishops under a STATE ESTABLISHMENT.' These, it is
acknowledged, are my words; but with what truth, or justice, the Doctor could
say, they contain that in them which looks like my 'giving up the main point'
in debate, is best known to himself. He must have been strangely inattentive,
if he did not perceive, that the Bishops in his plan, and those I spoke of,
were ESSENTIALLY different, and consequently that I might oppose the former,
while I had no objection against the latter. What he has here introduced with
no small parade, and peremptorily affirmed for truth, amounts to no more than a
declaration of the sense he is pleased to put upon my words; which sense it may
be worthy of notice. I had purposely taken care to guard against, in as
explicit a manner as I well could. The Bishops I had 'not a word to object to,'
the Bishops that 'would give no uneasiness,' were particularly described as
having 'AUTHORITY ALTOGETHER FROM CHRIST,' and as being 'PURELY SPIRITUAL'
Bishops. These, the Doctor could not but know, were, in my apprehension, quite
different from the Bishops proposed in his plan, and that I had largely
endeavored to show wherein they were so. And yet, at the very entrance upon
his defense, and before he had so much as attempted to offer a word in proof
that his Bishops, and those I expressed my approbation of, were the SAME, he
would prepossess his readers with the thought, that this was the real truth;
and consequently that I had wrote many scores of pages in opposition to that,
against which 'I had not a word to object.' Is this 'ingenious?' Would not the
Doctor have done himself more honor, and his cause more service, if, in a way
of 'sober reasoning,' he had endeavored to make it evident, that I had acted a
weak, ridiculous, and inconsistent part, before he virtually told the world
that I had so done. Notwithstanding this boasted assurance, enough was said in
the answer to the appeal to satisfy any reasonable man, that the Bishops
proposed by Dr. Chandler, and those 'not objected to' by Dr. Chauncy, were as
widely different, as this world is from another; and it may hereafter appear,
that the assigned reasons for this difference have not been in the least
invalidated by any thing the Doctor has offered in his long labored defense.
He has indeed very slightily passed over this MOST ESSENTIAL part of the
dispute; though more than once called upon to make out the right of
Episcopalians to such Bishops as are specified in his published plan. If he
would do justice to his own character, and promote the cause he is engaged in,
he must not substitute arbitrary misconstruction in the room of solid
reasoning, and upon this footing triumphantly assure his readers, 'the matter
being brought to this issue, he might give up all further controversy.'

THE Doctor, having said (p. 11) that 'his chief business was with me,' goes on
to 'contrast his own diffidence with my gigantic confidence.' What gave the
occasion for this? The reader may wonder when I tell him its rise. The Doctor
introduced his appeal by informing the Public, 'that he was appointed to this
service by the convention of the clergy of New York, and the Jersies, with some
of their brethren from the neighboring provinces:' Whereas, I introduced my
answer to the appeal by saying 'that I could not pretend to such distinguishing
honor, but was prevailed upon to engage in the cause by the desire of private
friends only.' The Doctor shrewdly infers herefrom, that he is a man of
'diffidence,' but that I am a 'giant for confidence;' for no reason but because
I presumed to enter the list with one so eminently important, as to be selected
by a venerable body of the Clergy to write an 'appeal to the Public.' Some of
his readers may possibly esteem this incense offered to himself an illustration
of his singularly modest 'diffidence;' but, I am sure, none of them can account
his treatment of me a just specimen of that 'ingenious reasoning' stripped of all
'abuse,' which he recommends to others in the management of the present
dispute. It would be easy, because it would be natural, by comparing the manner
of the Doctor's 'coming forward' with mine, to make reprisals, by inverting the
order of the contrast he has brought to view; but the occasion is too trifling,
and I an't disposed to deal in that which may look like returning 'railing for
railing.'

I HAD complained, 'that the arguments in support of the PETITIONS for an
American Episcopate had been kept secret,' and that 'an authentic knowledge of
them, though applied for, was rejected." To this the Doctor replies (p. 12) 'I
know nothing of such application, or rejection.' I am disposed to think, he
here wrote as he thought. But, if he had taken time for recollection, it is
probable he would have called to mind what he might not then have had in actual
remembrance. Did he never hear of a formal application made by Dr. Styles in a
letter to the Clerk of the New York convention, desiring a copy of their
petitions, especially their petition to the King, and of the formal negative
put upon this reasonable request? Did he never hear of any controversy between
the American Whig, and this Clerk of the convention, relative to the petition
to the King, wherein he was called upon to put an end to the dispute by
producing the words of the petition, which he refused to do? The Doctor must be
a much greater 'stranger in Israel' than I took him to be, if he never heard of
these things. Besides, I could, were it proper, name one member at least of
this convention who was applied to for a copy of the petition to the King, but
in vain. Should the Doctor be ignorant of these truths, surely his ignorance is
no proof that they are not such. There might have been the 'applications' and
'rejections' complained of, though he knew nothing of them. But, says he, 'the
complaint is altogether groundless; for the plan upon which it was proposed
that Bishops should be sent to America, and the arguments afterward made use
of in support of our petitions, actually were published a considerable time
before the petitions were sent. -- And afterward it was voted by our
convention, that more particular information should be published, and the whole
matter explained, for the satisfaction of all parties; in consequence of which
the appeal was drawn up, and published.' What is all this to the purpose? It is
true, such arguments, in support of the plan for American Bishops, as were
thought fit to be publicly used, we have been made acquainted with. But the
question is, are these the ONLY ones that enforced the petitions that were sent
Home? Will the Doctor venture to say, NO OTHERS w^e used? If this is the truth,
how comes it to pass, that these petitions are secreted to t^s day? If ALL that
they contain has been already published, what possible harm can the be in
giving copies of them? It ought not to be taken amiss, if, in this view of the
case, it is generally supposed, that some things are said, in support of these
petitions, which the Clergy who sent them, are not willing should be publicly
known. It cannot otherwise be accounted for, that they should thus stea^y
refuse a copy of them. If any credit is ^e to the word of a Gentleman of well
established reputation, who was favored with a sig^, though not with a copy,
of one of these petitions, it contained that in it which has ne^r been made
public, by any who have (...) in support of the plan for an Episcopate in the
Colonies. I am fully satisfied, in common with many others, that the true
cause, at bottom, why we can have no 'authentic knowledge' of the contents of
these petitions is, their having that inserted in them, which the Episcopal
Clergy, for reasons best known to themselves, do not choose the public should
be let into. The Doctor would have acted a more fair and honorable part, if he
had plainly said so, and not endeavored to turn his readers off with disguised
amusement.

HE now proceeds to the 'defence' of his 'appeal;' which leads me, in pursuit
of his own method to make some suitable reply to what he has seen fit to offer.

Reply to Dr. CHANDLER's First Section.
THIS section he designed as a defense, in part at least, of the 'sketch of
arguments' he had brought to view, in his 'appeal,' in favor of Episcopacy in
general. It is a pity he put himself to the trouble of giving us this sketch. I
remonstrated against it, in my answer, p. 14, and for these reasons. The plea,
in what he had undertaken, would, by his own confession, 'be equally valid,
whether these principles were founded rightly, or wrongly;' and no valuable end
could be answered by this trouble, unless to increase the number of his pages,
which would DETAIN his readers from attending to the MAIN POINT he proposed for
debate; and needlessly too, as he gave us only a repetition of arguments that
had been before repeated over and over again so as to be even nauseous. He has
seen fit frankly to acknowledge, defen. p. 77, 'that he was convinced what was
said upon the general subject, however just in itself, or proper in theory, had
been better omitted.' And yet, he has wrote no less than ninety-eight pages
(more a great deal than one third part of the whole of what he has offered) in
support of that, concerning which he was 'convinced' it had been better if he
had said nothing. And what is astonishing, not being satisfied with barely
insinuating, he has peremptorily declared, p. 77, that his 'adversaries have
eagerly laid hold of a subject which has been already debated for almost 200
years, and will probably be debated for 200 years to come; by this means
keeping the PRINCIPAL OBJECT of this controversy, which is an AMERICAN
EPISCOPATE, at a distance, and as much as possible out of sight.' Who could
have imagined, that one who professes a regard to his own honor and character,
could be capable of reflecting blame upon others, not only in an instance
wherein he himself has been grossly faulty, but wherein the faultiness of
others, if indeed they are at all faulty, is wholly owing to him as its real
and only occasional cause? Was not the Doctor the very person, who, by his
needless 'sketch of arguments' to support Episcopacy in general, 'kept out of
sight the grand object in pursuit?' And did he not hereby render it necessary
for those who answered him to do the like, at least for a while, and until they
might, with allowance from him, bring this object into view? He is still
inexcusably inattentive upon this head; for, says he, p. 77, 'the Doctor seems
to have acted upon this plan, exerting himself upon the subject of Episcopacy
as if it was his chief business in answering the appeal; whereas the curiosity
of the Public called him to pursue another object.' -- I had employed but about
50 pages in 200 upon the general subject of Episcopacy; and this, after having
remonstrated against the Doctor's obliging me to take this needless trouble,
and excusing myself, on this account, to the Public, for postponing, for a
while, the consideration of the grand point in view: And yet, he unaccountably
brings me in making that my CHIEF BUSINESS, which was only a small part of it,
and would not indeed have been any part, if he had not unseasonably and
needlessly called me to it. The 'other object', which, says the Doctor, in the
next words, 'the curiosity of the Public called him to pursue, is an object
from which I propose to be no longer diverted by an endless dispute concerning
Episcopacy.' And yet, if the reader can give credit to it, he has still gone
on, in contradiction to his own purpose, for more than 20 pages; though he had
before wrote upon the same subject more than 70. Perhaps, when he calmly
reflects upon his injudicious unfairness, not to say inconsistency with
himself, as above opened to him, he may be put to the blush. It is impossible
he should think, he has shown himself so 'ingenuous' as might reasonably have
been expected: Nor will it, after this, appear any thing strange, if we should
meet with still more gross misrepresentations.

THE Doctor introduced the first section in his 'appeal' with observing, 'that
the church of England is episcopal, and consequently holds the necessity of
Bishops to govern the church, and to confer ecclesiastical orders.' It was said
in answer, 'that the church of England neither holds, nor is obliged to hold,
the DIVINE RIGHT of Bishops in the appropriated sense, to govern the church, or
confer holy orders; and that none of her public offices, or any part of the
system of her conduct, are founded on this principle.' The Doctor replies, def.
p. 16, 'If it be by virtue only of the jus humanum of Episcopacy that Bishops
are necessary, still the ends for which they are necessary cannot be obtained
without them so long as we are subject to the authority that requires them.' It
is at once easy and sufficient to say here, as the authority requiring is by
supposition merely human, no complaints can reasonably be made by those who
could have none to make, if they acknowledged and honored no one but JESUS
CHRIST as SUPREME HEAD of the christian church.

BUT the JUS DIVINUM of Episcopacy is what the Doctor has all along pleaded
for, and it is THIS RIGHT only I ever pretended was not the doctrine of the
church of England. And, upon further examination, in consequence of what the
Doctor has offered, I am abundantly confirmed in the persuasion, that this
doctrine was never intended to be delivered as her faith, in any of her public
offices; no, not in her 'preface to the book of ordination,' which has the
strongest aspect this way. The Doctor thinks the DIVINE RIGHT of Episcopacy is
clearly and fully asserted in this preface. Having cited those words of it he
supposes make for his purpose, which I shall throw into the margin, 'It is
evident to all men diligently reading holy scripture, and ancient authors,
that, from the apostles time, there have been these orders of ministers in
CHRIST's church; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Which offices were evermore had
in such reverend estimation, that no man might presume to execute any of them,
except he were first called, tried, examined, and known to have such qualities
as are requisite for the same; and also by public prayer, with imposition of
hands were approved and admitted thereunto by lawful authority. And therefore,
to the intent that these orders may be continued, and reverently used and
esteemed in the church of England, no man shall be accounted or taken to be a
lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, in the church of England, or suffered to
execute any of the said functions, except he be called, tried, examined, and
admitted thereunto, according to the form hereafter following, or has had
formerly episcopal consecration, or ordination.'
he observes upon them as follows, 'If the reader will now carefully consider
this passage, let him say, Whether it is easy to conceive a more direct,
positive, and complete testimony in favor of Episcopacy, than is here given by
the compilers of the ordinal. The distinction of the three orders of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, is in this preface fully asserted; -- the antiquity of
this distinction is deduced 'from the Apostles time;' -- the evidence in favor
of it is said to be contained 'in holy scripture, and ancient authors;' -- and
the clearness of this evidence is such that it must appear 'to all men
diligently reading the holy scripture.' In consequence of this doctrine, 'no
man is to be accounted a lawful I would give notice here, that, after long
seeking, I was at length helped to a sight of the OLD ordinal, from the library
of the long deceased venerable Dr. Increase Mather. Whether it was one of the
first printed copies, or a reprint from one of these, I cannot say; because the
year in which it was printed is not mentioned. But, by its being printed in the
Old English letter, it must be of ancient date. At the bottom of the title page
are these words 'LONDON, printed by Robert Barker and John Bill, Printers to
the King's most excellent Majesty. Upon comparing THIS with the PRESENT ordinal
I find, that in conformity to the commission granted by King Charles the 2d to
several Bishops and other Divines, to review the book of common prayer, and the
book of the form and manner of makand consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, and to prepare such alterations and additions as they thought sit to
offer, that they did accordingly make and prepare a number of alterations and
additions, and some very momentous ones; which were approved by his Majesty,
and established by act of Parliament in the 14th year of his reign. THIS is the
ordinal that has been in use ever since. I shall have occasion to point out
most of these alterations, in marginal notes, upon what may follow. One very
material alteration I shall take notice of here. In the OLD ordinal the words,
in the preface, are, 'which offices were evermore had in such reverent
estimation, that no man by his own private authority might presume to execute
any of them [the beforementioned offices] except he were first called -- and
also by public prayer and imposition of hands, approved and admitted thereunto.
And therefore, to the intent that these orders should be continued, and
reverently used and esteemed in this church of England, it is requisite that no
man (not being at this present, Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon) shall execute any
of them except he be called, tried, examined, and admitted, according to the
form hereafter following.' In the NEW, they are thus altered, 'which offices
were evermore had in such reverend estimation, that no man might presume to
execute any of them, except he were first called -- and also by public prayer
and imposition of hands were approved and admited thereunto by lawful
authority. And therefore, to the intent -- no man shall be accounted, or taken
to be, a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, in the church of England, or
suffered to execute any of the said functions, except he be called, tried,
examined, and admitted thereunto according to the form hereafter following, or
has had formerly episcopal consecration or ordination.' It is obvious, at
first sight, according to the PRESENT ordinal, that no man may be looked upon
as a LAWFUL minister of the church of England, who has not had episcopal
ordination; but it it does not appear, that this was the case while the OLD
ordinal was in use. Certain it is, that the commissioned reviewers, King and
Parliament, did not think this an indisputable point: otherwise they would not
have made an alteration, the principal design of which was to put this matter
beyond all doubt. It is in fact true, that, under the OLD ordinal, those were
admitted to officiate as ministers in the church of England, who were not
episcopally ordained: whereas, I suppose, an instance of this kind cannot be
produced since the 14th of Charles the second.
Bishop, Priest, or Deacon in the church of England.' -- If I should, in my own
words, point out the inconclusiveness of the Doctors reasoning here, he and his
friends might be disposed to cry out prejudice! obstinacy! perverse blindness!
I shall therefore give the proper reply, at least in part, in the language of
two famous episcopal writers. Bishop Hoadly, who has defended Episcopacy in a
more masterly way than any one I have ever yet met with, in answer to Dr.
Calamy, thus expresses himself upon this very passage in the preface to the
book of ordination. Vid. his reasonableness of conformity, p. 57, 58.
'You wholly alter the form of that sentence in the preface to the
ordination-office, on which you ground this objection; and seem to me to
misrepresent the plain design and intent of it. For there is some difference, I
think, between these two sentences, 'Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are three
distinct orders in the church, by DIVINE APPOINTMENT;' and 'from the Apostles
times, there have been these orders in CHRISt's church, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons.' The former of these is yours; and leads people to think, that the
principal intent of this sentence you scruple, was to lay it down for an
undoubted truth, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are three distinct orders,
(in the most strict sense of that word, and in opposition to those episcopal
men, who did not approve of that word taken in so strict a sense) and that by
DIVINE APPOINTMENT. The latter is the sentence, as it is expressed by the
church itself; and the design of it is plainly no more, but to signify, that
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, have been in the church from the beginning,
distinguished from one another by their peculiar offices. But, if you take a
pleasure in representing, and understanding, every thing in the way which
carries most difficulty along with it, we cannot help it.' Another champion in
the cause of the church of England, speaking in reply to this same difficulty
objected by Dr. Calamy against ministerial conformity, observes, Vid. Ollyffe
against Calamy.
with reference to the words on which this difficulty is grounded, that they
'say nothing of DIVINE RIGHT or APPOINTMENT; but only that, from the Apostles
times, there have been these orders: -- from which, the most that can be
inferred is, that in such churches where there has been need of them, or
occasion for them all, there have been three such ranks of ministers for the
government and instruction of CHRIST's church, from the times of the Apostles;
which yet, by Mr. Calamy's leave, does not prove a DIVINE APPOINTMENT of all,
-- there having been other things, in the Apostles days, which yet for all that
are not allowed to be of divine appointment.' It may not improperly be further
said, the upper house of convocation, no longer than 1702, appear to have been
of opinion, that Episcopacy, upon the footing of DIVINE APOSTOLICAL
INSTITUTION, was not the doctrine of the church of England, notwithstanding all
that is said in the preface to the ordinal. For, it is observable, the lower
house, this year, in an address to their Lordships begged that the declaration
they had made, and signed, might be entered on their books, the purport of
which was, 'that whereas they had been scandalously represented as favorers of
Presbytery, in opposition to Episcopacy, they now declared, that they
acknowledged the ORDER of Bishops, as SUPERIOR to Presbyters, to be of DIVINE
APOSTOLICAL INSITUTION.' -- The same day they presented an additional address,
signifying that whereas this their declaration had given NEW OFFENSE, and that
from having been traduced for allowing TOO LITTLE to Episcopacy, they were
accused of ASCRIBING TOO MUCH to it, they begged therefore that their Lordships
would take the doctrine aforesaid into their mature consideration. -- Calamy's
abridgement, p. 637, 638. It is possible, the upper house of convocation might
be as well acquainted with the preface to the ordinal, and its true meaning, as
Dr. Chandler; and yet, they accuse the lower house of ascribing TOO MUCH to
Episcopacy, in speaking of the ORDER of Bishops as SUPERIOR to Presbyters by
DIVINE APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION.


THE Doctor may perceive, by these quotations from two famous writers in behalf
of the church of England, that those who cannot, in the present case, be taxed
with 'prejudices that might influence them to misrepresentation,' could discern
nothing in this 'ordination-preface' that 'seemed to have an aspect' in favor
of the DIVINE RIGHT of Episcopacy. It is true, it accounts no one a LAWFUL
Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, of the church of England, unless admitted to
office by LAWFUL authority, in the manner prescribed. But there is a wide
difference between LAWFUL, and DIVINE authority. Does this preface affirm, with
the Doctor, that the power of government and ordination are by GOD appropriated
to Bishops, and so appopriated to them as that they ought to be exercised by no
other, and, if they are, that they have no validitv? Let him, if he can, give
the least shadow of proof, that this idea was intended to be conveyed as the
sense of the church of England. Until he is able to do this, it will be a vain
thing in him to pretend, that this is the doctrine of the English church, as
held forth in this preface. The plain truth is, the 'book of ordination,' the
'preface' to which we have been considering, is formed upon the supposition,
that Presbyters have the power of ordination in common with Bishops; nor can it
in any other view be made consistent with itself. This, because a matter of
importance, even in relation to the grand point in debate, and not commonly
considered, I will a little dilate upon, and shall do it by giving the Public a
large extract from Mr. Ferdinand Shaw's 'judgment of the church of England, in
point of ordination;' wherein it is shown, that 'she allows a divine inherent
right in the Presbyter's office to ordain.' And I the rather choose to exhibit
this extract, because it is taken from a pamphlet I lately received from the
other side the Atlantic, and is, perhaps, the only one in America.

ONLY, before I proceed, I would take leave just to inform the Doctor, that I
have tried the experiment he proposes, and find, that I can 'honestly and
consistently subscribe' to this ordination preface, with the allowance only of
'explanations' more natural, and 'interpretations' less softening, than
ninety-nine in an hundred are obliged to recur to, before they can, if they pay
any regard to conscience, subscribe to the thirty-nine articles of the English
church, not to say any thing of the book of commonprayer, and other forms to
which they are obliged to assent and consent. -- To go on,

SAYS the writer abovementioned, 'It is very observable, that, for above an
hundred years after the happy reformation in England, the form of committing to
Bishops and Presbyters their office and work made no distinction at all in the
order; as is evident to all who have perused the FORMER book of ordination. In
the ordination of a Deacon, the office was expressed, take thou authority to
execute the office of a Deacon. This was a distinct office, and the person was
ordained to a distinct order in the church. But in the ordination of a Bishop,
or a Presbyter, it does not appear, by the commission that was given them, that
they were esteemed distinct orders. It appears, on the contrary, that they were
esteemed one and the same order. It may to this purpose be worthy of special
remark here: -- In the OLD ordinal, previous to the ordination of Priests, Acts
xx. from the 19th to the 24th verse, was appointed to be read, for the epistle;
which must be esteemed highly impertinent, if they were not, as EPISCOPOI, to
RULE [POIMANEIN] as well as feed the church of GOD. For the gospel, it is said
shall be read, Matt. xxviii. verse 18, 19, 20; or else John xx. from the 19th
to 24th verse, both which passages of scripture contain the highest commission
of gospel-officers; and the last of them that power of binding and loosing,
which none may presume to exercise, who are not entrusted with the government
of the church. The reviewers of the OLD ordinal were clearly and fully
satisfied of this, and have accordingly, in the NEW book of orders, taken away
these texts from the ordering of Priests, and inse^ted them as the epistles and
and gospels to be read previous to the consecration of Bishops.
For there was no mention made in the words of ordaining them, that it was for
the one, or the other office. In both it was said, 'receive thou the HOLY
GHOSt;' -- but it was not added (as it is in the PRESENT book of orders) 'for
the office and work of a Priest, or for the office or work of a Bishop: In the
OLD ordinal, when the Bishops and the Priests present lay their hands on the
person to be ordained a Priest, the Bishop is directed to say, 'Receive the
HOLY GHOST: whose sins,' etc -- In the NEW, the words he must use are these,
'Receive the HOLY GHOST for the office and work of a Priest in the church of
GOD now committed to thee by the imposition of our hands. Whose sins,' etc. --
So also in ordering a Bishop, there is the like alteration. In the OLD book,
the Archbishop and Bishops present shall lay their hands on the elected
Bishop, the Archbishop saying, 'Take the HOLY GHOST, and remember that thou
stir up the gift', etc. -- In the NEW, the words are, 'Receive the HOLY GHOST
for the work and office of a Bishop in the church of GOD now committed unto
thee by the imposition of our hands, in the name of the FATHER, and of the SON,
and of the HOLY GHOST. Amen. And remember, etc.
So that it is plain, there was no real intrinsic difference granted by the
ordination-commission to those of the first or second order. The powers granted
to the one, for ought appears, were granted to the other; for as the commission
they received made no difference in the name or function, so neither did it in
their authority. Whatever spiritual powers the one had given them, to the other
were given the same. Had Bishops the power of ordination committed to them, so
had Presbyters too, who received the same commission by the same solemnity, in
words of the same importance, and therefore must be invested with the same
divine powers.'

And that the church of England continues in the same mind to this day, I doubt
not to make appear from the present book of orders; This, it is true, has been
greatly altered by the appointed reviewers, in the reign of Charles the second;
and, no doubt, with a direct view to exalt Bishops, and depress Presbyters.
Some of these alterations have been already pointed out. There are yet many
more. It may not be improper to notice them here. In the OLD book, Priests were
called, in the exhortation, 'Messengers, Watchmen, Stewards, and PASTORS of the
Lord;' but in the NEW, the word PASTORS is designedly left out, taking from
Priests the pastoral power, and making them little or nothing more than
Bishop's Curates. -- In the OLD the Bishop asked the Priest, whether he did
think in his heart, that he was truly called, according to the will of GOD, and
the order of the church of England, to the ministry of Priesthood: in the NEW,
it is to the ORDER, as well as ministry; making priesthood an order of itself
distinct from deaconship and Episcopacy. -- In the OLD, the two Bishops who
present the elected Bishop to the Archbishop, say, 'Most reverend father in
GOD, we present unto you this godly and well learned man to be consecrated a
Bishop:' In the NEW it is, to be ORDAINED as well as consecrated; intimating
hereby, that he was to be commissioned to a new, distinct, and higher office in
the church. In the OLD, that part of the litany was read, which says, 'that it
may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, PASTORS, and Ministers of the
'church with true knowledge. -- In the NEW, the words are, 'Give grace, we
beseech thee to all Bishops, THE PASTORS OF THY CHURCH;' -- as though none were
PASTORS but Bishops. And whereas, in the OLD book, the prayer for the Bishop
was, 'that it may please thee to bless this our brother, and send thy grace
upon him, that he may duly execute the office whereunto he is called to the
edifying thy church; -- In the NEW it is, 'that he may faithfully serve thee in
this office to the edifying, and WELL GOVERNING, of thy church.' --

It is glaringly evident, from these alterations, that the reviewers of the OLD
ordinal were much higher in their notions of Episcopacy than the first
reformers, in whose days it was compiled and established. And it is plain
likewise, that they were in Laud's sentiments concerning Episcopacy, and
intended to make these the doctrine of the church of England. But they happily
failed herein. Whether this was owing to inattention, or to a non-acceptance of
the other alterations, they might have made, either by the King, or Parliament,
I cannot say. Certain it is, notwithstanding all the alterations that now
appear, and have been established, that the power of ORDAINING, which is
pretended to be the most ESSENTIAL one belonging to Bishops, is still left
untouched, or rather stands confirmed in the PRESENT ordinal; as may be seen
abundantly proved in the above extract from Mr. Shaw.


to which every Clergyman is obliged to give his 'unfeigned assent and
consent.' This therefore cannot be pretended to be only the particular opinion
of some private persons, but must be owned to be the established doctrine of
the church, to which all her sons are by a most sacred vow bound to conform.

The Rubric, immediately after the ordination-prayer says, 'the Bishop with
the PRIESTS present shall lay their hands severally upon the head of every one
that receives the order of priesthood.' As priests are not to ordain without
the Bishop, so neither is the Bishop to ordain without Priests. If the former
would be esteemed invalid, so, for ought I can see, must the latter too: I am
sure, it would be expressly contrary to the rules of the church, by which some
Priests are required to be always present with, and assisting of the Bishop in
all ordinations; as appears by the Rubric abovementioned, compared with other
parts of the office, and Can. 31, 34.

IT cannot, with any colorable pretense, be said, that the joining of
Presbyters with the Bishop in this solemn act does only signify their
witnessing to, or approbating, the thing done. If thus were all, it might as
well be done by the laity who were present, or the Deacons; and yet, it is
certain, they are not permitted to lay on hands in ordination (as the Priests
are); though they are permitted to be spectators, witnesses, or approvers, as
well as they. Besides, it is evident from the ordination-commission, that the
office of Priest is conveyed by the Bishop and Presbyters JOINTLY. 'Receive the
HOLY GHOST for the office and work of a Priest in the church of GOD, now
committed unto thee by the imposition of OUR hands.' From whence it is as plain
as words can make it, that priestly orders in the church of England are to this
very day conferred by the BISHOP AND HIS PRESBYTERS TOGETHER; that the office
is received from their JOINT AUTHORITY; that the Bishop ought not to ordain
without his Presbyters, any more than without prayer, or imposition of hands,
which are all made essentially necessary; yea, that he cannot do it without a
very material, but absolutely unwarrantable, alteration of the words in the
commission, and perverting the design of it, changing the word OUR into MY, and
saying, 'by the imposition of MY hands, instead of OUR hands; by which
variation, how small soever it may seem, the Bishop would lodge the sole power
of ordaining in himself, contrary to the letter and intention of the office,
which necessarily supposes, that Presbyters have the same intrinsic power with
the Bishop: otherwise it would be no other than a solemn piece of mockery to
deliver the commission in the name of the Presbyters EQUALLY with the Bishop.
For how could they convey power to others which they had not in themselves?
None certainly should lay on hands at all in giving ministerial authority, but
such to whose office it belongs to commit the same doctrine to others, which
themselves have received a commission to be teachers of, no more than any
should consecrate the elements in the eucharist, who were never empowered to
administer the sacrament.

THERE is not the least appearance of any distinction by the words in the
office, that the granting the commission is only from the Bishop, and that what
the Presbyters do in conjunction with him is only consenting to what he does.
The church, in the preface to the book of orders, supposes imposition of hands
necessary to the conveying the office of the priesthood. She therein requires
PRIESTS, by the Rubric, to lay on hands together with the Bishop: and, upon
the performing of that action, the Bishop declares in express words, 'that the
office and work of a Priest is committed unto thee by the imposition of OUR
hands; which can never be meant, in any proper way of speaking, of the Bishops
hands alone, but include his Presbyters, who were partners in laying hands with
him, as having a share also in conveying the power which was by granted by that
action, by a right inherent in their office; though, by the ecclesiastical
constitution of the country, they are restrained from exercising it ALONE, as
the BISHOP HIMSELF ALSO IS. He may indeed ordain a Deacon without the
concurrence of his Presbyters, and in this case the imposition of his own hands
alone is required: whence it is plain, that the church makes a manifest
distinction betwixt what the Bishop can do ALONE, and what he cannot do WITHOUT
his Presbyters. She allows him to ordain Deacons by his SOLE power, and therein
the office is conferred ONLY by the imposition of his own hands: but when he is
to ordain Priests, he must then have the concurrence of his Presbyters with
him, and the office is said to be conferred by the imposition of OUR hands,
that is, of Bishop and Presbyters CONJUNCTLY. That is done by BOTH TOGETHER,
which the church allows not to be done by EITHER SEPARATELY.

THIS may be illustrated from the office of 'consecrating Bishops,' which is
made exactly to correspond with that of 'ordering Priests,' and therefore must
be allowed to be a parallel case. In this office, conformable to the other, (
mutatis mutandis) the 'Rubrick', just after the ordination-prayer, requires the
Archbishop and Bishops present (of whom there must be two at least) to lay
their hands upon the elected Bishop, upon which action the Archbishop
immediately pronounces the commission, (as the Bishop does in the ordination of
Priests) but declares, 'the office is committed by the imposition of OUR
hands;' that is, the episcopal function is conveyed by the imposition of the
hands of the Archbishop and Bishops together, without whom he ought not to
consecrate a Bishop. Now, if a Bishop can no more ordain a Priest without the
concurrence of his Presbyters, than an Archbishop can consecrate a Bishop
without the concurrence of his Bishops; if Presbyters are required to use the
'same action' together with the Bishop in the ordination of 'Priests,' as
Bishops are with the Archbishop in the consecration of a 'Bishop,' viz.
imposition of hands; and if the commission granted to 'Priests' by the Bishop
and his Presbyters be in the 'same words' with the commission granted to
Bishops by the Archbishop and his Bishops, viz. 'committed unto thee by the
imposition of OUR hands;' it must undeniably follow, that Presbyters have as
much an inherent right in their office (in the opinion of the church of
England) for ordaining Priests, as Bishops have in their's for consecrating
Bishops.'

IT cannot be pretended, that the Archbishop ALONE conveys the power, and that
the Bishops who join with him in laying on of hands do it merely as witnesses
to, or approvers of, his act; because the Archbishop's power over Bishops is
granted to be merely ecclesiastical, I mean owing to human institution, and not
to a divine right.

LET men make what pretensions and evasions they will, it is certain, from the
'book of orders,' and the practice of the church of England, that she allows
Presbyters to ordain in conjunction with their Bishop, which must be
understood, if words and actions have any determined sense, by virtue of a
divine right inherent in their office.

IF this be not her sense, what an absurdity must she be guilty of in ordering
their concurrence in the sign, who have no manner of interest or right in the
ministerial conveyance of the thing signified by it? Just as if it should be
said, a Deacon has power to use the words of institution in Baptism, and to
apply the proper element, but yet has not power to baptize; or that a
Presbyter may consecrate the eucharistical elements, according to CHRIST's
institution, and distribute them to the People, and yet not have power to
administer the LORD's supper.

IF imposition of hands in ordination be a mere cipher, and empty formality, in
Presbyters, will it not be concluded, that so it is in Bishops too, and that
the laying on of the hands of the one and the other is but a needless ceremony,
and signifies no more to the conveyance of ministerial authority, than if the
hands of mere laymen were imposed? But, if this external rite be supposed to
convey the ministerial commission from the Bishop, why does it not import the
same thing from Presbyters, who are enjoined it by the same authority as the
Bishop, and in conjunction with him? Will not every one naturally conclude,
that since the action is the same, since it is done at the same time, in the
same manner, with the same words, and declared by the Bishop himself to be for
the same end, that it conveys the same powers?' Thus Mr. Shaw.

UPON the whole, if there is no inconsistency between the established ordinal,
and the preface to it, the Bishops spoken of, in the latter are not Bishops in
the Doctor's sense, that is, Bishops who are divinely vested with the exclusive
right to convey holy orders. For, according to the appointed rule, no man can
be ordained a Priest without the laying on of the hands of Presbyters as well
as of the Bishop. The ordaining power is lodged, not in the Bishop ONLY, or
EXCLUSIVELY, but in the Bishop, and Presbyters CONJUNCTLY. If Presbyters cannot
ordain by themselves ALONE, neither can the Bishop. There must be, according to
the book, the concurrence of BOTH. It is from hence evident, that the restraint
laid both upon Bishops and Presbyters, as to the exercise of their ordaining
power, is merely ecclesiastical. The church of England certainly allows an
inherent right in BOTH to ordain, though she allows neither to exercise this
right but within certain limitations. And though she accounts none LAWFUL
Bishops or Presbyters but such as have been LAWFULLY admitted to office, she is
far from NULLIFYING the orders given by either. She nowhere declares ordination
by Presbyters to be invalid, though she esteems it not LAWFUL. And herein she
differs from those few of her high flying sons, who would make their own
uncharitable notions her avowed doctrine.

WHAT has been above offered in proof, that the jus divinum of Episcopacy,
according to the Doctor's sense of it, is not contained in the 'preface to the
book of ordination,' will receive further illustration, if we consider what
were the sentiments of the first reformers, those of them in special who had a
hand in compiling the ordinal.

I HAD said, from Dr. Calamy, (answ. to the appeal, p. 8) 'that in the year
1537, the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and Clergy of England, in their
book entitled, 'the instruction of a christian man,' subscribed with all their
hands, and dedicated to the King, expressly resolve, that Priests and Bishops,
by GOD's LAW, are ONE and the SAME.' To this the Doctor replies (def. p. 22) '
Collier has given an abstract of the most essential parts of this book. In this
abstract there is nothing like what the Doctor would prove from it, but
something extremely unlike it.' Collier's silence is to little purpose. Merely
an omission of his, which might have been designed to serve his own ends, ought
to be esteemed as nothing, when opposed to direct positive evidence given in
the case by one of an established reputation for veracity, especially as he has
quoted the very words of the book itself. And as to the passage in this
abstract, which is 'so extremely unlike' to what I had brought to view, it can
have this appearance to those only who are disordered in their sight. If there
is any 'unlikeness,' it must be in the following words, which the Doctor has
distinguished by the manner of printing, 'BISHOPS are authorized by our Savior
to CONTINUE THE SUCCESSION, and PERPETUATE THE HIERARCHY.' But it ought to be
remembered, it had been said before, 'Bishops and Priests are one and the same
thing': and, if so, its being said afterward, 'that Bishops are authorized to
continue the succession,' conveys precisely the same idea as if it had been
said, 'Priests are authorised' to do this. This passage cannot be made at all
'unlike' to the other, unless the whole Clergy of the church of England in that
day are made to contradict themselves; for which no reason can be assigned but
that of serving a present turn.

THE Doctor allows, that the book entitled, 'a necessary erudition for any
christian man,' which though 'drawn up by only a committee of the King's
nomination,' was yet authorized by both houses of Parliament, prefaced by the
King himself, and published in 1543 by his command; I say, the Doctor allows
(p. 23) that, in this book, it is declared, 'that the scripture speaks
expressly of no more than the two orders of Priests and Deacons;' consequently,
Bishops must be, in the apprehension of these reformers, of the same rank and
order with Priests, their office the same, and the superiority of the one above
the other by the ordinance of man, and not of GOD. But, says the Doctor, from
Collier 'the ERUDITION makes orders one of the seven sacraments, and defines it
a gift of grace for administration in the church; that it is conveyed by
consecration and imposition of the Bishop's hands; that in the beginning of
christianity, this character was given by the Apostles.' He then adds, 'how to
reconcile these passages may be difficult; and until this be done, they can
prove but little on either side.' There is nothing to reconcile in these
passages. If, as these reformers say, 'the scripture makes mention of only the
two orders of Priests and Deacons,' Bishops cannot, in their opinion, be a
distinct order from Priests; consequently, when they further say, 'the gift for
administration in the church is conveyed by consecration and imposition of the
Bishop's hand,' by Bishop they must mean an officer of the same rank or order
with Priests, unless they are made foolishly, as well as needlessly, to
contradict themselves, when their words are as capable of a consistent
construction.

IT is evident then, beyond all reasonable dispute, from the 'institution' and
'erudition;' that, in the reign of Henry the Eighth, 'Bishops and Priests were
one and the same order' in the opinion of the church of England. But, says the
Doctor, (p. 25) 'at this stage of the reformation, it is no wonder that we meet
with some crude expressions relating to Episcopacy.' And again, (p. 24) 'among
the doctrines that had not been fully canvassed, by Cranmer and his friends,
must be reckoned that of ecclesiastical government.' But the plain truth is,
the sentiments of the church of England, relative to Bishops and Priests, were
much the same in the reign of Edward the Sixth, as they were in the days of
Henry the Eighth,; in order to evince which I had recourse (ans. to app. p. 9)
to the 'select assembly called by King Edward for the resolution of several
questions relative to the settlement of religion.' To which the Doctor replies,
'It was at this time [in the reign of Henry the Eighth] and not ten years
afterward, in the reign of Edward the Sixth, as Dr. Chauncy, following his
blind guide, The Dr. would not have discovered too much reverence for a
celebrated Bishop of the church of England, if he had here used a softer
epithet. This is not the first time he has dishonored himself by speaking too
slightily of one, who was every way his superior. In a marginal note, (p. 17)
he adopts the sentiments of a puny writer, in one of the New York periodical
papers, concerning this truly great man, by calling the account he gives of his
Irenicum 'a just one.' Says he, 'I do not scruple to declare, that I look upon
the Irenicum to have been a hasty, indigested, partial account of principles
and facts.' If he had possessed a tolerable share of modesty, he would not have
declared his opinion in so harsh and crude a manner concerning a work, which
has been read, applauded, and so often recurred to, by many of the most learned
men in Europe. It is to little purpose to say, 'he wrote it at the age of 24;'
or to bring him in saying, 'there were many things in it, which if he was to
write again, he would not say.' It is upon the known truth of the facts he has
related, and the solid reason that supports the principles he maintains, that
we depend; and not upon the name or authority of the man. Until the book is
answered, which has never yet been done, and I will venture to say never will,
it will remain with us in full force. For facts are stubborn, and reason is the
same, whether men are old or young, or however their judgments with their
interest may alter.
the Irenicum, asserts, that these questions were given out for discussion; as
is plain from Bishop Burnet.' If this is plain from Bishop Burnet, he is the
'blind guide' to the Doctor, and not the Irenicum to me. For, it is observable,
these questions with the resolutions of them, are published by Bishop Burnet
'ex M. S. S. D. Stillingfleet,' as his own words are. Hist. reformation, vol.
1st p. 201. Collect, of records.
And it is undeniably evident, from what is said of these manuscripts, and
quoted out of them, by Dr. Stillingfleet, that this 'select assembly' was
called by King Edward the Sixth, and not by Henry the Eighth. Vid. Irenicum, p.
386 and onwards.
Nay, Bishop Burnet himself was of the same mind. For, says he, Hist.
reformation, p. 289.
'I find another instance like this, in the reformation that was further
carried on in the SUCCEEDING REIGN of EDWARD THE SIXTH, of many Bishops and
Divines giving in their opinions under their hands, upon some heads then
examined and changed. In CRANMER's papers some singular opinions of his about
the nature of ecclesiastical offices will be found'. -- Dr. Chandler has
inserted (in p. 27) from Bishop Burnet, the other words in the above passage I
have, for this reason, omitted quoting, in order to weaken the evidence of
Cranmer: and yet taking no notice of the former part, he places these questions
given out to be discussed about ten years backward from their true date, and in
direct contradiction to Bishop Burnet; affirming, at the same time, that it was
'plain from him,' that he had fixed the time right. He is able to say, whether
this was done with design, or through inattention. I would heartily attribute
it to the latter, however strange it may appear, that he should quote one part
of a passage, and suffer another, he lays so great stress upon, to escape his
observation.

HE acknowledges (p. 26) that Cranmer's answer to the tenth question in these
words, 'Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two things, but one
office in the beginning of CHRIST's religion,' are to be found, as I had quoted
them, in the manuscript published by Burnet; but then adds, 'the reader will
not forget the time of his giving this answer, which was about ten years before
our present offices for ordination were composed.' To which I would only say,
this memento to the reader is the effect of his 'blindly' following a true
guide. For it appears from what has been said above, that the very author whose
authority he relies on speaks of this answer of Cranmer's as given, not 'about
ten years before the ordinal was compiled,' but in the reign of Edward the
Sixth; and as this book of ordination was published in the third year of this
King's reign, it could be but a very little time before its composition; which
is the more worthy of special notice, because, as the Doctor himself observes '
Cranmer was the principal person concerned in that work.'

HE goes on (p. ibid) 'However strange Cranmer's opinion may appear to have
been, there is strong proof that he altered it immediately.' This 'strong
proof' follows in these words, 'For in the same copy of questions and
resolutions, Dr. Leighton's answer to the eleventh question is; 'I suppose that
a Bishop has authority of GOD, as his minister, by scripture to make a Priest;
but he ought not to admit any man to be a Priest, and consecrate him, or to
appoint him to any ministry in the church without the Prince's license and
consent. And that any other man has authority to make a Priest by scripture, I
have not read, nor any example thereof.' To the twelfth question Leighton
answers, 'I suppose that there is a consecration required, as by imposition of
hands; for so we be taught in the ensamples of the Apostles.' Now Durell, in
his Vindiciae, says, 'That, having had an opportunity of examining the original
manuscript, he found that Cranmer gave his consent to these two opinions of
Leighton, subscribing to each Th: Cantuariensis.' It is observable, the 'strong
proof' that Cranmer changed his opinion is rested upon the evidence of Durell,
which is really no evidence at all, if Mr. Boyse may be believed, who speaks of
him Account of the ancient Episcopacy, p. 21.
as 'an author too notorious for his many falsehoods and mistakes in this kind
to be depended on.' And the Doctor himself has unwarily given us strong reason
to presume, that Boyse's account of Durell is a just one. For, says he (p. 27)
'Why Stillingfleet left out this passage is plain; it interfered with the
design of his Irenicum: but why Burnet omitted it is doubtful.' There can be no
doubt in the case. If this passage was not in the original manuscript the
reason of his not inserting it is at once evident. If it was there, he must,
without all controversy be esteemed a dishonest publisher of original
manuscripts; which would, in this case, be very extraordinary, as it would have
been to his purpose to have given us these words, and he could have no
imaginable temptation thus unfairly to suppress them. But should it be supposed
true, that Cranmer subscribed his consent to the opinion of Leighton, as
signified in the above quoted answers to the tenth and twelfth questions, it
would not argue that he had changed his sentiments as to this, that 'Bishops
and Priests were not two things, but one office in the beginning of CHRIST's
religion.' The only words upon which such a change of opinion can be grounded
are these, 'I suppose that a Bishop has authority of GOD, as his minister, by
scripture to make a Priest -- and that any other man has authority to make a
Priest by scripture I have not read. -- But for aught any thing that is here
said, Bishops and Priests might, in Leighton's opinion, be one and the same
order of officers in the church of CHRISt; and nothing appears in any of his
other answers in contradiction hereto. And as to the words, 'That any other man
has authority to make a Priest I have not read,' it is evident that 'by any
other man is meant, any other man not vested with clerical authority. The
general strain of all the answers to this eleventh question plainly leads to
the thought, that it was intended for the settlement of this point, whether the
power of making Priests was appropriated to the Clergy, so as that it might not
be exercised by mere laymen. It was by no means designed to decide the
question, Whether ordination was appropriated to Bishops in opposition to, or
exclusion of, Presbyters? This is put beyond dispute by the answer particularly
of the Archbishop of York to that question, which is this, 'That a Bishop may
make a Priest may be deduced from scripture -- And that ANY OTHER THAN BISHOPS
OR PRIESTS may make a Priest we neither find in scripture, or out of scripture.

THE plain truth is, it does not appear from any one of the answers, to any of
the proposed questions, that there was a difference in the sentiments of these
Bishops and Divines as to the ONENESS, or SAMENESS, of the ORDER of Bishops and
Presbyters; though they might differ in their opinion about the DEGREE in the
same order. The Archbishop of York's answer to the tenth question, 'Whether
Bishops or Priests were first,' will convey to us a clear and just idea of
this; as we find in it such words as these, 'the name of a Bishop is not a name
of ORDER but a name of office, signifying an overseer. And although the
inferior Shepherds have also care to oversee their flock, yet forasmuch as the
Bishop's charge is also to oversee the Shepherds, the name of overseers is
given to the Bishops, and not to the other; and as he is in DEGREE higher, so
in their consecration we find difference even from the primitive church.' I
shall yet add; to the 13th question, 'Whether (if it fortuned a christian
Prince learned to conquer certain dominions of infidels, having none but
temporal learned men with him) if it be defended by the law, that he and they
should preach and teach the word of GOD there, or no? and also make and
constitute Priests, or no? I say to this 13th question, Leighton's answer is,
'I suppose the affirmative thereof to be true; quamvis potestas clavium refidet
praecipue in Ecclesia.' And to the fourteenth question, Whether it be
forefended by the law (if it so fortune that all the Bishops and Priests of a
region were dead, and that the word of GOD should remain there unpreached, and
the sacrament of baptism and others unministred) that the King of the region
should make Bishops and Priests to supply the same or no?' His answer is, 'I
suppose the affirmative to be true, in case that there cannot Bishops or
PRIESTS be had forth of other countries conveniently.' These answers are
essentially different from what the Doctor would have given to these questions,
and absolutely incompatible with the divine right of Episcopacy in his sense of
it. And yet, these selected Bishops and Divines were perfectly unanimous in
saying, that, in the case proposed, 'learned laymen not only may, but ought to
preach and teach GOD's word;' and the greater part of them declare it to be
their opinion, that the 'PRINCE, (in this same case) and his TEMPORAL LEARNED
MEN may make and institute ministers, or Priests.' Burnet's Hist. reform. p.
231, 232, 233, 234. Collect. of Records.
How dissonant are these sentiments of our reformers from those expressed in
the 'appeal,' (p. 4) in these words, 'If the succession [that is, in the line
of Bishops, who only have authority to ordain] be once broken, and the power of
ordination [that is, by Bishops only] once lost, not all the men on earth --
not all the Angels in Heaven, without an immediate commission from CHRIST, can
restore it!

THE Doctor has not yet done with Cranmer. (Says he, p. 30) 'After the time of
his subscribing to Dr. Leighton's opinions concerning Episcopacy, I find him in
no fluctuation of principles; but many proofs appear of his settled and steady
belief that Bishops are superior to Presbyters by apostolical institution.'
Enough, I trust, has been already said to show, that no valid proof has been
given, that Cranmer subscribed Leighton's answers; or, if he did, that this was
sufficient to fasten on him a change of sentiments relative to Episcopacy: nor
am I yet persuaded to think, that there are any proofs from which it will
appear, that it was ever his 'settled belief that Bishops are superior to
Presbyters by apostolical institution.' It is a pity the Doctor has not quoted
the passages in Cranmer's writings, upon which he finds that there was 'no
fluctuation in his principles on this head.' He speaks of a ' Catechism he
compiled, in which, if we may believe Bishop Burnet, he fully owns the divine
institution of Bishops and Priests.' Could a sight of this catechism be
obtained, it is probable it might be in our power to refute what is here said
from Bishop Burnet: However this may be, thus much is certain, if we would form
a right judgment in this matter, it must be from what is said in the catechism
itself, and not by implicit faith in the opinion of another, who, perhaps,
never saw it himself. The Doctor likewise tells us of a 'sermon in this
catechism, or large instruction of young persons, concerning the authority of
the keys, upon Romans x.13, 14, 15, in which sermon his notions of Episcopacy and
church government are so high, that even the high-flying Dr. Hicks reprinted it
at large in his preface to the divine right of Episcopacy asserted.' This
sermon is, I conclude, the very one repaired to by Mr. Drury in order to prove
that Cranmer retracted his opinion about Bishops and Priests; to whom Mr. Boyse
replies Ancient Episcopacy, p. 8.
'the passage he has cited in this sermon no way asserts Priests and Bishops to
be at the beginning two distinct orders.' If the Doctor will bring to view
this, or any other passage, in this sermon, or in any other writing of Cranmer,
and from thence point out to us the affirmed change in his sentiments, we will
readily submit; but until then we shall beg leave to think, that he ever
adhered to the opinion, 'that Priests and Bishops were at one time, and not two
things, but one office in the beginning of CHRIST's religion.

I HAD said, (ans. to app. p. 12) from Mr. J. Owen, and upon his authority,
'that the notion of the right of Bishops to govern and ordain, as being
officers in the church superior to Presbyters, by divine appointment, was first
promoted in the church of England by Archbishop La^d.' The Doctor takes
occasion from hence to play with the word PROMOTED to make his readers merry.
He is utterly at a loss what to make of it. It is a 'mysterious' word; it
contains in it 'some secret meaning, which he does not comprehend;' it 'must be
unfolded,' or, notwithstanding what may be the meaning of this unsearchable
word, 'he must take the liberty to believe, that the national establishment of
this doctrine again and again, and making it a fundamental principle of our
reformation, was doing something to PROMOTE it.' I assure the Doctor I would
not have used this word, which appeared to me a harmless, well meaning one,
could I have foreseen the strange influence it would have on him. It has
certainly very much obstructed his discerning faculty: otherwise, it would not
have appeared to him, that the superiority of Bishops to Presbyters, by divine
appointment, was a doctrine that had been 'again and again nationally
established;' much less that this was a 'fundamental principle of the
reformation.' Archbishop Laud, without all doubt, was the FIRST, I will not
say that PROMOTED this doctrine, lest a word of so profound a meaning should
puzzle the Doctor; but he was the FIRST, in opposition to any 'national
establishment,' or its being at all a principle, much less 'a fundamental one
of the reformation,' that openly asserted, and pleaded for this doctrine.
Perhaps the Doctor, now I have substituted a plain word, instead of a
'mysterious' one, will be convinced of this by what has been offered to his
view: if he is not, I am satisfied, the impartial Public will.

HE goes on, 'if the meaning' of this incomprehensible word promoted 'be, that
none before Archbishop Laud contended for the superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters, by divine appointment, in their writings, I must still deny it; as
I am able to produce abundant evidence to the contrary.' The reader will
remember, I brought in Arch Bishop Laud, as the first promoter of Episcopacy
upon the plan of a divine right, from Mr. J. Owen, depending on his authority.
Of what great importance is it, whether he was the first, second, third, or
fourth that contended for this doctrine? And yet, the Doctor has taken up eight
or nine pages in endeavoring to prove, that a few others wree before Laud in
pleading the divine right of Episcopacy. But the unhappiness is, he is grossly
mistaken in the idea he has given of the sentiments of the men he has named.
They were, it is true, Episcopalians upon the foot of divine right, in a
qualified, mitigated sense; but not in the sense in which Laud and the Doctor,
plead for this right. It was not the opinion of any one of them, that the right
of Bishops, by divine appointment, to govern and ordain, was such, as that it
could not, as the case might require, be altered: and they were clear and full
in signifying their sentiments to this purpose. I have by me a book, entitled,
'A representation of the government of the church of England, according to the
judgment of her Bishops unto the end of Queen Elisabeth's reign,' by Stephen
Lob, as I find his name inserted, in the title page, by Dr. Increase Mather; in
which are extracts, from all the writers Dr. Chandler has mentioned, and many
more, making it evident, beyond denial, that their notion of Episcopacy, upon
the jure divineship plan, was so qualified as to be consistent with an entire
change in the exercise of governing and ordaining power: but it must suffice,
that I may not take up too much room, to bring to view a few of these extracts,
from only two or three of the most illustrious of these writers; and I have
selected these principally for instruction to the Doctor, and to let him and
the Public know, that he is HIGHER in his church-principles than the HIGHEST it
was in his power to name, when HIGH notions of Episcopacy first began to be
broached.

HE celebrates Archbishop Whitgift as an eminent writer in favor of the
divine right of Episcopacy; but, whether the Archbishop's notion of a divine
right does at all agree with his, may easily be determined by the following
passages in his book against Cartwright. Having distinguished between such
things as so necessary that without them we cannot be saved, and such as are so
necessary that without them we cannot so WELL and CONVENIENTLY be saved, he
adds 'I confess, that in a church collected together in one place, and at
liberty, government is necessary with the second kind of necessity; but that
any kind of government is so necessary, that without it the church cannot be
saved, or that it may not be altered into some other kind, thought to be more
expedient, I utterly deny; and the reasons that move me so to do be these The
first is, because I find no one certain and perfect kind of government
prescribed, or commanded, in the scriptures to the church of CHRIST; which no
doubt should have been done, if it had been a matter necessary to the salvation
of the church. There is no certain kind of government, or discipline,
prescribed to the church; but that the same may be altered as the profit of the
churches requires. -- I do deny, that the scriptures do set down any one
certain kind of government in the church to be p^rpetual, for all times,
persons, and places, without alteration. -- It is well known, that the manner
and form of government used in the apostles time, and expressed in the
scriptures, neither is now, nor can, nor ought to be observed, either touching
the persons or the functions -- We see manifestly that, in sundry points, the
government of the church, used in the Apostles time, is, and has been of
necessity altered, and that it neither may, nor can be, revoked; ^hereby it is
plain, that any one kind of e^ternal government, perpetually to be is no where
in the scripture prescribed to the church, but the charge thereof is left to
the MAGISTRATE, so that nothing be done contrary to the word of GOD. This is
the opinion of the best writers; NEITHER DO I KNOW ANY LEARNED MAN OF A
CONTRARY JUDGMENT. -- Either we must admit another form now of governing the
church, than was in the Apostles time, or else we must seclude the christian
Magistrate from all authority in ecclesiastical matters. -- I am persuaded,
that the external government of the church under a christian Magistrate must be
according to the kind and form of government used in the commonwealth; else
how can you make the Prince supreme Governor of all states and causes
ecclesiastical?' -- The places referred to in Lob's representat. are 'Defence
tract, C. 3, Divis. 38, 39, 40, 41. And Tract 17, C.2. Divis. 29.


ARCHBISHOP Bancroft is likewise mentioned by the Doctor as having signalised
himself in defending the cause of Episcopacy; but it could not be Episcopacy in
the the sense pleaded for in the 'appeal,' and its 'defence.' For it is
evident, from the case of the three Presbyters that were consecrated Bishops
for Scotland, at London, that Bancroft allowed ordination by Presbyters to be
valid. The Doctor indeed ^s pleased to say, (p. 46) 'They were not consecrated
on the principle that ordination by Presbyters was valid, but upon the belief
that the episcopal character, as it included those of a Presbyter and Deacon,
might be conveyed by a single consecration' -- But, as this is rested on no
other proof than the Doctor's own affirmation, it ought to be considered as
nothing, when compared with the evidence we have, that Bancroft directly
expressed his acknowledgment of the validity of ordination by Presbyters.
Archbishop Spotiswood declares this in so many words. Says he, Hist. of
Scotland, Lib. 7, p. 514, as quoted by Lob in his represent. p. 34.
'A question was moved by Dr. Andrews, Bishop of Ely, touching the consecration
of the Scottish Bishops; who, as he said, must be first ordained Presbyters, as
having received no ordination from a Bishop. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr.
Bancroft, who was by, maintained, That thereof there was no necessity, seeing,
where of Bishops could not be had, the ordination given by Presbyters must be
esteemed lawful; otherwise, that it might be doubted if there were any lawful
vocation in most of the reformed churches. This applauded to by the other
Bishops, ELY acquiesced, and at the day, and in the place appointed, the three
Scottish Bishops were consecrated.'

AS for Hooker, it is plainly evident, from a considerable number of large
extracts from his 'immortal work, the ecclesiastical polity,' to be met with in
Lob's representation, that, in his opinion, the scriptures do not make the
Episcopal, or any other particular kind of government, UNALTERABLE; that the
power of conferring orders is not, by any divine law, SO APPROPRIATED TO
BISHOPS, that in no case, ordination by PRESBYTERS can be valid; and that the
church visible is the true original subject of all power, and can alter the
government of the church. Among the extracts to this purpose, the two or three
following ones only must suffice for the present.

THE first is taken from his seventh book, in these words, 'Bishops, albeit
they may avouch with conformity of truth, that their authority has thus
descended even from, the very Apostles themselves; yet the ABSOLUTE and
EVERLASTING CONTINUANCE of it they cannot say any commandment of the LORD
enjoins; and therefore must acknowledge, that the church has power by
universal consent, upon urgent cause, to TAKE IT AWAY, if thereunto she be
constrained through the PROUD, TYRANNICAL, AND UNREASONABLE DEALINGS OF HER
BISHOPS. Therefore, lest Bishops should forget themselves, as if none on earth
had AUTHORITY to touch their states, let them continually bear in mind, that it
is rather the force of custom, whereby the church, having so long found it good
to continue under the regiment of her virtuous Bishops, does still uphold,
maintain and honor them in that respect, than that any such true and heavenly
law can be showed, by the evidence whereof it may of a truth appear, that the
LORD himself has appointed Presbyters for ever to be under the regiment of
Bishops in what sort so ever they behave themselves.'

IN the same book, he says, 'There may be sometimes very just and sufficient
reasons to all ordination made without a Bishop. The whole church visible,
being the true original subject of all power, it has not ordinarily allowed
any other than Bishops alone to ordain: Howbeit, as the ordinary course is
ordin^ in all things to be observed, so it may, in some cases not unnecessary,
that we decline from the ordinary ways.'

IN the same book still, we meet with this passage 'We are not simply without
exception to urge a LINEAL DESCENT OF POWER FROM THE APOSTLES BY CONTINUED
SUCCESSION OF BISHOPS IN EVERY EFFECTUAL ORDINATION.' Vid. Lob's represent. p.
42, 43, 45.
I shall subjoin here, that Stillingfleet says, 'They who please but to consult
the third book of Hooker's ecclesiastical history, may see the mutability of
the form of church government largely asserted, and, fully proved.' Lob makes
the same observation; and with exact truth, as I can myself testify, having had
opportunity, since the penning what has been above offered, to look into
Hooke^, that I might be satisfied what his sentiments were upon this head.

UNTIL the Doctor sees fit to profess his readiness to fall in with these
sentiments, I shall think myself at liberty to believe, that Laud was the FIRST
who promoted Episcopacy, conformably to the idea, he, and the very small party
he is joined with, entertains concerning it.

AS, upon the point of Reordination, he 'does not undertake to contradict me,
(to use his own words, p. 42) but to place it in a proper point of light,' I
shall only desire the reader to take notice of one thing he has omitted, which
is of far greater importance than any thing he has offered. It is the act of
the thirteenth of Elisabeth, which runs thus, Lob's represent. of the
government of the church of England, p. 59, 60.
That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to
be a Priest or minister of GOD's holy word and sacraments, by reason of ANY
OTHER FORM of institution, consecration, or ordering, than the FORM NOW USED in
the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady -- shall -- declare his assent,
and subscribe to all the articles of religion.' -- [These concern only the
profession of the true christian faith, and the doctrine of the sacraments,
comprised in a book entitled, Articles, etc. viz. Thirty-nine articles] The
penalty is, 'That every such person which shall not subscribe, shall be (ipso
facto) deprived, and all his ecclesiastical promotion shall be void, as if he
had been naturally dead.' In consequence of this act, Whittingham and Travers,
though not ordained according to the FORM THEN IN USE, might notwithstanding be
LAWFUL ministers of the church of England. I mention this to let the Doctor
know, that he was mistaken in his declaration, (p. 45) 'that throughout the
whole reign (that is of Queen Elisabeth) we are considering, -- it was an
established law -- that no man should be accounted or taken to be a lawful
Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, in the church of England, or suffered to execute any
of the said functions, WITHOUT EPISCOPAL ORDINATION.' This is said in direct
contradiction to the abovementioned act of the thirteenth of Elisabeth, which
continued in force till Charles the second; when, by another act, 'every one,
not in holy orders by EPISCOPAL ORDINATION,' was disabled from 'holding any
parsonage whatever, as if he had been naturally dead.' Whitingham and Travers
were therefore LAWFUL ministers in the church of England, though not EPISCOPALLY
ordained; and their holding benefices was not 'by permission through the
necessity of the times,' but in perfect agreement with the then established law
of the nation.

I SHALL not think it improper to add here, more especially for the use of the
Doctor, and his friends, that this act of the thirteenth of Elisabeth is a full
proof, that it was not her opinion that ordination was, by divine appointment,
appropriated to Bishops in distinction from Presbyters, so as that ordination
by Presbyters only was invalid. Had this been her sentiment, she could not in
consistency herewith have given her fiat to this act. Now, let it be
particularly remembered, the Doctor has told us, (p. 41) he has 'proved, that
the doctrines of the Bishops and Clergy, in the reign of Queen Elisabeth, must
have been agreeable to the Queen, and to the principal persons about her court.'
If so, Whitgift, Bancroft, Bilson, and other episcopal writers in this reign,
were not for ordination by Bishops, so as to nullify ordination by Presbyters;
nor could they disown any as LAWFUL ministers of the church of England MERELY
because they had been ordained by Presbyters only. The divine right of
Episcopacy, in the Doctor's sense, could not therefore be the doctrine of the
church of England in the reign of Queen Elisabeth (as I have before proved it
was not in the reigns either of Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth); and to
say that it could, would be to say, that two contradictory establishments were
in force at one and the same time.

THE Doctor now proceeds to show, that there is 'authority in the church of
England purely ecclesiastical;' -- But, as in reply (p. 211) to my third
objection to the plan of an American Episcopate, he only says 'it has been
answered already, [he must mean in this part of his defense, or it is no where
endeavored to be answered] I shall postpone what might have been offered here,
until I come to justify the force of this objection. Only, I shall think it
proper to insert, in this place, a few pertinent words from Burn, who is an
author the Doctor will not suspect to have been wanting in his regard to the
church of England. Says he, Ecclesiastical law, vol. 2. under the word
supremacy.
'The truth is, that, after the abolition of the papal power, there was no
branch of sovereignty with which the Princes of this realm, for above a century
after the reformation, were more delighted than that of being the supreme head
of the church: imagining (as it seems) that all the power which the Pope
claimed and exercised (so far as he was able) was, by the statutes abrogating
the papal authority, annexed to the imperial crown of this realm. -- The Pope
arrogated to himself a jurisdiction superior, not only to his own canon law,
but to the municipal laws of kingdoms. And these Princes of this realm
abovementioned seem to have considered themselves as POPES IN THEIR OWN
DOMINIONS.' --

THE Doctor, after he had wrote fifty-eight pages, very pertinently introduces
his reader, asking, 'What is all this to the purpose of an American
Episcopate?' And then as pertinently answers the question by saying, 'I know
not.' Why then did he commit so gross a trespass upon the patience of the
Public? It is true, he said nothing, in his appeal, 'about the opinion of the
reformers upon the points of Episcopacy, and the King's supremacy;' but it is
as true, that he said that which contradicted their opinion, and made it
necessary in answering his appeal, to set this matter in a just light. He has
therefore really, though undesignedly, sneered at himself. If his sketch of
arguments 'was to the purpose of an American Episcopate,' it was to the purpose
to make answer to it; if it was not to this purpose, as is certainly the truth,
he knows as well as I, that HE ONLY is the object of ridicule for giving
occasion to that which was impertinent, as not being to the purpose of the main
point to be disputed.

HE now comes to defend his darling doctrine of an uninterrupted succession in
the line of Bishops. And here he has sunk much below my expectations; not
having offered any one thing that will bear being examined, though in a cursory
way only.

I HAD allowed, 'that none have authority in the christian church but those who
derive it from CHRIST, either mediately, or immediately;' suggesting, that this
was 'the opinion of the Colonists of whatever denomination:' upon which the
Doctor, taking it for granted that authority, if conveyed mediately, must be
conveyed by personal succession, labors hard to prove a self-evident truth,
namely, 'that where a thing is to be conveyed from one person to another, not
immediately, but by a successive communication through a number of intermediate
hands, if any one in the succession fails of making the conveyance, the thing
evidently stops, and passes not on to the person to whom it is intended'. Who
ever disputed this, which is so evident, upon the b^re proposal, that it cannot
be made more to by any method of reasoning whatever? It is a pity the Doctor
did not think it proper to prove the only thing that here needed proof, viz.
that authority can be conveyed mediately from CHRIST, in no way but by personal
succession. Un^il he is able to prove this, it is to no purpose to say, 'if the
authority first given to A is to pass on successively to B, to C, to D, and to
E; should the conveyance stop, or be interrupted at C, so that it passes not on
to D; in that case D does not receive it, and therefore cannot convey it to E,
unless D is able to give what it has not.' This pompous show of demonstration
may delude weak minds, but is altogether a rope of sand, unless it be first
proved, that the authority is so given, that it can in no mediate way be
conveyed, but in succession from A to B, and so on. We join with the Doctor in
saying 'That no number of men on earth, nor all the Angels in Heaven, can give
authority from CHRIST not given to them, or renew this authority if lost.' And
what then? Is it not obvious to the most vulgar understanding, that the grand
point in dispute is here begged, and supposed to be granted, namely, that
authority is given by CHRIST to be communicated by personal succession, and
that there is no other mediate way in which it can be communicated? The Doctor
might have known, as he pretends an acquaintance with Hooker's 'immortal work,'
that the church, at least in his opinion, is the true original subject of all
power from CHRIST; and that she may take it away even from Bishops, if they are
proud, tyrannical, and unreformable in their dealings, as GOD knows has too
often been the case. He accordingly declares, we are not simply, and without
exception to urge a lineal descent of power from the Apostles by continued
succession of Bishops in every effectual ordination. Vid. Quotation from
Hooper, in the foregoing 53d. page.
And I can assure him still further, it is the opinion of the non-episcopalian
Colonists, that the power of perpetuating the ministration of the word and
gospel ordinances, is so lodged with christian churches, that, whenever the
case requires it, they can begin a succession de novo, Monsieur Claude has
clearly expressed, and concisely proved, our sentiments upon this head. Says
he, in his defense of the reformation, part 4, p. 94, 95, -- 'Wherein the
scripture recommends to the faithful, the taking diligent heed to the
preservation and confirmation of their faith, and to propogate it to their
children, it gives them by that very thing a sufficient right to make use of
all proper means in order to that end; and every body knows the ministry is one
of those means, and therefore the obligation the faithful are under to preserve
and propagate the faith, includes that of CREATING to themselves Pastors when
they cannot have them otherwise: in short, when the scripture teaches that the
faithful have a right to choose their Pastors, it teaches thereby that they have
a right to instal them into their office in case of necessity; for that call
consisting more essentially in election than in installation, which is but a
formality, there is no reason to believe that GOD would have given the people a
right to choose their Pastors, and to have them installed by others, and that he
has not given them at the same time a power of installing them themselves, when
it cannot be done otherwise, since naturally that which we have a right to do
by another, we have a right to do by ourselves.' Nay, even Dodwell himself,
that high-flying Episcopalian seems to have expressed nearly the same
sentiments, [whether it be, or be not, consistent with the other parts of his
scheme] in his separation of churches. Says he, as he is quoted by Mr. M. H's.
enquiry into the nature of schism, (p. 49,) -- 'Whenever any person is invested
into the supreme power, and the society over which he is placed is independent
on other societies, such a person can never be placed in his power if not by
them who must after be his subjects, unless by his predecessor, which no
society can depend upon for a constant rule of succession. -- I am apt to think
this must have been the way of making Bishops at first, how absolute soever I
conceive them to be when they are once made. -- This seems best to agree with
the absoluteness of particular churches, before they had by compact united
themselves under metropolitans and exarchs, into provincial and diocesan
churches; and this seems to have been fitted for the frequent persesecutions of
those earlier ages, when every church was able to secure its own succession,
without depending on the uncertain opportunities of meeting the Bishops of the
whole province: and the alteration of this practice, the giving the Bishops of
the province an interest in the choice of every particular Colleague, seems not
to have been so much from want of power in the particular churches to do it, as
for the security of compacts that they might be certain of such a colleague as
would observe them. -- It is probable that it was in imitation of the
philosophers successions, that these ecclesiastical successions were framed;
and when the philosophers failed to nominate their own successors, the election
was in the schools.' My author's remark upon these words is, 'If every
particular church had originally a power within itself to choose and invest its
Bishops, and the concurrence of other Bishops herein was not for want of power
in that particular church, but only for securing the agreement of Bishops among
themselves, we have done with the necessity of a continued line of episcopal
ordination, and there may be true mission without it.'
which succession will be as truly vested with authority from CHRIST, as if it
had been uninterruptedly handed down from the Apostles. The Doctor, instead of
attempting to disprove these tenets, takes it for granted, that authority from
CHRIST can be conveyed in no mediate way, but by personal succession in his
notion of it; and then needlessly blots several pages in proving what no man in
his senses ever did, or could deny.

I HAD said of the succession pleaded for in the appeal, 'that it is not
capable of any good proof, nor is there any probability, that so long a chain,
running through so many ages of ignorance, violence, and all kinds of
imposture, has never once been broke,' (p. 15.) The Doctor rep^es, 'This
assertion militates as forcibly against the succession which the churches in
the Colonies certainly believe, as against the episcopal.' The colony-churches
are so far 'from certainly believing' what the Doctor would here make them
believe, that they care nothing about an uninterrupted line, either of Bishops
or Presbyters; as they know they have power from CHRIST to constitute officers
for all the purposes of the gospel ministry, should it so happen, that the line
of succession, in regard of Presbyters, as well as Bishops, had been
interrupted and broken.

THE Doctor goes on, 'as to the succession in the line of Bishops, I am still
of opinion, that it is incumbent on the objectors to prove, that it has been
interrupted'. One would naturally be disposed to think, it was incumbent on
those, who urge the absolute necessity of the non-interruption of this line, in
order to the validity of gospel-administrations, to prove that it has not been
interrupted; especially if they are the administrators. For myself, I am free
to own, I should not dare to meddle with the dispensation of gospel ordinances,
upon the doctrine of an uninterrupted line, unless I was able, fairly to prove,
that I was myself in this line without interruption.

THE Doctor here mentions some things positively in favor of the line's being
uninterrupted. Says he, 'We know, by the best historical evidence, that it has
been the universal practice of the church, from the time of the Apostles to the
present hour, to acknowledge none for Bishops who were not ordained by other
Bishops.' It is impossible he, or his party, should be possessed of this
knowledge, unless in imagination only; because it can have existence no where
else, having no reality as a truth, from the practice of any one christian
church for the first two hundred years. Throughout this long space, no proof
can be given, that 'none were acknowledged for Bishops, who were not ordained
by Bishops' in the impleaded sense. If there can, let it be produced. It has
never yet been done, and I challenge the Doctor to do it: nor indeed was it
ever the 'universal practice,' in any age, even to this day, to 'acknowledge
none for Bishops, but those who were ordained by Bishops,' upon the plan of a
DIVINE RIGHT. He goes on, 'the consecration of Bishops was a public act --
esteemed to be a matter of such importance that the report of it was
immediately carried even to distant places -- and, in disputed cases, it was
easy to discover, whether the person was, in reality, a Bishop or not; or,
supposing the contrary, that no one would receive episcopal consecration from
such hands.' I shall leave it with common sense to judge, whether this is any
other than a sandy bottom to build one's faith upon, in a matter of such
essential concern as the uninterruption of this line is made to be. And what
the Doctor yet adds is as weak an one. Says he, 'We know from scripture, that
IF such a succession is as necessary, as, upon a speculative examination, it
appears to be, CHRIST has promised to preserve and continue it to the end of
the world.' That is, in plain english, if it be supposed, allowed, and taken
for granted, that CHRIST has made an uninterrupted succession necessary, he
will take care, in virtue of his promise, to preserve and continue it. A
notable discovery this! Who, besides the Doctor, that regards his character,
would declare in the face of the world, that he was 'abundantly satisfied with
these various kinds of evidence,' in an affair essentially connected, in his
view, with everlasting salvation, which, when examined, appear to be mere
nothing?

I HAD said, that, to make the very being of a church, and all covenant hopes
of salvation, to rest upon so precarious a foundation as an uninterrupted
succession in the line of Bishops, was to expose the religion of CHRIST to
ridicule; -- That it would follow upon this doctrine, that the public worship
of the non-episcopalian Colonists, of all the dissenters in England, and of all
the reformed churches who had no ministers but such as were ordained by
Presbyters, would be an affront to CHRIST; and that, at the reformation, if the
popish Bishops had stuck to their old principles, and discontinued the
succession by refusing to ordain any but those of their own communion, it would
have been the duty of the laity to have lived without gospel ordinances till a
new commission was sent from Heaven to give authority to administer them; --
And I am greatly confirmed in the propriety and force of these objections by
what the Doctor has said in answer to them. Let the reader compare what we have
both offered, and judge for himself. And, perhaps, he will not judge
differently from Monsieur Claude, in the like case; whose words are these.
Hist. de^* of the reform. part 4, p. 97.
'To speak my thoughts freely, it seems to me that this confident opinion, of
the absolute necessity of Episcopacy, that goes so high as to own no church, or
call, or ministry, or sacraments, or salvation, in the world, where there are
no episcopal ordinations, although there should be the true doctrine, the true
faith and piety there; and which would make all religion depend upon a
formality, and on such a formality as we have shown to be of no other than
human institution; that opinion, I say, cannot be looked on otherwise than as
the very worst character and mark of the highest hypocrisy, a piece of
pharisaism all over, that strains at a gnat and swallows a camel; and I cannot
avoid having, at least, a contempt of those kind of thoughts, and a compassion
for those who fill their heads with them.'

IT was further observed, in answer to the appeal, 'That the worst of this
doctrine of an uninterrupted succession is, its being derived through the
church of Rome;' concerning which it is declared by the church of England in
her homilies, 'that as at present it is, and has been for nine hundred years,
it is so far from being of the nature of the TRUE CHURCH, that NOTHING CAN BE
MORE;' besides which, she explicitly speaks of this church as a FOUL, FILTHY,
OLD, WITHERED HARLOT, the FOULEST and FILTHIEST that was EVER SEEN.' What now
is the Doctor's reply? He gives it in a passage he quotes from Mr. White's
defense, the whole force of which, so far as there is any, lies in these words,
'Harlot as she is, she may bring forth children, as well as an honest and
virtuous matron, and sometimes children far better than their parent. And if I
must derive my spiritual pedigree from a harlot, I had rather it should be an
old withered one, of an ancient and honorable line, than a young strumpet of
no name and family, and who came into the world but yesterday,' The Doctor
cannot be more surprised at my being 'unacquainted with this defense of Mr.
White,' as he thinks I 'appear to be,' than I am at his injudiciousness in
bringing it into view. If Bishops derive their existence, as such, from an
acknowledged WHORE, they must, without all controversy, be born of fornication.
Is it possible a WHORE, a FOUL, FILTHY WHORE should, being an ADULTERESS, bring
forth any other than a BASE-BORN, SPURIOUS race? And it matters not, whether
she be a young whore, or an old withered one. The Doctor may prefer an
episcopal pedigree from a withered whore, having existed such for many hundreds
of years, being on this account, an ancient whore, and an honorable one, (if
this is not a moral impossibility) to a descent from a young strumpet of no
name or family. He shall have his choice for all me; but let him remember, in
either of these cases, the descendants will be bastards, and not sons. Besides,
he has not seen fit to say a word, either from himself, or Mr. White, by which
we may be informed, how that church can communicate true genuine orders, which
the homilies, he has subscribed to, declare to have been 'NINE HUNDRED YEARS
past SO FAR from having the nature of the TRUE CHURCH, that NOTHING CAN BE
MORE. As the dissenting Gentleman Answ. to White, p. 207.
reasons with great propriety and strength, 'What miracles are here! That which
is no true church, nor has been any thing like it for a thousand years past;
yet conveys true, regular offices and powers! An anti-apostolic church
imparting genuine apostolic orders! The synagogue of satan becomes the sacred
repository, wherein the power of ordination to holy offices, in CHRIST's
church, for more than ten centuries, principally rested, and was almost only to
be found! The church of Rome, which, by apostasy has cut itself off from the
body of CHRIST, has nevertheless his spirit and authority dwelling in it; and
is commissioned by CHRIST to examine, ordain, and send ministers into his
church, for the edifying his body, and perfecting his saints! How in every view
mavelous and transcendant is this!'

THE Doctor says nothing further, in this section, in his own defense, that
calls for enlargement by way of reply.

THOUGH he had needlessly introduced an extract, in his appeal, from
Chillingsworth's demonstration of Episcopacy, I thought it proper to take some
notice of it. What he has offered in his defense, is, as I apprehend, very
little to the purpose. I desire therefore nothing more, than that the reader
would examine what we have both said, and then judge between us.

HE does not deny, that Bishop Burnet, when he wrote his vindication of the
church of Scotland, 'believed Bishops and Presbyters to be several degrees of
the same office.' But he adds, 'his subsequent writings afford innumerable
proofs, that he afterward believed the doctrine of Episcopacy, both by the
evidence of scripture, and the practice of the primitive church.' When he wrote
his vindication, he believed the doctrine of Episcopacy in the sense that
nineteen in twenty of the members of the church of England believed it then,
and believe it now; but that he ever believed it in the Doctor's sense, or that
he ever wrote any thing from whence this can be made evident, I shall not be
persuaded to think, until I have better proof of it than bare affirmation It is
strange the Doctor has given us no proof from any of the 'writings' of Bishop
Burnet, as they 'afford innumerable proofs,' that he believed the doctrine of
Episcopacy, in the impleaded sense. It may reasonably be supposed, it was not
in his power to do this; and the rather, because the Bishop declared the
sentiments mentioned in the answer to the appeal, when Episcopacy was in its
zenith, and it might be expected, on that account, that he would have spoken as
highly of it, as his conscience would permit. And yet, he is particularly
express in making Bishop and Presbyter, not distinct orders, but different
degrees only in the same office. His words are these, which I choose to quote,
that the reader may see in how full and strong a manner he delivers his
sentiments upon this head. Says he, Vind. of the the church of Scotland, p 310,
'I do not allege a Bishop to be a distinct office from a Presbyter, but a
different degree of the same office.' -- And again, p. 331, 'I acknowledge
Bishop and Presbyter to be one and the same office, and so plead for no new
office-bearer in the church. The first branch of their power is their authority
to publish the gospel, to manage the worship, and dispense the sacraments; and
this is ALL that is of DIVINE RIGHT in the ministry, in which Bishops and
Presbyters are equally sharers: But besides this, the church claims a power
of jurisdiction, of making rules for discipline, and executing the same; all
which indeed is suitable to the common laws of societies, and the general rules
of scripture, but has no positive warrant from any scripture precept. -- I
herefore, as to the management of this jurisdiction, it is in the church's
power to cast it into what mould she will.' --
: nor I shall believe, that Stillingfleet ever departed so far from the
sentiments of his Irenicum, as to fall in with the Doctor in his notion of the
jure divinino-ship of Bishops in distinction from Presbyters, before I see it
otherwise evidenced than by his naked assertion.

I SHALL take this opportunity to assure the Doctor, that I am not ashamed
openly to declare, that I pay 'more deference to Stillingfleet, Rector of
Sutton, than to Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's, or Bishop of Worcester, in
the dispute relative to Episcopacy.' He may call this 'partiality, absurd, and
preposterous:' But it may be, the Public will think with me, that a rectorship,
or bishopric might have some influence to enlarge his notions of the power and
dignity of Bishops, though never that I know of, to the height the Doctor would
carry them.

AS to Archbishop Usher, that known and celebrated antiquary, it is as evident
as a fact of this nature can be, that it was his settled opinion, 'That Bishops
and Presbyters differ only in degree, not in order. What the Doctor has said
tends only to disguise, not to invalidate this truth. I never said, or thought,
that the Archbishop esteemed ordination by Presbyters regular, where there
were Bishops by whom it might be obtained. But it is indisputable, even from
the very words omitted by me, in the Archbishop's letter to Bernard, but cited
by the Doctor, that he accounted ordination by Presbyters to be valid in places
where Bishops* cannot be had; which is essentially inconsistent with the
Doctor's scheme. The plain truth is, the Archbishop neither thought Bishops
were a distinct order from Presbyters, or that ordination was, by divine
appointment, appropriated to that order. This is, beyond all reasonable
dispute, evident from his own words, professedly used in arguing upon this
point, as produced by Dr. Parr who wrote his life. Appendix to his life, p. 6.
They run thus. 'The intrinsical power of ordaining proceeds not from
jurisdiction, but only from order. But a Presbyter has the same order in
specie with a Bishop. Ergo, a Presbyter has equally an intrinsical power to
give order, and is equal to him in the power of orders: The Bishop having no
higher degree in respect of the intention or extension of the character of
order, though he has an higher degree (i. e. a more eminent place) in respect
of authority and jurisdiction in spiritual regiment.'

THE Doctor finishes this first section by declaring, 'That he is more
established than ever in the belief that Episcopacy is not only ancient, and
catholic, but truly apostolical.' But this faith of his, and the publication of
it, are to no purpose. He made his appeal to the 'impartial Public;' and to
this tribunal the dispute, on both sides, is submitted. They therefore are our
Judges, and it must be left with them to decide in this matter.

Reply to Dr. CHANDLER's Second Section.
THE Doctor has seen fit, for reasons best known to himself, to pass over
almost every thing, this section relates to, that was material; choosing to
detain his readers, from the main point, by calling their attention to that
which is of comparatively small importance.

HE thought it proper, in his appeal, to make a distinction 'between the
several things that had been added to the episcopal office, and those which
originally and essentially belong to it.' It was said in reply, 'The question
is not, whether these and such like appendages to the episcopal office will be
destructive of the powers which essentially belong to it; but whether they do
not unfit the persons vested with it for the proper discharge of the duties of
it? insomuch that it would be unreasonable to add such appendages, and as much
so to expect, if they are added, that christian professors should not complain
of it as an intolerable grievance.' The Doctor affects, to be at a loss to
know, who I meant by 'christian professors,' by his crying out 'Professors of
what!' I will tell him, professors of faith in CHRIST, as the one only SUPREME
HEAD of the church, in opposition to all other claims, whether they are made by
the POPE, or any christian PRINCES or STATES whatever. He then says, 'Whether
the addition of such append^ges be reasonable, or unreasonable, is nothing to
me; and, which is much more, it is nothing to the case of such an Episcopate as
is proposed for America.' Why then, in the name of wonder, did he say any thing
about these appendages? If it was nothing to him, that is, the cause he was
defending, and nothing to the case of an American Episcopate, it was most
certainly to no purpose for him to say a word about them.

IN prosecuting the distinct on he had made, he observed. 'He who has a small
diocese has the same episcopal powers, as he that has a large one; and it
matter^ not as to the validity of the act, whether it be performed by the one
or the other.' To which it was answered, as he has summed up the answer, 'It
certainly does as to his capacity to serve the ends of his office; and there
is, in proportion, the same incongruity in placing Bishops at the head of large
diocesses, as in having an universal one.' What now says the Doctor to this?
His reply is, 'This considered as an answer to me, and in no other light are we
authorized to consider it, amounts to no more than this; that although what I
said is allowed to be true, yet something that I did not say is entirely false.
The thing which I did not say is, that a Bishop is as able to serve the great
ends of his office in a large diocese as in a small one.' It is true, he did
not say this; but it is as true, that it was with propriety, and irresistible
force that I said it. He knows, or is grossly ignorant, that we never disowned
the validity of episcopal acts, where Bishops had large diocesses. He knows
also, unless he is an utter stranger to the non-episcopalian sentiments, that
we judge it highly improper, and an intolerable grievance, that Bishops should
be at the head of large diocesses; because it destroys their capacity to serve
the ends, designed by CHRIST in the institution of their office. His only
business therefore was to show, that this appendage did not affect the Bishop's
capacity to answer the ends of his appointment. As the 'validity' of episcopal
acts was never called in question, on account of the largeness, or smallness,
of their diocesses, his mentioning this appendage was quite impertinent, unless
with a view to prove, in opposition to us, that it would consist with the
Bishops duty; which, it should seem, he does think was any part of what he was
called to. However, he goes on, 'If I had said this [that a Bishop is as able
to serve the ends of his office in a large diocese, as a small one,] unless the
large diocese is supposed to be larger than in any protestant country -- it
would not have been so very exceptionable." -- Much might be said here, but I
shall make no other answer than this, that when the Doctor understands the full
meaning of those words of our Savior, 'My kingdom is not of this world,' and
has his mind impressed with a just sense of the duty incumbent on a Bishop in
the church of CHRIST, I have no doubt but he will alter his sentiments upon
this head.

HE now passes on to the trite worn-out instances of Aerius and Colluthus, but
without saying any thing worthy of detaining us very long.

AS to Aerius; I had said, 'That Epiphanius was the first that found fault with
him, for his opinion of the parity of Bishops and Presbyters.' Upon this the
Doctor, that he might make some show of learning, egregioussly trifles. The
only thing that needs a remark is, his observing, 'If an intimation is
intended, that Ephiphanius was the only person that, at first, considered the
doctrine of Aerius as exceptionable, or that the parity of Bishops and
Presbyters was generally admitted in the fourth century, the suggestion is
groundless. The united voice of antiquity, and even the concessions of our most
considerable adversaries, prove the contrary with invincible evidence.' This is
not the first or second time, that the Doctor has discovered his little
acquaintance with antiquity; though he speaks with positive assurance, as
though he was the most learned antiquary. Episcopal writers of the first
figure, such as Reignolds, Jewel, Bridges, Bishop of Oxford, Whitaker, Regius
Professor of divinity in the University of Cambridge, Stillingfleet, and
others, would have informed him, had he not read the original authors, that
Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysistom, The^phy act, were, as
to the identity of order upon the footing of divine right, of the same opinion
with Aerius, though they lived much about the same time; and, I may add, so
were Clement of Rome, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenaeus, who lived before him. It
is not therefore in the least probable, that Aerius was condemned CHIEFLY, as
the Doctor or says, for his opinion concerning the parity of Bishops and
Presbyters. Had this been the case, most of his co-temporaries must have been
condemned likewise, as they were chargeable with the same monstrous heresy. It
is far more reasonable to think, that he acted in opposition to the then
general practice, exciting, in consequence of his opinion, divisions and
discord; and that this, among other things, was the true reason of his
condemnation. And this indeed appears to be the purport of the account, the
Doctor himself has given us from Mosheim, the only evidence he has brought to
prove, that Aerius was condemned, not 'meerly or only,' as I had said, but
CHIEFLY for his opinion concerning the identity of Bishops and Presbyters.

AS to Collythus; he has added an 'extract from the synodical epistle of the
Bishops of Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, and Pontapolis, and from a joint letter of
the Clergy of the Province of Marcotis, both preserved in the works of
Athanasius.' But if he had seen fit, as he was desired, to consult Blondel's
Apologia, or what is said from it in the Irenicum, he would have found a full
answer to these extracts. I shall here lay before his view what is said in the
Irenicum as a summary of Blondel's representation. It is in these words, Iren.
p. 381, 382.
'First, the pronouncing such an ordination null does not evidence, that they
looked on ordination as belonging, of divine right, only to Bishops; for we
find, by many instances, that acting in a bare contempt of ecclesiastical
canons was sufficient to degrade any from being Presbyters. Secondly, if
Ischyrds had been ordained by a Bishop, there were circumstances enough to
induce the council to pronounce it null. First, as done out of the diocese, in
which case ordinations are nulled by council. Arel. c. 13. Secondly* Done by
open and pronounced schismatics. Thirdly, done fine titulo, and so nulled by
the then canons. Thirdly, Collythus did not act as a Presbyter in ordaining,
but as a Bishop of the Meletian party in Cynus, as the Clergy of Mareotis
speaking of Jschyras, his ordination by Collythus a Presbyter, making show of
being a Bishop; and is supposed to have been ordained a Bishop by Metetius.'

I NOW come, my readers, to hold out to your view, not a 'CURIOSITY,' but a
mavelous phenomenon in the 'regions of controversy.' The Doctor had said, in
his appeal, 'No instance of an ordination by mere Presbyters can be found in
the church for several ages.' It was offered in reply, 'We should take it
kindly to have pointed out to us so much as ONE instance, within the long
period of an hundred and fifty years from CHRIST, of an ordination by any
Bishop, in any part of the christian world; meaning by a Bishop, an officer in
the church superior to a Presbyter. I have lately been looking over the
extracts I made twenty years ago from the FATHERS OF THE TWO FIRST CENTURIES,
and do not find a SINGLE EXAMPLE of an ordination by Bishops, in the
appropriated sense, within the time before specified. If the Doctor would
present us with one [that is from the FATHERS within this time] it would be to
me a great favor.' What now is the Doctor's answer? It follows in these words,
'Behold, reader, a curiosity. This very same challenge he made in his Dudlean
lecture, (p. 70) to which a formal and direct answer has been given by Mr.
Leaming. His words are as follow: I will comply with his (Dr. Chauncy's)
demand; and I hope he will allow the authority of my author. I might produce
many, but for brevity's sake shall mention but one instance; and that is the
ordination of Titus by St. Paul. That Titus had an episcopal ordination appears
from the charge St. Paul gave him, Tit. 1.5. 'For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
elders in every city, as I HAD APPOINTED THEE' St. Paul charged him to 'rebuke
with all authority;' and again, 'a man that is an heretic, after the first and
second admonition, reject.' Here St. Paul committs to Titus the whole power of
ordaining elders in Crete, and of governing them, and all the christians in
that Island. This authority is clearly expressed, and the bounds, in which he
was to exercise it, distinctly marked out. Thus it appears, that this was an
episcopal ordination in our sense of the matter. Our Bishops claim nothing but
the very same power that St. Paul gave to Titus over the Island of Crete.'
Having cited this passage from Mr. Leaming, he goes on, 'Is not this a fair and
full answer to the Doctor's demand? Ought he then to be unsatisfied, when all
that he asks has been given him?' Unless the Doctor [ Chandler] will allow me
to suppose, that he possesses understanding but in a very low degree, which I
would not choose to do, I must hold myself obliged to think, that he KNEW that
this was neither a fair or full answer; and that I had no reason to be
satisfied with it, as NOTHING that I asked, instead of EVERY THING, had been
given me. Was it possible one of common discernment should not perceive the
gross impertinence of Mr. Leaming in bringing to view a pretended SCRIPTURE
instance of episcopal ordination, when the instance I desired, in as plain
language as I could speak, was one from the FATHERS of the christian church.
Would the Doctor have thought I had given a fair and full answer to that
affirmation of his, 'There is not an instance of ordin^tion by Presbyters to be
found in the chu^ for several ages,' if I had only said, 'I might produce many,
but for brevity's sake shall mention but one instance,' and that is the
ordination of Timothy by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery;
producing only those arguments that had been used an hundred times over to
prove, that this was an ordination by Presbyters? I am essentially mistaken in
the Doctor, and that convened body which first put him upon writing, if they
would not have laughed at the mention of such an instance, in opposition to the
above affirmation, and treated it with contempt as being altogether trifling.
He proceeds, 'Is it not very extraordinary, that he (Dr. Chauncy) should so
roundly repeat the demand without the least notice of Mr. Leaming's answer?'
The Doctor will not venture to say, he had not read the following words of mine
concerning Mr. Leaming, in the letter prefixed to Mr. Welles's answer to him,
'Was I inclined to engage in the episcopal controversy, I should choose for my
opponent, one that is better able to manage a dispute, than he appears to me to
be.' This is sufficient to account for my repetition of the demand, when so
fair an occasion was offered for it. The Doctor will doubtless think it
sufficient. And as to my doing this 'without taking the least notice of Mr.
Leaming's answer,' the plain truth is, I did not esteem it worthy of the least
notice, or that any one else would, that had any considerable degree of
intellectual discernment. Besides, the Doctor knows Mr. Wells had wrote an
answer to Mr. Leaming, in which he nullified this produced instance, and all
that was said upon it; particularly signifying to him, and to the Public that,
the example of episcopal ordination wanted, and desired, was to be selected,
not from the scripture, but from one or another of the FATHERS of the two first
centuries: Notwithstanding which, the Doctor has carefully avoided a compliance
with my demand; though repeatedly made, and so particularly explained as not to
be capable of being misunderstood. How then could he, without blushing, go on,
and say, 'I have sometimes met with persons who would allege the arguments of
others that had been answered, and the objections of others that had been
confuted [He is himself an eminent instance of this] without taking notice of
the said answers and confutations; but Dr. Chauncy is the first man I have
found in any of the regions of controversy, that could, without any symptoms of
perturbation, deal thus with his own arguments and objections, after they had
been formally answered and confuted.' -- One cannot help thinking that the
Doctor found himself greatly puzzled, not knowing what to say. To give the
desired instance was not in his power -- To declare that it was not, would have
had an ill aspect on the cause he was defending -- To say nothing might have
lessened his reputation as the selected episcopal-champion. The best method
therefore was to say something, though it should not be to the purpose; but to
do it in the use of language that might lead ignorant readers to imagine, that
he had effectually done the business. If the Doctor can give a better account
of his conduct, let him do it.

HE now knows, if he is capable of being made to know, that what I desire is,
an instance of EPISCOPAL ORDINATION, in the appropriated sense, from some or
other of the FATHERS within an hundred and fifty years from CHRIST. The demand,
he owns 'is fair;' and it is modest likewise, as ONE INSTANCE ONLY is required,
which he may fetch from any part of the then christian world. He is either able
to give an instance, or he is not. If he is able, let him do it; and I will
frankly acknowledge, in the face of the world, that I have been mistaken: If he
is not able, let him as frankly and openly acknowledge it, and not divert his
readers with telling them of curiosities and extraordinaries in the regions of
controversy, which have no existence but as creatures of imagination. I shall
only add, as I am in some solicitude for him, lest he should not be able,
merely of himself, to produce the desired instance, I would advise him to call
in the aid of the learned convention, of which he is a member; or if they
should not be sufficient, let him seek further help from any of the episcopal
Clergy on the American Continent. It is really worth his while to be at some
pains in this matter; for unless he produces the demanded instance of ONE
EPISCOPAL ordination, he cannot, with any tolerable face, in time to come, ask
for an example of ordination by PRESBYTERS: Nor may he think he is at all
wronged, if we give no credit to his word, should he hereafter say, as he has
done, (p. 63) That 'we know, by the best historical evidence, that it has been
the UNIVERSAL practice of the church, from the TIME OF THE APOSTLES TO THE
PRESENT HOUR, TO ACKNOWLEDGE NONE for BISHOPS, WHO WERE NOT ORDAINED BY OTHER
BISHOPS.' And for his encouragement I now publicly assure him, that I will
receive as genuine any instance he may be able to bring from the certainly
spurious, or interpolated, epistles of IGNATIUS, the great oracle of
Episcopalians.

THE Doctor now comes ^o consider the example of the Waldenses, which I had
mentioned in proof of ordination by Presbyters. And he says here, in direct
opposition to as known a truth as is contained in history, 'That the Waldenses
were Episcopalians; yea, 'such high-flyers that they claimed an uninterrupted
succession in a line of Bishops as superior to Presbyters.' If he had affirmed
this of the church of Scotland, it would not have been more distant from the
truth. Nothing is more evident, than that, among the Waldenses, long before
they had that name, and from the twelfth century when they were thus
denominated, ordination was performed by coordinate Pastors, or Presbyters,
assembled in synods; as may be seen in the account of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, published by Paul Perrin of Lions, under the head of discipline.
Nay, that famous Episcopalian, Dr. Reignolds, who more than equalled in
learning either Mosheim, or Dr. Alix, peremptorily affirms, in his letter to
Sir Francis Knolls, that the Waldenses were of the same opinion with Aerius as
to the identity of the order of Bishops and Presbyters. The unknown writer of
the answer to Mr. Owen, to whom the Doctor is obliged for his account of the
Waldenses, indeed says, 'They did affirm, that they had lawful Bishops, and a
lawful uninterrupted succession from the Apostles to this day' -- But we all
know the equivocal use of the name Bishops; and that it may as well mean
officers in the church of the same order with Presbyters, as of a superior
order. In the latter sense, the Waldenses never pretended to have Bishops, or a
succession of them from the Apostles, as is evident from the general strain of
ecclesiastical history; in the former, they might possibly affirm this. It is
most probable this author, or the writer he quotes from, confounded the
Waldenses with the Bohemians; though it is not true, even in this view, that
the Bishops, and succession spoken of, would be pleasing to the Doctor. For the
episcopacy of the Bohemian church was not such an one as he is a stickler for.
Says the learned Comenius, in his ratio disciplinae fratrum Bohemorum, (p. 19,
20.) 'It is true, the Bohemians have certain Bishops, or superintendants, who
are conspicuous for age and gifts, and chosen by suffrages of all the ministers
for the keeping of order, and to see that all the rest do their office. Four,
or five, or six such have they, as need requires; and each of these has his
diocese. But then the dignity of these, beyond the other ministers, is not
founded in the prerogative of honors and revenues, but in that of labors and
cares beyond others. According to the canons of the Apostles, a Presbyter and
Bishop are one and the same thing; only a Bishop among them signifies an
inspector, or superintendant: And therefore the Bishops of the unity are in
equal honor among themselves, except that one of them presides for the sake of
order.' -- But I must not enlarge here. I may have said too much already.

THE Doctor concludes this section with a few feeble attempts to defend some
part of what he had said upon the subject of confirmation. Three texts he
brought to view, in his appeal, in support of this rite of the church of
England. I was particular in taking notice of each of them. To the first and
third of these texts he has not seen fit, no doubt for a very good reason, to
say a word. In answer to the second, he complains of being 'accused of unfairly
quoting a text of scripture; a crime (says he) which I hold in abhorrence -- I
am sorry Dr. Chauncy could think me capable of committing such a flagrant act
of impiety.' I have carefully looked over what he has offered to exculpate
himself from the crime, he says, I had charged him with; and shall be glad, if
the impartial Pubilc find reason to be satisfied, 'that he did not suppress the
latter part of a text, because if he had given the whole, it would have been at
once visible to the reader, that it would have been nothing to his purpose. I
will not say a word to weaken the effort he has made to clear up his character
in this point; but willingly suffer it to be seen in its full force.

IF the reader shall think it worth while to turn to the answer I was
particular in making to the two objections against confirmation, the Doctor
endeavored, in his appeal, to remove out of the way, he may, perhaps, be let
into the true reason why he passed over what was there offered in total silence.

I CONCLUDED what I had to say, on the rite of confirmation, with an extract
from the dissenting Gentleman against Mr. White. The Doctor has thought it
sufficient to give us, in answer, the reply of Mr. White. And I shall think it
sufficient, in return, only to beg the reader to compare this reply of Mr.
White, with my extract from the dissenting Gentleman; and if he can bring
himself to think it worthy of the name of a reply, let him repair to what this
same dissenting Gentleman has said in answer to it, in his fifth section; more
especially that part of it which is contained in p. 172, 173. He will then need
nothing ^urther to convince him, unless he is in a disposition not to believe
that the sun shines, though he beholds it in its meridian luster.

IT only remains here to assure the Doctor, in acknowledgment for his advice,
that I have not the opinion of Mr. White that he has; esteeming him no more
than a child in comparison with Mr. Towgood And this, I believe, is the real
sentiment of all, in the impartial world, who have had opportunity to read
their performances. As to Dr Gray, he was u doubtedly an inferior man, in all
respects, to Mr. Pierce; and particularly appears to be so in his controversy
with him.

Reply to Dr. CHANDLER's Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Sections.
THESE Sections, in the appeal, were principally contrived to give opportunity
for a declamatory application to the passions; and they were abundantly
employed to this purpose. Nothing that could be thought of, or hyperbolical^y
expressed, was wanting in order to impress the reader's mind with a deep sense
of that wretched, deplorable, oppressed, persecuted, perishing condition, the
poor church of England in America was unhappily reduced to, through the want of
Bishops in this part of the world. These topics of harangue, enlarged on in the
appeal, were particularly replied to in the answer to it. The Doctor has said
little that is new or material in 'the defence' he has made. It would therefore
be a needless trial of the reader's patience to detain him here: However, he
will, I trust, bear with ^e while I take some brief notice of a few things,
wherein he has grossly failed in his reasoning, or that fairness with which he
should have represented facts.

I HAD seen fit to make two previous remarks. The first occasioned by his
saying, 'none but Bishops have a right to govern the church, was to this
purpose, 'That it was difficult, or rather impossible, to conceive how it
should be believed, that none but Bishops have a right to govern the church,
while it is believed, at the same time, that the King is the supreme Governor
of it, according to the article [the Doctor] referred to, which declares that
he has the CHIEF POWER, the CHIEF GOVERNMENT in all ecclesiastical causes.' --
The only reply is, 'This matter has already been placed in so full and clear a
light, that to enlarge upon it would be paying but an ill compliment to the
reader's understanding.' I may rather with exact truth say, if would be an
affront to his understanding to suppose, that he could imagine what had been
said, in p. 50 and a few pages onwards, relative to the King's supremacy,
should have the least tendency to remove away this difficulty, which can be no
otherwise done, than by making both parts of a most apparent contradiction
true. It may be worthy of the reader's notice here, I had said, from the
several acts of Parliament, relative to the King's supremacy, that he is vested
with ALL POWER to exercise ALL MANNER of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and that
Arch Bishops, Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical persons, have NO MANNER of
jurisdiction ecclesiastical but BY AND UNDER THE KING'S MAJESTY, who has full
power and authority to hear and determine ALL MANNER OF CAUSES ECCLESIASTICAL.
To this the Doctor has not thought fit to say a word. I had also been
particular in observing, 'That whatever authority the Clergy of the church of
England, whether superior or inferior, are vested with, it is, in all its
branches, restrained, by the STATE, within certain bounds, beyond which they
have no authority: Insomuch, that all the Clergy of the Kingdom, with the
Bishops at their head, have no constitutional right to make the least
deviation.' To all this, and much more of the like import, the Doctor has made
no other answer, than by referring us to what he had said in some preceding
pages concerning the King's supremacy, which is saying nothing, because nothing
is there attempted to be said in reply to these difficulties. It will, I am apt
to think, be at once obvious to the reader, why he did not choose to point out
to us, how NONE BUT BISHOPS have a right to govern the church, when they are so
far from being her ONLY Governors, that they are nothing more than SUBORDINATE
rulers, and can do nothing in the church but according to the AUTHORITATIVE
PRESCRIPTIONS of the King and his Parliament.

THE other remark, as the Doctor has represented it, 'relates to the difference
betwixt the complaint as made at the head of this section, and its appearance
in the explanation that follows.' The reader here meets with a notable instance
of his critical justice, and candid fairness, in so quoting my words as to find
occasion to remark upon them. For I had, in express terms, made the difference
between the complaint, and its after-vindication, to consist, not merely, or
only, in what was said 'at the head of this section;' but IN THAT PARAGRAPH,
SOME WORDS OF WHICH [namely these, none but Bishops have a right to govern the
church] WE HAVE BEEN CONSIDERING. This essential part of the remarked
difference the Doctor has been pleased entirely to leave out in quoting my
words; and unless he had been thus unfair, there would have been no propriety
or pertinency in the reply he has made to them: It is wholly grounded on his
unaccountably leaving that out, which he ought to have put in. He owns indeed,
that he had said, (ap p. 27) 'The American churches, while without Bishops,
must be without government;' upon which he says, 'If he [Dr. Chauncy] had this
general expression in his view' he did wrong in saying it was at the head of
the section.' He is here chargeable with inexcusable inattention, not to say
any thing worse. How otherwise could he have made the supposition, 'if he had
this general expression in view,? when, in pointing out the difference between
the complaint, and its vindication, it was, in the most plain language,
directly held out to view? His insinuating, that 'I did wrong in saying it was
at the head of, the section,' could be intended only to make way for the
singularly beautiful piece of wit that follows, 'Few of his readers, I believe,
would ever think of looking for the head of a thing in the middle of it.' One
would naturally suppose, from so striking a flight of fancy, that 'this general
expression' was to be found in the middle of the section; whereas, it is the
very first thing, after what is briefly said by way of introduction, that we
meet with. It is not easy to conceive, how the Doctor came to call the head of
a thing its middle; and upon a misrepresentation too, which any common reader
might rectify upon ocular inspection.

HE goes on to say, with reference to this general proposition, without Bishops
the church of England in America must be without government, 'I took notice,
that it is to be understood in a qualified sense: But surely there can he no
inconsistency in this. It is very common, and agreeable to strict method, first
to lay down a general proposi^n, and then to mark out the exceptions and
limitations with which it is to be understood.' It is neither common, nor
consistent with strict method or good sense, to limit a proposition that is not
capable of limitation. The Doctor's proposition is of this kind. Can there be
government with exceptions and limitations, when all right to exercise
government is denied, and for want of this right there is wretchedness and
misery? The complaint therefore should not have been in absolute terms, when a
limited mi^igated meaning only was intended. This is wha^ I aimed to show in my
remark, and principally with a view to give particular distinct notice to the
reader, that it was in a 'qualified limited sense only,' that I was called to
consider this complaint. It was accordingly in this qualified sense that I did
consider it upon the head of ordination as well as government, and in perfect
conformity to the sense in which the Doctor himself endeavored to vindicate
his own complaint. If the reader will only carry this in his mind, when he
reads what he has said (p. 101, 102) he will at once perceive, that the whole
of it is a mere vain show, altogether unworthy of any one who pretends to
reason fairly. We shall examine what is here offered.

SAYS he, 'As to ordination, the general proposition is true without any
exception. For without Bishops, upon the principles of the church of England,
there cannot be ordination in a fingle instance.' And what then? Who ever said
there could be an instance of episcopal ordination without a Bishop? He is here
beating the air, having no one living to contend with. He goes on, 'The Doctor
[ Chauncy] distinguishes; no ordination, and ordination with inconvenience and
charge, are quite different things.' Who in his senses ever thought, or said
otherwise? Instead of 'laboring under a great confusion of ideas,' my
antagonist must have no ideas but what are different from the ideas of all
other persons, if he can dispute this. But, says he, 'The position which he
controverts is this, that there can be no ordination in America, without
Bishops in America.' If he here means, that I dispute whether episcopal
ordination can be obtained by Americans, unless there are Bishops in America;
it is neither true, nor consistent with his own vindication of his own
complaint; or with my answer to it. If the m^aning is, that I controvert this
position, that no ordination can be performed by Bishops in America, unless
there are Bishops here, he is challenged to point out the place in which I
dispute this, or was called upon by him to do so: If he cannot, he must be
looked upon as ridiculing himself, by endeavoring to bring me in disputing as
self-evident a truth, as that two and two make four. He goes on, 'In opposition
to which [the position, there can be no ordination in America without Bishops
in America] he argues, that we may have ordinations in America with
inconvenience and charge But how can we, without Bishops, have ordination in
America? Why, says my very logical opponent, by having them in England.' The
Doctor is here illogically insensible, that he is sneering at himself. For it
was HE that spoke of inconvenience, danger, and charge, in having ordinations
^n ^merica by having them in England. For these are the considerations, and the
only ones, in the virtue of which he endeavors to support h^s complaint upon
the head of ordination. If therefore there is any thing ridiculous in saying,
'We may have ordinations in America by having them in England,' he only must
bear the ridicule; for he is the only person that made this a matter of
complaint; and he ^s more clamarous upon this supposed grievance than any other.

AS he never once complained, that episcopal ordination could not be obtained;
but grounded h^s complain: SOLELY upon the inconvenience, danger, and expense
of being obliged to go to England for it, there being no Bishop in America,
this ONLY I was called to consider, and this only I did consider. The
illustration therefore he has given us from a printing press in Holland or
Prussia, can serve no purpose unless to show, that he did not understand his
own argument.

I SHALL not think it improper to add here, notwithstanding the Doctor, and a
few others have made a mighty noise about 'having ordinations in America by
having them in England,' and at a vast expense, and the hazard of life, there
being no other way in which holy orders can be episcopally conferred on this
side the Atlantic; I say, notwithstanding this mighty outery, there are at
least two Bishops now residing in the British America, one in the north, the
other in the south part of it, from either of which it is reasonable to think,
the episcopal office might be conveyed, with incon^estible validity, to an
episcopal Presbyter; which would, at once, put an end to all further complaint
of expense and hazard in 'going to England to have ordination in America.'

THE Doctor will not esteem it an objection of any weight against deriving the
episcopal office from the Canadian Bishop, because he is a POPISH one. For he
has expressly assured us, (p. 7^) 'That he knows of no reason why ORDERS
derived from the PAPISTS should, on that account, be invalid, any more than
arguments derived from them should be so' And he knows also, for he has
declared it, 'That the church of Rome, though an OLD HARLOT, even in the
opinion of the church of England, may yet bring forth children, harlot as she
is, as well as an honest and virtuous ma^ron, and sometimes children better
than their parent' As a POPISH Bishop is, by an extraordinary act of British
favor, permitted to reside, and exert his official power, in Canada, now in
subjection to England; it cannot easily be supposed, that he would be so
ungrateful as to refuse to comply with so reasonable a request as this of
vesting an American Presbyter with the episcopal order. Or if he should
ungenerously refuse to do this, there is no good reason to think, but that the
southern Bishop would willingly perform so christian a deed of kindness. It is
true, he is a Bishop according to the Moravian mode; but he is notwithstanding
vested with episcopal powers, as handed to him in a direct line from the
Apostles. It is true likewise, he can convey no human dign^y, tempora^^ty, or
worldly appendage; but this can be no difficulty, as PURELY SPIRITUAL powers
are the ONLY ones that are wan^ed, or so much as desired; for these he can
communicate as well as my Bishop in England It may reasonably, and will be
strongly u^^e^ted, some thing more than that which is PURELY SPIRITUAL is
hankered after, if the poor church ^f England in the Colonies, is suffered to
continue in a 'lamentably distressed perishing condition' for want of a Bishop,
when she may have one, without any hazard of life, and at a small expense of
pocket, by only repairing to an AMERICAN Bishop. Surely, the cry of distress
and misery, for want of a PU^LY SPIRITUAL Bishop will be disregarded, as it
ought to be, until it is made evident, that due application has been made to
one or other of the continental Bishops, and that they have refused to
consecrate a Bishop for the Colonies, or to ordain Candidates for holy orders.
If the episcopal Clergy had been as zealous in their applications to the
Bishops in America, as they have been elsewhere, they might, without all doubt,
have had one from among themselves vested with the episcopal powers of
ordination and government long before now.

THE Doctor, in his 'appeal, p. 34, had complained of the expense of a voyage
to England for ordination; to which the reply was made that is contained in p.
82 of the 'appeal answered.' This reply, however candid and just, gave occasion
to my being very scurrilously treated in one of the New York periodical papers:
And Dr. Chandler himself, in his 'appeal defended,' has remarked upon it in a
manner much below the gentleman, not to say the christian divine. The reader
will bear with me, while I set this matter in a clear and full point of light.

IT was said, in the 'appeal,' p. 34, 35, in order to represent the
disadvantage of being obliged to go to England for orders, 'That the expense of
this voyage cannot be reckoned at less, upon an average, than one hundred
pounds sterling to each person. To men of fortune this is an inconsiderable
sum; but men of fortune must not be expected to devote themselves to the
service of the church in America, when the prospect is so discouraging, and so
many disagreeable circumstances are known to a^ it. The expense must therefore
generally fall upon such, as having already expended the greatest part of their
pittance in their education, will find it extremely hard to raise a sum
sufficient for the purpose' These are the Doctor's words, and the whole of
them. In reply hereto it was said, 'appeal answered, p. 82, 'Anoth^r reason
[that is, of the disadvantage attending the affair of ordination] is, the
expense of the voyage, which cannot be reckoned at less, upon an a^erage, than
one hundred pounds st^rling to each person.' And this is aggravated by the
consideration 'that the expense must generally fall upon such, as, having a
ready expended the greatest part of their pittance in their education, will
find it extremely hard to raise a sufficient sum for the purpose.' I heartily
suppose the Doctor had never seen, or, if he had, did no^ remember, at the time
of writing the account of the Society, published in 1706, in which they say, (p
74) 'All young students in those parts (meaning the Colonies) who desire
episcopal ordination, are invited into England; and their EXPENSES in coming
and returning are to be de^ra^ed by the Society.' According to this invitation
there is no hardship, as to the article of 'expen^e' that can be complained of,
unless absurdly, but by the Society themselves; and they can have no just
reason for complaint, as the money they expend in this way is as properly
bestowed, as in the support of the missionar^es themselves.' This, verbatim, is
what I said, and all that I said. Who could have imagined, that what is here
offered, in so candid a manner, without so much as an harsh or provoking word,
should have been made an handle for the base and injurious reflections that
have been cast upon me! -- But let us hear what the Doctor has said, in his
'appeal defended.' Having owned, (p 124.) 'That I very heartily supposed he had
never seen, or, if he had, did not remember, at the time of writing, the
account of the Society, published in 1706; -- he goes on to argue, 'The
complaint made in the 'appeal' is, that the voyage is expensive; the answer by
Dr. Chauncy is manifestly contrived to excite the idea, that it is not
expensive.' It is really unaccountable he should be able to move his pen to
write thus, when he could not but know, if in seeing he would see, that my
answer, in the whole of it, was grounded upon the supposition that the voyage
was attended with expense; nor is there a word in it, from whence it can be
inferred, that I did not think this to be a certain truth. He proceeds, 'The
complaint says, the expense, upon an average, is an hundred pounds sterling to
each person; the answer leads the reader to believe, that it is not a
farthing.' He should rather have said, it leads the reader to believe, that it
would not be a farthing, if the Society defrayed the charge conformably to the
promise they published for the encouragement of Colony-students to go to
England for orders. And, as they have never revoked this promise that we
non-episcopa^ans know of, (for such revokation is no where contained, that we
can find, in the published accounts of their proceedings) we ought, in honor to
them, to suppose, that they, and not the students they have invited into
England, are at the expense of the voyage, unless it is otherwise defrayed. He
says yet further, 'But this is not the worst of it; the answer appears to me to
be artfully calculated to lead the reader also to believe something further --
namely, that concerning a plain matter of fact, with regard to which it is
impossible any Missionary can be mistaken, I published to the world an
absolute, wilful falsehood; a falsehood, which was known to be such, not only by
every Missionary on the Continent, but by every member of the Society both here
and at home, and by every Bishop in the Kingdom. So that I fear the Doctor
really intended to lead his readers to believe me to have been in this matter,
both a notorious liar, and abominably stupid. I have freely mentioned what I
strongly suspect, and what I know to be suspected by many others. If he can
exculpate himself, I think it greatly concerns him to do it: Or if any of his
friends can clear him, it is in their power to do him a most essential service.
Nothing less, in my opinion, can excuse him to the world, and to his own
conscience, than proper evidence that he himself believes, and has reason for
believing, that I have actually been guilty of such base and absurd conduct, as
his insinuations manifestly imply' -- It must, I should think, appear to the
reader, that the Doctor, instead of being 'very candid,' has discovered a total
want of candor in what he has here said. He expressly declares, 'That I had
very heartily supposed, he had not seen, or did not remember, the Society's
engagement in 1^06; and yet, in direct contradiction to this acknowledged
candor, he would lead the reader to think, that it was my intention to
represent him as an abominably stupid liar. It was in truth my real design,
explicitly as well as heartily signified, to guard him against entertaining any
such thought. What other imaginable end could I have had in view? I should have
acted the part, not of an 'artful calculator,' but of a weak silly person, to
have made the supposition, the Doctor himself calls a 'very candid one,' if it
had been my intention to make the reader believe he was 'a notorious liar,' as
having published a known wilful falsehood. What should lead him 'strongly to
suspect' this was my design, I am not able to conjecture, unless he felt within
himself a consciousness of guilt in this matter; which might be the case. For
though I neither said, nor intended to say it before, I say it now in plain
words, that he did not declare the truth, however 'impossible it was that any
Missionary should mistake in so plain a matter of fact,' if he intended to make
his readers believe, agreeably to the evident import of his words, 'That the
expense of the voyage to England for orders, was, to each person,' out of his
own pocket, without exception, 'one hundred pounds sterling.' I am sure he did
not know this to be true, because I know it to be false: Nor does any
Missionary on the Continent know it to be true, because the consciences of some
of them will tell them to their faces, that pious donations have wholly, or in
great part, defrayed the expense of their going home for holy orders. It is
indeed common in these parts, however it may be where the Doctor resides, for
candidates to be much assisted in their voyage: I believe there are those, who
have crossed the Atlantic for ordination, without being at any epxence of their
own. It does not therefore belong to me, but to the Doctor, to 'exculpate
himself.' or to get some friend to do it for him: Nor otherwise can he 'excuse
himself to the world, or his own conscience,' for what he has here published
that is not agreeable to truth. How far he might do this 'wilfully,' or
'stupidly' or 'notoriously,' or 'abominably,' is best known to himself; though
I am so candid as to think, that he did it rather through want of due
consideration, which is a fault he is too apt to be betrayed into.

HE has been pleased, in a note, at the bottom of p. 12^, to insert the
following words, 'The author of a fictitious letter from a member of the
Society, which has been published in one of the New York papers has endeavored
to vindicate Doctor Chauncy from the charges of falsehood and insincerity, which
had been brought against him [in another of these papers] on account of his
conduct in this affair. But, unless he should have the good luck to meet with
an abler and fairer advocate, his reputation must suffer, wherever the case
shall be known.' I cannot help saying here, I did not think Dr. Chandler was so
little of a Gentleman as to insinuate to to the Public, from the scurrilous
writer in Gaines's Gazette, that I was 'chargeable with falsehood in this
affair,' and to declare 'my reputation must suffer, unless I met with an abler
and fairer advocate, than that member of the society,' who wrote in my
vindication.' He knew, as he had eyes to see, that this charge of falsehood
brought against me was grounded upon a false representation of what I had said
-- He knew also, that neither that writer, or any other, to this day, has so
much as attempted to return an answer to what was offered by my advocate to
justify me against this charge -- And he knew further, that, as 'good luck'
would have it, 'so able and fair an advocate,' as Dr. Chandler himself, has
appeared in my vindication: For he has declared, in express words, (p. 12^)
'That the Society published such an ininvitation, in 1706, I believe to be
true.' How then could he endeavor to lead the Public to believe, that it was
false? Is this consistent with that honest fairness which might reasonably be
expected from one who professes to be a christian Divine.

IT may deserve the reader's special notice, though the Doctor would, from a
fictitous writer, insinuate, that I was chargeable with falsehood, he has not
ventured, in his own reply, to exhibit such a charge. Instead of this, his
charge is, that I had artfully endeavored to make the reader believe, that HE
had been guilty of falsehood. He says not a word tending to fasten falsehood upon
me; but his zeal is wholly spent in throwing blame upon me for leading the
Public, as he imagines, to think, that I intended to represent him as 'a
notorious wilful liar.' How strangely different is the charge the Doctor has
brought against me, from that he refers to in the margin? And how unaccountably
inconsistent is he with himself, in mentioning this latter charge as hurtful to
my reputation, when he has himself declared it to be false? For this is the
meaning of his acknowledgment, 'that the Society published such an invitation,
in 1706, I believe to be true.'

HAVING made this acknowledgment, he goes on to represent the 'invitation of
the Society' as nothing to my purpose. Says he, 'It appears that it was only
occasional.' -- Very true; but what was the occasion? The reader will be best
able to judge from the invitation itself, which I shall here insert at large;
and the rather, that the Public may, from what they shall see with their own
eyes, be indisputably convinced, that I have been treated with great
dising^nuity and baseness.

I^ an account of the Society for propagating the gospel in foreign parts, etc.
London, printed by Joseph Downing, 1706, p. 74, 75, it is said, 'All young
students in those parts [the Colonies] who desire episcopal ordination, are
invited into England, and their EXPENSES of coming and returning are to be
DEFRAYED BY THE SOCIETY, in pursuance of an ORDER MADE TO THAT EFFECT. And the
form of a letter was prepared, and allowed to be sent to the GOVERNOR OF
NEW ENGLAND, and one of the like importance to the EPISCOPAL CLERGY in those
parts, encouraging the sending over hither such young students as are
inclinable to be ordained, and to embrace the mission.'

IN an abstract of the proceedings of the Society, annexed to Dr. Kennet's
sermon, Feb. 15, 1711, 1712, p. 44, is the following passage, 'The Society
apprehending that nothing would more effectually tend to justify their good
endeavors, and to promote the success of them, than to INFORM THE WORLD of
their foundation, establishment, and continual progress, did agree, that the
book, called, 'An account of the Society for propagating the gospel in foreign
parts, with their preceedings and success, London, for Joseph Downing, 1706, 4
to,' should be reprinted with a continuation down to the present time.'

FROM these extracts, it appears, with a meridian luster, that the Society
wanted and desired Colony Missionaries, and that this was the OCCASION of their
publishing their invitation, wherein they PROMISE to defray the EXPENSE of such
as shall be inclined to go home for holy orders: and this 'invitation' and
'promise' were, without all doubt, communicated in the 'letter' that was
prepared to be sent to the EPISCOPAL CLERGY, that they might communicate them
to the Colony-students for their encouragement to go home for ordination. And
it is observable, five or six years after the first publication of the
'account' in which this invitation and promise are contained, it was agreed and
ordered by the Society, that it should be REPRINTED to promote the success of
their proceedings. Who now can suppose, that the printed and reprinted
INVITATION and PROMISE of the Society ought not to be looked upon as an
obligation lying on them, in point of honor and justice, to defray the expense
of the voyage to England for orders, unless it is made known to them that it
has been defrayed some other way?

BUT, says the Doctor, before the first candidates f^m this Country went home
for holy orders, the invitation was recalled, or rather had expired.' He would
do well to tell us, how it should expire, if it was not recalled. And let him,
if he can, produce its revokation in any account the Society have given of
their proceedings. Until he is able to do this, he must excuse us
Non-episcopalians, if we are notable to see, but that the Society is STILL as
strongly obliged as ever to make good their PROMISE to the Colony-students,
unless it may have been vacated in any instances by the payment of the expense
of the voyage by their episcopal friends here. The Doctor may, if he pleases,
call this invitation of the Society an 'antiquated' one, and compare it to 'one
of the English statutes against the Lollards;' but it is easy to perceive, that
he here substitutes laughter in the room of sober argument, and for a very good
reason no doubt. He would justify the invitation as 'antiquated' by saying,
'That neither the first candidates that went home for holy orders, nor any of
their successors, so far as I can learn, have received benefit from it.' This,
if true, is really strange, and reflects no small dishonor on the Society. But
the Doctor, perhaps, may in time make higher seize in learning of this
kind, than he is at present possessed of, and find that both the 'first
candidates,' and 'some of their successors' too, have received benefit from
this invitation and promise of the Society. I am the rather disposed to
believe, that this is the truth of the case, from that respect which is due to
so venerable a body of men; and assure the Doctor, though he has so publicly
and boldly asserted the contrary, it has no influence to put me upon
'suspecting my own ignorance' in this matter. For it is no infrequent thing
with him to affirm that, both 'publicly and boldly' which he never would have
done, had it not been for want of more knowledge.

HE very justly assures the Public, (p. 153) That 'I will not allow that the
church of England, in the Colonies, is distinguished and stigmatized by a want
of those religious privileges, which are granted to all other denominations;'
and for this very good reason, because 'Episcopalians are allowed the same
liberty with all other persuasions, and do, with as much freedom from
molestation, worship GOD in the precise way they themselves are pleased to
choose:' Upon which he cries out, 'Can he be serious when he says this? Or does
he mean to insult us?' I mean to insult no body; but I seriously spoke a real
truth. 'Is it the truth, that we have the same liberty with all other
persuasions?' I affirm it is the exact truth. 'Do not they all enjoy their own
religious systems completely, and in every part? But can this be predicated of
the church of England?' If it cannot, it is not owing to any want of liberty,
but to their not using that liberty which is equally granted to all
denominations without distinction. 'We complain that we are destitute of the
power of ordination, and are not allowed to enjoy several of the institutions
of our church, which we hold in great esteem and veneration'. The answer is
short and easy. Episcopalians are as much allowed, as other denominations, to
procure for themselves ^he full enjoyment of all the spiritual privileges of
the Kingdom of CHRIST. Nothing restrains them from deriving, whenever they
please, ordaining, governing, or any other religious power, in it is pure,
naked, simple, spiritual nature, which is all they desire, from the Bishop in
Canada, or Pennsylvania; or from a Bohemian or Waldensian Bishop; [it will be
no difficulty with the Doctor that he is an high-flying one] if they cannot
derive these powers from an English one: They are indeed at full liberty to
ransack the whole earth, that they may enjoy their truly apostolic Episcopacy.
If other denominations have their own Pastors and Teachers, their own religious
worship, government and discipline, it is the ^esult of nothing more than that
PERMISSION, I might say RIGHT, which Episcopalians are EQUALLY FAVORED WITH;
and, in consequence of this permission, or right, they also might have their
Bishops, and their own apostolic form of episcopal government. What should
h^der? They are no more under restraint, than t^ other denominations, by any
interposing act o^ the state, either in England, or America; but are at full
liberty to provide themselves with such spiritual officers, discipline, and
worship, as they shall think agreeable to the will of CHRIST; and if they do
not, or will not, thus provide themselves, what imaginable reason have they for
complaint? Should it be said, their principles restrain them from the
procurement of apostolic Episcopacy in any way but from the King or state, and
by being distinguished from all the other Colony-denominations: In this case,
the reply was given in the answer to the appeal, in these words, 'It is from
their principles only that they are hampered with difficulties.' The Doctor,
upon this, has discovered, as he had often done before, that his peculiar
talent is not that of reasoning. He can perceive no difference between
difficulties, suffered upon principle, in consequence of the non-bestowment of
distinguishing favor, and difficulties that are suffered for not complying
with the arbitrary, tyrannical precepts of men, in violation of the rights of
conscience* Yea, he would make us believe, that difficulties suffered, upon
principle, through want of a grant of favor, may, with as much pertinency, be
complained of, as any of the tortures the Saints of the Most High have been
harrassed with, for their adherence to their GOD, from the greatest persecutors
that ever existed. I shall only say here, for once borrowing the Doctor's own
polite words, 'This is the weakest of all the weak things he has said.'

IT was observed, ap. ans. p. 130, 131, 'That the Non-episcopalian Clergy and
Laity, in the town of Boston, in one week only, subscribed two thousand pounds
sterling for a fund to support Missionaries among the Indian natives, upon
condition there might be an incorporated society among themselves for
conducting and managing this important affair; that an incorporating act was
prepared, and passed by the several branches of the government here, and sent
home for the Royal sanction, without which it could not continue in force: But
that it soon met with a negative, by means of which this whole money was lost,
and as much more we had good reason to expect would be subscribed.' This was
complained of as a great hardship. And it was then added, 'We should esteem the
hardship much greater, if, in any measure, it was brought upon us by EPISCOPAL
influence. I will not too positively say it was; but this I will say, and in
the words of a letter from home.' -- The words were inserted at large. What now
says the Doctor? Instead of taking the least notice of this letter, he mentions
it, from one he calls the very sensible author of a vindication of the Bishop
of Landaff's sermon, as 'an utter improbability, that a number of eminently
pious men, who have the conversion of the Savages much at heart, would oppose
such a measure for that purpose' I am heartily sorry I am obliged to say, that
this 'number of eminently pious men' have given the Public so little reason to
think, that they have the conversion of the Savages much at heart.' Had this
been the real truth, it is impossible but they should have done much more than
they have ever yet done to promote their conversion. They have made it
abundantly evident, that they had at heart the PROPAGATION OF EPISCOPACY, much
more than the 'conversion of the Savages;' and, if we may be permitted to judge
from their conduct, we shall naturally, and almost necessarily, be obliged to
think, they would be in readiness to oppose any plan for the conversion of the
Savages, that did not propose to convert them by EPISCOPISING them. He
subjoins, from the same very sensible author, an extract of a letter, from o^e
of the most important members of the Society to his friend in this Country, in
which it is said, 'The plan, as presented, was liable to several objections;
particularly, that the members were to be accountable only to themselves.
However, the Society made NO OPPOSITION TO IT.' It was not said, the Society,
in their character as such, made opposition to our incorporating act. It may be
true, as this letter declares, that the Society made no opposition; but it may
be as true, notwithstanding what is here affirmed, that some of its members,
and its most important ones too, in their private capacity, might oppose it
with their whole influence. The Doctor also brings in Mr. Apthorp, 'after
enquiry upon the spot' as saying, 'I can affirm upon very good authority, that
neither the Society, nor any Episcopalians, AS SUCH, opposed the act of the
Boston assembly.' -- This may be true, and not inconsistent with the account
that has been given us by others, who were upon the spot as well as Mr.
Apthorp, and as capable of making enquiry as he can be supposed to be. The
letter the Doctor has passed over in silence says, 'There is reason to think,
an account of the incorporating act was sent to LAMBETH as early as to -- The
Archbishop was prejudiced -- Umbrage was taken at the new society -- The least
attempt to take subscriptions here would have blown up the suspicions of the
church, and society, into an open slame.' This account we had from one, who, to
say the least, was under as good advantages, as Mr. Apthorp, to know the truth
of the affair. And it is observable, Mr. Apthorp's affirmation is designedly
worded with particular guard and caution. 'Neither the Society, nor any
Episcopalians, AS SUCH, opposed the act.' No one ever said, the Society, AS
SUCH, made opposition; though, notwithstanding what is here affirmed, some of
its members, and even the Archbishop of Canterbury, its President, might be in
the opposition: And it may, in like manner, be true, that Episcopalians might
use their influence against the passing this act, though they might not do it
AS SUCH. His saying, 'it was rejected upon political and commercial reasons,
when there was not one Bishop present,' may, to weak minds, have a plausible
appearance; but the disguise is thin, and easily seen through. It was never
imagined, had there been EPISCOPAL influence, but that it would be kept out of
sight, in the management of the affair at the board of trade. They must been
blunderers in ^eed, if they could not have assigned some other reasons of their
conduct, than that they had been applied to by Bishops, or an Archbishop,
though not in their capacity as members of the Society, or as vested with the
episcopal office. The Doctor now speaks of my taking no notice of 'so clear and
full evidence of the Society's innocence, as one of the strange modern
phenomena, which admit not of an easy solution.' It is at once solved by only
saying, it was none of my business to take notice of this evidence, until he
had produced it; upon which I have made it very plainly to appear, that,
instead of being 'clear and full evidence,' it is in ^eality no evidence at
all. The reader will, I believe, think it very extraordinary, in the Doctor, to
call me to an account for taking no notice of evidence he had not laid before
me, and knew not that I had ever seen, while, at the same time, he is himself
chargeable with taking no notice of the letter he had placed before his eyes,
containing much stronger counter-evidence. I will not account for this, by
supposing 'he wrote in a hurry, and did not give himself time for
recollection:' A much better reason may be assigned, namely, his finding
himself unable to return a just answer to the contents of so material a letter.

MANY other things, contained in this part of the Doctor's defense are justly
liable to exception; but he desires 'the controversy may be brought into a
narrower compass; and the reader, I imagine, will think with me, that it would
be needless to take any further notice of what is here said, as being remote
from the GRAND POINT in dispute. To this therefore I shall now immediately
proceed.

Reply to Dr. CHANDLER's Eighth Section.
THE Doctor comes, in this section, to invalidate the objections that had been
brought against the proposed plan for an American-Episcopate. And here it might
have been expected to find him exerting himself with the greatest vigor and
strength. But we are greatly disappointed. He discovers less spirit, and is
less convincing, in what he has offered upon this MAIN POINT in controversy,
than in any part of his performance. He seems indeed to have kept this GRAND
OBJECT out of sight as long as he could, if we may judge from the 198 pages he
wrote before he came to it. And it would have been, perhaps, as much to his
honor, if he had wholly passed it over in silence, unless what he has said had
carried more weight with it.

BEFORE he enters upon the consideration of the objections to the episcopal
plan for America, he takes notice of two or three other things, which must
detain us a while.

IN the 'appeal answered,' in a marginal note at the bottom of p. 133, mention
was made of a copy, that had appeared in one of the public newspapers, of the
petition that was sent by a number of episcopal Clergymen to the University at
Cambridge, in which some things justly exceptionable were pointed out. The
Doctor's reply is, 'I can and do assure him [Dr. Chauncy] that it is fictitious
and false; and that the Convention sent home no such address, nor any that
contained similar expressions with these he censures.' I also can and do assure
Dr. Chandl^r, that it would have given both myself, and the Public, much
greater satisfaction, if he had here inserted a copy of the petition itself,
properly authenticated. We might then have judged for ourselves, and not been
put upon yielding implicit faith in his bare word; which though true in his own
apprehension, might possibly be otherwise in the view of others. Whatever the
Doctor, or the Convention may think, it carries with it no good aspect, that
they so resolutely keep secret their petitions, when copies of them have been
desired; putting us off by telling us, they do not contain that in them which
we have heard they do, and in such ways that we shall believe what we have
heard, until we have opportunity to see with our own eyes.

IT was said, ap. answ. p. 135, 'Some of the most respectable Episcopalians, in
these parts, for sobriety, good sense, and a steady attachment to the interest
of the church of England, have declared it to be their opinion, that Bishops
would be of no service here, and that they did not desire they should be sent.'
The Doctor, upon this, affects to be at a loss to know what 'peculiar idea' I
intended to convey by the phrase 'respectable Episcopalians;' which could not
easily be accounted for in any other person, as I was particular in
representing them respectable 'for their sobriety, good sense, and steady
attachment to the church of England.' He is much puzzled to understand the
meaning of the 'indefinite word, SOME;' whether I intended by it 'two, or two
hundred.' It could not well have been 'impossible' for him to have known my
meaning, in the use of this innocent word, if he had only allowed himself to
read the immediately following sentence. 'And it is to me, as well as to MANY I
have conversed with upon this head, EPISCOPALIANS among others, very
questionable, whether, if the members of the church of England, in these
northern Colonies, were to give their votes, and to do it without previous
CLERICAL influence, they would be found to be on the side of an American
Episcopate.' One might 'possibly' have guessed at what I meant by the word,
SOME, after this explanation of myself. But the Doctor chose rather to make a
show of being witty, than to argue; though his wit is wholly grounded upon a
partial representation of what I had said. He goes on, 'I question whether
there is an Episcopalian on the Continent, either of a more or less respectable
character, including in it some degree of attachment to the interest of the
church, that has objected against an Episcopate upon the plan of the appeal.'
-- What he here says, put into plain English, is this; he questions whether
truth can be spoken unless by himself, and a few others who speak as he would
have them. But why does he question, whether any Episcopalian has objected to
an Episcopate upon his plan? The reason is, because 'he must act a very
unnatural, inconsistent part. For how absurd is it for a man, who is attached
to the church of England in America, not to wish its soundness and health?' And
here he goes on repeating, in a way of argument, what he had often urged before
in favor of his American Episcopate. But what is all this to the point? It is
a fact, not a speculative truth, we are now upon. And the Doctor must know,
unless he is a great stranger to the world, that facts and speculative
arguments do not always harmonise with each other. Besides, where is the
difficulty in supposing, that most Episcopalians on the Continent may have a
quite different notion of the plan for an American Episcopate, from that the
EPISCOPAL CLERGY have of it, who were its ONLY FORMERS, and the ONLY
PETITIONERS that it might be carried into execution? Might they not be
apprehensive of danger from a plan contrived by the CLERGY, and sent home for
ratification, without their consent, or being applied to for it? Surely, it is
not impossible they should think, notwithstanding all the Doctor has said, that
the mission of Bishops into the Colonies would do more hurt than good. This, I
know, is, in fact, the opinion of MANY Lay-episcopalians, and, I believe, of
the greater part of them in the New England Colonies. I shall only add here,
speculative arguments are no more suited to invalidate the truth of this fact,
than they would be to prove that there were no Episcopalians on the Continent.
For it would be a much easier task to prove it speculatively absurd there
should be any, than that they should be against the proposed Episcopate.

THE Doctor animadverts upon nothing further, until he comes to p. 138, where
he says, that 'I objected to their plan because I thought it had been illegally
settled.' And for aught any thing he has proved to the contrary, the objection
to the plan, for this reason, stands firm and unshaken. He says, 'I take it for
granted, that what has been done by our friends and superiors at home relating
to it [the plan] has been done without the King's approbation.' And well I
might, as we were told of a scheme for the mission of Bishops to the Colonies,
settled by Clergymen at home, and approbated by Clergymen here, to the entire
n^glect of his Majesty, without whose LICENSE, not even the CONVOCATION have
any right to settle such a plan, or so much as ATTEMPT to form it. The Doctor
allows, 'that the two houses of Convocation have no authority, without a ROYAL
LICENSE, to attempt, enact, promulge, or execute any canon, by whatever name it
might be called, which should concern either doctrine or discipline.' But says
he, 'This notwithstanding, the Clergy, even in convocation, are still, in
several inferior instances, left perfectly free.' It would be strange, if they
were not. But how does this prove, that they are 'left perfectly free' in such
SUPERIOR instances as the settlement of a plan for the new modelling the power
of Bishops? The King's supremacy, as head of the church, is not more nearly
concerned in any ecclesiastical affair whatever. He goes on, 'The two houses of
Parliament cannot, without a Royal license attempt, enact, promulge, or execute
any statute, more legally than the two houses of Convocation can enact a canon'
This is expressed very much as it would have been by one who did not understand
the proper rights of Parliament. If the thing meant is, that the two houses of
Parliament, and the two houses of Convocation, are under the same
constitutional restraint, he is entirely mistaken. The two houses of Parliament
are perfectly at liberty, without any Royal license, not only to ATTEMPT, but
actually to form, any statute, plan or canon, in order to its being enacted,
promulged, and executed in consistency with the constitution: Whereas the two
houses of Convocation are restrained, by the statute of the twenty-fifth of
Henry the eighth, called the act of submission, from so much as ATTEMPTING any
law, or canon, or whatever other name may be given to it, without LICENSE FIRST
GRANTED TO THEM BY THE KING; and having, in virtue of his license, agreed on
any canon, or constitution, they are not permitted to PUBLISH it, until it has
obtained his confirmation. Vid. Burn's Eccles. law, under the word Convocation.
And if it is accounted inconsistent with the King's supremacy in
ecclesiastical matters, for even the Convocation to ATTEMPT to form, settle, or
publish a plan for the regulation of the church, without his GRANTED
PERMISSION, though, in so doing, they should profess the highest regard to 'the
public good;' it ought certainly to be esteemed much more so for other
Clergymen to do this, especially in bodies convened for the purpose, not by
authority from the King, but of their own heads: And it makes no alteration in
the case, whether they are superior or inferior Clergymen, or a mixture of
both, unless in the degree of dishonor that is hereby reflected on his Majesty
as, under GOD, the supreme head of the church. They may speak of themselves as
'consulting the public happiness,' and doing it 'with the utmost fidelity,' and
all 'deference and submission to the wisdom of government;' but time was, when
they would, notwithstanding such a compliment on themselves, have been called
'disaffected associations,' and as such been 'suppressed;' as has often been
the case.

THE Doctor takes occasion here peremptorily to declare, 'That I have
pronounced all consultations of their Bishops for the interest of religion to
be, in general, an infringement of the King's supremacy, unless a license for
that purpose is formally granted from the Crown.' He has been so wise as not to
refer to the page in which I say this; and until he is pleased to do it, I
shall think myself at full liberty to esteem what he has offered as a gross
misrepresentation.

HE seems to look upon 'consultations for the interest of religion,' and laying
plans for a new regulation of the power of Bishops, and the exercise of
discipline in the church of England, as meaning one and the same thing. But he
ought to have known, that NO ROYAL LICENSE is made necessary for consultations
to promote the general interest of religion; whereas, even the whole body of
the Clergy, superior and inferior, are not permitted, though legally assembled
in Convocation, so much as to ATTEMPT a plan for new modelling, in any part,
the ecclesiastical constitution, without a LICENSE formally granted herefor by
the King. Can it then be supposed allowable, for a deputised Clergyman to
proclaim it to the world, without the least hint of any GRANTED LICENSE from
the King, that such a plan has been 'privately formed and settled by some
superior Clergymen at home, and approbated by the episcopal Clergy here,' and
in convened bodies for the purpose? -- He would now suggest, 'That the King had
been consulted, and given undoubted proofs of his approbation of the measure.'
Why then was not the plan introduced with particular notice of so important a
point of deference to the Royal supremacy? Was it more proper to tell the
Public, that the episcopal Clergy here were agreed in this plan, than that his
Majesty had approbated it? And why is there not now exhibited in form some
authentic proof of the KING's LICENSE to contrive and publish the plan we have
had held out to view? This would have been much more satisfactory, than barely
to insinuate, or say, 'That it had been honored with the King's approbation.'

SENSIBLE, I suppose, of the insufficiency of all that had before been offered,
the Doctor now gives us the following very extraordinary information. Says he,
'The charter granted to the Society for propagating the gospel, has the nature
and efficacy of a commission.' For what? Why, 'by this charter, or commission,
the members are warranted to concert measures, and to settle plans, for the
carrying on the design of that incorporation in the most effectual manner.'
Very tru^; but was it any part of the design of that incorporation to 'settle
plans' for a new modelled church of England? The Doctor is, I believe, the
first man that ever dreamed of a 'Royal commission' in the Society's charter,
empowering its members to contrive schemes for governing the church of England
in a manner different from that which has been ordained by the King and
Parliament They might probably think, 'That an American Episcopate was highly
expedient' in order to their propagating Episcopacy, instead of religion in
general; and they might hereupon 'sketch out a general plan for sending Bishops
to America, which plan might be publicly approved, and patronised by her
Majesty Queen Ann.' All this may be true, and perfectly consistent with due
honor to the Royal supremacy. For it is not merely a plan for sending Bishops
to America, that is inconsistent herewith; but a plan that proposes their
mission to carry on the business of ecclesiastical government and discipline in
a manner quite different from that which is enjoined by the authority of the
King and Parliament. The proposed plan, as 'resumed and digested with peculiar
attention;' is of this sort; and therefore a direct violation of the
seventy-third canon, which enjoins, 'That no Priests, or Ministers of GOD's
word, nor any other persons shall meet together in any private house, or
elsewhere, to consult upon any matter, or course to be taken by them, or upon
their motion, or direction by others, which may any way tend to the impeaching,
or depraving of the doctrine of the church of England, or of the book of common
prayer, or of any part of the government or discipline now established in the
church of England, under pain of excommunication ipso facto.' The Doctor says
here, 'Whoever knows any thing of the history of the times in which the canon
was framed, must be sensible that it was designed against a very different sort
of persons from those ven^rable prelates, who formed and settled the plan for
an American Episcopate.' If vene^able prelates at home formed this plan, and
episcopal Clergymen here approbated it in conve^ed bodies for the purpose, they
are chargeable with the very crime this canon was designed to guard against;
and it is more aggravated in them, than in 'the different sort of persons' it
might be supposed would be liable to condemnation by it. He adds, 'And as it
was designed against a very different sort of persons, so the words of it
clearly point out a very different conduct.' The conduct of the persons
concerned in the forming and approbating this plan, is as like that pointed out
and condemned, in the canon, as words can make it. There has been 'the meeting
together of Priests and others;' -- they have met together 'in private houses
or elsewhere; -- and the design of their meeting was 'to consult upon a course
to be taken by them, or upon their motion,' in order to affect an alteration
'in some part of the government, or discipline, now established in the church
of England:' which, without all dispute, is the very fault intended to be
testified against in the canon. There is no way, indeed, in which this
established mode of government in the church of England can be more directly
and effectually impeached, or depraved, than by practical endeavors to get it
changed. And it will not be pretended, that this is not the tendency of the
proposed and published plan. Whether the 'combinations and consultations,' to
this end, 'are factious,' or not, must be determined by the canon itself; which
certainly supposes them to be so.

I SAID, in my answer to the appeal, the proposed plan 'is a plan for altering
the government and discipline of the church of England in the Colonies.' To
which the Doctor replies, 'Does he then believe the canon was intended to
secure the government and discipline of the church of England in the Colonies?
Without this intention the proposal of any alteration in the form of
ecclesiastical government here can be no violation of the canon.' Why do
Colony-episcopapalians glory in being members of the church of England, if
there is no church of England here. And if there is, it is as as reasonable to
suppose the canon was intended to guard its established form of government
against impeachment or depravation here, as at home. But, says the Doctor,
'What is the nature and tendency of the alteration proposed? Is it to deprave
the government of the church of England at home? No; it is in reality to honor
it, by endeavoring to bring the government of the church here much nearer to
her pattern, than it is, or can be, while destitute of Bishops.' One, having no
biass on his mind, would not think it reflected much honor on the government
of the church at home to make alterations and amendments in it, before it is
thought fit to be exercised here. And the supposed alteration most certainly
depraves it, as it restrains Bishops from the exercise of that government over
the Laity, they are entitled to, not only from the grant of the King and
Parliament, but, as the Doctor believes, of JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles. He
goes on, 'Nor is the plan for a different mode of an Episcopate for the church
of America, any impeachment of that under which it exists in England.' The
proposing, and endeavoring, an alteration essentially carries in it the idea
of an impeachment. It is not possible it should be altered without being
impeached. What imaginable reason can there be for a change in any mode of
government, unless it be supposed, insufficient, imperfect, and not suitable to
be exercised, in those respects at least, wherein a change is desired and
endeavored. And this is the very thing here meant by its being impeached. But,
says the Doctor, 'As to such externals, the church of England has always
allowed them to be things that are alterable, and that they ought to be
altered, according to the circumstances and opinions of different Countries, or
even of the same Country in different ages. When she has made this alteration
in 'such externals' at home, America will of course r^ap the benefit of it,
should an Episcopate be s^t^led here; but until this is done, it will be an
impeachment of the mode of government in the church of England at home, to
propose a different one for the same church here. It is an i^le thing to say,
'That circumstances in America require that the externals of an Episcopate
should be under a regulation peculiar to this country.' Epis^opalians here and
in England are members of one and the same church; and no circumstances, unless
those of a mere worldly nature, which have nothing to do with a purely
spiritual kingdom, can make it fit, suitable, or reasonable, that the mode of an
Episcopate should be different from what it is at home.

THE reader will, perhaps, by this time be disposed rather to wonder, than
'laugh,' at the Doctor's 'audaciousness' in making so light of the
'fulminations' of an established canon against impeaching, or depraving the
constitutional government and discipline of the church of England. He, together
with the other framers, approba^ors, and publishers, of the proposed plan of
impeachment would do well to consider, whether they are not, by the
determination of their own church, 'excommunicated' persons.

THE way being thus prepared, we now come to the GRAND POINT in debate, the
proposed plan for an American Episcopate. According to the Doctor's desire, in
his 'appeal to the Public,' objections were brought against this plan. He has
endeavored in his 'ap^eal defended,' to take off the force of them. We shall
impartially examine what he has said upon each objection distinctly.

OBJECTION I. 'The government and discipline of the church of England, under
the proposed American Episcopate, is injurious both to the church, and the
Bishops that are to preside over it.'

'IT is injurious to the church.' And why? 'Because it is to operate on the
Clergy only. The lay-members of the church of England may not be favored with
the benefit of the governing authority of the Bishops to be sent.' What says
the Doctor in reply? He reasons thus, 'If the Laity are not to be affected by
the Bishops authority, they are certainly not to be injured by it; that which
does not operate at all, producing no effect either injurious, or beneficial.
With regard therefore to the exercise of discipline over the Laity, no benefit
is proposed, and no injury is to be feared.' Is this a fit answer for the
public view? Are not Bishops appointed, in the sense even of the church of
England, for the benefit of the Laity, as truly as the Clergy? Are not the
Laity as capable of receiving benefit from Episcopal authority, duly exercised,
as the Clergy? And if they are capable of being benefited by the exercise of
this authority, must they not be injured, if a stop is put to its operation, in
relation to them? Its not being permitted to operate at all, in regard of them,
is, in the nature of the thing, injurious, and in proportion to the greatness
of the benefit that is lost by this non-permission. No one, I believe, before
the Doctor ever said, it was not injurious to deprive the Laity of a spiritual
privilege they are supposed to be entitled to, and by a grant from JESUS
CHRIST. And if CHRIST has granted them this privilege, for their spiritual
good, what power on earth can justly deprive them of it? If superior Clergymen
at home, and inferior ones here, should combine together, and project a plan to
prevent their being under the governing authority of Bishops, they would
certainly plan away an indubitable privilege they are entitled to as members of
the church of England; and, if they are really Episcopalians, they must look
upon such treatment as highly injurious and abusive. The Doctor, in answering
this part of the objection, has done no great honor to himself. He could
scarce have said any thing that would have more exposed the weakness of what he
undertook to defend.

THE proposed plan was said to be 'injurious also to the Bishops it would have
sent to the Colonies.' And for this reason, 'Because they are, in a mere
arbitrary manner, restrained in the exercise of that authority, which, in the
judgment of these very planners, properly belongs to them, both by apostolic
appointment, and the constitution of the church of England.' The Doctor
replies, 'If such a restraint is not injurious to the church, it will be
difficult to prove that it can be injurious to the Bishops.' -- It is not
possible it should be any other than injurious to the church, as it deprives
its Laity of a privilege they are as certainly entitled to as the Clergy, and
that might be as advantageous to them. But he says further, 'Are we to consider
the authority of Bishops as so much private property, which belongs to them,
and every limitation of it as so much damage sustained by the Bishops? And yet,
unless we consider it under some such idea, I see not how it can be made out,
that any prudent restraints of their authority can be an injury to them.'
Ocular demonstration only could have convinced me, that the Doctor was capable
of sinking so much below a man of common understanding in his reasoning here.
Does he not believe, has he not strenuously pleaded, that the governing
authority of Bishops is derived from JESUS CHRIST himself? And if CHRIST has
vested Bishops with their governing authority, is no injury done to them,
arbitrarily to restrain them in the exercise of this authority? If CHRIST has
empowered, and commanded Bishops to exercise authority over the Laity, as well
as Clergy, shall it be deemed no injury to be confined in the exercise of this
authority to the Clergy only? It is amazing, one of the Doctor's character
should not be able to see, that Bishops were capable of 'sustaining damage' in
other ways besides that of being touched in their 'private property!' If he had
allowed himself to consider, he must have known, that a good Bishop would have
esteemed himself more highly injured by being restrained in the just exercise
of the authority committed to him by CHRIST, than by suffering in his private
property.' A total restraint of authority over the Laity is here called a
'prudent one; but it can be so, only in regard of political worldly ends to be
answered by it. I entirely agree with the Doctor in what he adds, 'He that is
fond of exercising power for the sake of exercising it, without regarding
whether it tends to edification or destruction, is unworthy of it.' But what he
aims at proving by this is beyond me to find out. Surely he will not say
Bishops are so fond of the destructive power here described, as to make it
expedient to restraim them from the exercise of any power at all over the
Laity! And unless he means this, I see not to what end he has made the remark.
And, in every conceivable view of it, it holds as strong against their having
power over the Clergy as over the Laity. This is all he has thought fit to say
in answer to the first objection. The reader can have no just idea of the utter
insufficiency of this reply, unless he compares it with the objection, as
stated and illustrated in the 'appeal answered.'

OBJECTION II. 'The Bishops, in this plan, are so widely different from the
Bishops of the church of England at home, that it is not reasonable they should
be desired, or sent.' The Doctor says, in answer, 'The Bishops, in this plan,
are essentially the same with the Bishops at home, how widely soever they may
differ in some circumstances.' Can they be essentially the same, if they are
essentially restrained in the exercise of that authority which is proper to
their office, and they have full scope to exercise at home? And yet, this is
the exact truth. It is expressly proposed, that they shall have no rule over
the Laity; that is, that they shall be deprived of one half of that authority,
as to its exercise, which is essential to them as Bishops. He goes on, 'But let
them be never so different, if such Bishops as are proposed are fitter for the
Colonies, than such Bishops as are in England, then it may be reasonable that
they should be both desired and sent.' The plain answer is, they are not fitter
for the Colonies, than for the Mother Country; and it is unreasonable they
should be desired for, or sent to, the Colonies, until they are first enjoyed
at home. It was said in illustrating this objection, 'Shall a comparative
handful of episcopal professors, most of whom, in many of the Colonies, are so
insufficient as that they are upheld in Being, with respect to their religious
denomination, at the charitable expense of a distant Society; -- shall these
imagine themselves so important as that, for their sakes, the powers and
appendages of Bishops shall be so mightily abridged? Surely the whole body of
Dissenters in England, and a very considerable part of the established church
there, are as well worthy the national attention; and it is as fit, their
requests, often repeated, should be answered. When this is done it will be
time, and not before, to expect that this plan should be considered, and
brought into effect. -- To this, and much more of the like import, the Doctor
has only said, That he 'had before given a full and sufficient answer:' But
where, he has not told us; nor can I find that he has any where given such an
answer, or even attempted to do so. He has also silently passed over what was
argued from the doctrine of uniformity, made so important a matter in the
church of England; as that it would mar the glory of this uniformity to clothe
the same officers of the same church not with the same, but widely differing
powers; and that there would not, in this case, be the appearance of consistent
regularity in one and the same ecclesiastical constitution. -- This silence of
the Doctor, in answer to objections he openly 'invited objectors to make, that
they might be fairly and heartily debated before the tribunal of the Public,'
will, I fear, be construed to his disadvantage, if not to the hurt of the cause
he is defending.

HE goes on to the next consideration, which is, 'That if Bishops should be
sent to the Colonies, with these restrained powers, undesirable consequences
might be naturally feared, both here and at home.'

AN undesirable consequence to be feared here is, 'That the Bishops would throw
off this restraint as soon as might be; embracing all opportunities, and using
all likely means, to recover those appendages to their office they had been
deprived of.' This was said, and shown, to be no unreasonable supposition. The
Doctor replies, 'Was it ever before offered as a reason, why exorbitant power
should not be limited, (and such the Doctor esteems to be the power of Bishops
in England) because the persons curtailed would endeavor to throw off the
restraint as soon as may be?' This question, as thus generally put, is quite
beside the case. We never objected to the proposed limitation of the power of
Bishops, as being in itself, in its own proper nature, unreasonable and unfit;
but to the confinement of it to the Colonies: and for this good reason, among
others, that it would strongly tend to defeat itself. The Bishops under a
restraint of their power here, would naturally be disposed to throw it off, if
the like restraint did not take place at home; and they would have this
plausible plea to make in their own justification, that they aimed at nothing
more than was allowed to be reasonable and proper in England. The plain truth
is, if the exorbitant power of Bishops ought to be restrained at all, it is as
reasonable it should be restrained at home as here; and it is a good reason,
why it should not be restrained there, that such an unfair, partial, and unjust
restraint would, in all probability, through the lust of power, which even
Bishops are not totally delivered from, soon come to nothing here. But says the
Doctor, 'Why are we to suppose, that the American Bishops will be uneasy under
such a limitation of their power, as the plan expresses?' The reason is
obvious, namely, because Bishops have discovered, in all past ages, that
corruption was so far unmortified in them, as to consist with a strong
inclination to enlarge the sphere of their power, whenever they had any
plausible pretense herefor; as they certainly would have in the present case.
But 'whatever power or privilege, they [the proposed Bishops] shall once
possess, by virtue of their office, they will continue to hold, as long as they
shall remain in the office; and as they know the terms before they accept of
it, there can be no disappointment. And why should they be uneasy, because the
Bishops at home are invested with civil authority? The Bishops at home may as
properly be uneasy and restless, because they are not, like some of their order
on the Continent of Europe, sovereign Princes.' Some Bishops at home, in times
past, whatever may be the truth at this day, were uneasy and restless for want
of more honor and power; and, without all doubt, would have used any means,
could they probably hoped for success in the use of them, in order to their
being as 'sovereign Princes' as any 'Bishops on the Continent of Europe.' And
no security can be given us, if the desired Bishops should be sent, and upon
the proposed plan too, that they would not be soon so 'restless and uneasy,' as
to affect that very change, in their restrained dignity and power, which is so
much feared. The Doctor goes on, 'Perhaps the uneasiness of the American
Bishops may be supposed to arise from the reflection, that, destitute as they
are of civil power, they are Bishops of the same church with their brethren in
England.' And it may naturally be supposed, they would be 'uneasy,' if not at
first, yet, in a little time, from the reflection, that they were deprived of
that power, it is as reasonable they should be vested with, as their brethren
of the same church, and in precisely the same office, at home. But 'they will
not be able to avoid this further reflection, that they are Bishops of the same
church in different countries, and under different circumstances; which
essentially alter the case.' It is not probable they would ever make this
reflection, as there would be no just reason for their so doing. It is, in
truth, nothing better than a vain pretense. The same episcopal-mode of church
government is as proper for the Mother Country, as the Colonies. Nothing in the
situation of America, or in the circumstances of the Country, or of the
Episcopalians in it, can make it reasonable, or fit, that the episcopal-mode
should be 'different' here from what it OUGHT to be at home, unless it be
supposed, that the Kingdom of CHRIST is not that spiritual one he has declared
it to be, but a Kingdom whose government is founded on worldly policy, and is
to be supported upon principles of the same kind. What but the wisdom of this
world could ever lead any man to think, that the professed disciples of the
same LORD, of the same religion, and of the same subjection to the same
spiritual government, should be differently governed, because they happen to
live in different places? No considerations, but those of this world, can be
mentioned, that will justify, as reasonable, that episcopal mode of government
here, which will not render it equally fit in England. Says the Doctor yet
farther, 'This same kind of reasoning would operate as strongly against
episcopal Clergymen in America, as against Bishops. The Clergy of the church of
England at home, are, in a great measure, supported by tithes; therefore, it
may be said, if Clergymen of the church of England are once admitted in this
Country, under whatever restrictions and limitations, they will not be easy,
until they shall have secured to themselves the tithes of our estates.' The
fact here supposed is, I believe, strictly true, that the Clergy of the church
of England will never be ' easy until they have secured to themselves' from our
estates here, what will be, in substantial signification, the same thing with
the tithes in England. The Doctor himself very obviously, however undesignedly,
led us to suspect this in some hints he dropped in his appeal; and that is
attempting to be done, or actually is done, at home, respecting GLEBE-LANDS for
the church of England in America, which puts it beyond all doubt. But this
notwithstanding, we object not against the admission of episcopal Clergymen, or
even Bishops, into America, if they have no authority, but that which is
'altogether from CHRIST,' and not from this world.

AT home, it was said, two ill consequences might be looked for. One was, 'That
vast numbers there, who have long complained of the too largely extended power
claimed and exercised by Bishops, might think themselves hardly treated, that
no regard should be paid to their entreaties, while a comparatively few
inconsiderable professors of the church of England in America are heard, and an
Episcopate settled for them according to their mind.' To this the Doctor
answers, 'The reader can hardly avoid remarking, that here, and in many other
places, the Doctor forgets his proper business and character. His business is
to answer the appeal upon the principles of the Dissenters; but instead of
this, he frequently endeavors to raise difficulties and objections which
cannot properly be made, but upon principles opposite to his own, and of those
whom he represents, in this controversy.' The Doctor has injudicially misplaced
this remark. Had he made it under the former objection, it would have appeared
more plausible. As brought in here, it is really a blunder. Surely, Dissenters
at home might, in their proper character as such, complain of hard treatment,
should the request be granted to a few comparatively inconsiderable American
Episcopalians, which, for a long time has been, and still is, denied them;
though the request from them is equally reasonable. It is scarce possible but
that they should feel, and groan under, such partiality. But, upon whatever
principles this, or any others, difficulty is raised, it is proper, if a real
one, it should be mentioned by way of objection, as objections of all kinds
were called for. And the Doctor is now informed, if he needs information, that
those he improperly calls Dissenters in this part of the world, are, upon
christian principles, in real earnest that the episcopal LAITY may not be
imposed on by their planning Clergy. The former objection, under which the
Doctor's present remark would have been more pertinent, was principally made
with a view to serve them; as there has been a combination of their Clergy to
carry into execution, so far as they were able, a scheme they had contrived for
their own sakes, to the entire neglect of them; though much more worthy of the
most ample provision they could have made for their spritual profit, under the
government of the desired Bishops. The Doctor goes on, 'It will never be
admitted as an objection coming from the Dissenters here, or in England, that
many at home will grow more clamorous against the present power of the English
Bishops, in consequence of the settlement of such an Episcopate as is proposed
for the Colonies.' What business had the Doctor with those he calls Dissenters
here, when the objected difficulty was the uneasiness the proposed plan might
give the Dissenters at home? Besides, he ought to have known, there are no
Dissenters in any of the Colonies to the northward of Maryland, unless
episcopal ones. Moreover, it was not mentioned as an objection, that Dissenters
at home would 'grow more clamorous in consequence of the settlement of the
proposed Episcopate*' This he represents as my objection, but without any just
foundation from what I had said. There is a great and wide difference betwixt
Dissenters being 'clamorous against the power of the English Bishops,' upon the
settlement of the proposed Episcopate here, and their 'thinking themselves
hardly treated, that no regard should be paid to their entreaties, while a few
comparatively inconsiderable Episcopalians, in America, are heard, and an
Episcopate settled for them according to their mind.' These were my words, and
they contain a just reason for such sensations as naturally arise from hard and
partial treatment, which there may be without being at all 'clamorous.' The
Doctor has only this to say further here, 'Should the objection be made by any
who have a right to make it, it is sufficient to refer them to what has been
already said to the purpose.' -- Surely, if he had a right to 'invite objectors
to propose their objections, that they might be fairly debated before the
tribunal of the Public.' they must be supposed, at least by him, to have this
right which he seems to question. His business was to point out the
impropriety, or insufficiency, of such objections as any might make, not to
suggest that they had no right to make them. But what is it he had already
said, to which he refers us? It is in these words, 'That such an Episcopate may
be erected HERE with ease; but it cannot be effected in ENGLAND, without
subverting an establishment, and making a very visible alteration in the
national constitution -- a work never to be undertaken but in the greatest
extremity, and, even then, not without a trembling hand.' We have nothing more
here than an affirmation of his own opinion; though he knew it was the opinion
of others equally capable of judging, that he is certainly and grossly
mistaken. -- The proposed Episcopate could not be erected here with that 'ease'
he would insinuate. It would, without all doubt, be the occasion of effects
similar to those, it would have, were it to be erected at home; and they would
probably be, in proportion, as great and general. As to its 'subverting an
establishment, and making a very visible alteration in the national
constitution,' he has himself given us a full and sufficient answer. For he has
told us, (p. 205) That 'as to such externals [as the plan for an American
Episcopate would propose should be altered] the church of England has always
allowed them to be things that are alterable, and that they ought to be
altered, according to the circumstances and opinions of different countries, or
even of the same Country in different ages.' Perhaps, he will allow, if he will
not the impartial Public will, that the circumstances and opinions of the
present age make it as reasonable and fit, as they well can do, that these
ALTERABLE EXTERNALS should be ALTERED. And I will venture to say, it is, in the
present day, extremely necessary such an alteration should be undertaken. The
sooner the better. And it might, without much difficulty be accomplished, if
gone upon, not 'with a trembling hand,' but a resolution of spirit becoming men
and Christians.

THE other ill consequence, as the Doctor has been pleased to represent it, is,
'That the Bishops in England will be jealous, that an invasion of their
authority was intended'. I neither said, nor intended to say, that any invasion
of their authority was intended, but only that they 'might easily and naturally
argue from what was done here to what might, with as much reason, be done
there:' Upon which account, it was further said, 'It can be scarce supposed, it
should escape the thought of our English Bishops, that the settlement of such
an Episcopate in America, as is proposed, may prepare the way for such a change
in the power of Bishops at home, as they would not be very fond of.' To which
the reply is, 'I will only remind the Doctor of one circumstance which he
happened to forget; namely, that this very plan has been formed and introduced
by those Bishops themselves, and consequently should they be jealous that any
invasion of their power is therein intended, they must be jealous that they
have intended to invade it themselves". I can assure the Doctor I did not
forget, that a few Bishops at home might have an hand in the formation of this
plan; but that they all, or generally, had, I have never yet seen reason to
believe. But if it was the joint contrivance of them all, it would only argue
this, that they were inattentive to what might be the result of this plan in
the natural course of its operation; or that they were above fearing
consequences; or, in fine, that they designed this plan as only an entering
wedge to make way for the creation of more Bishops, who, in proper time, might
be clothed with like dignity and power with themselves.

THE impartial public will judge, whether the Doctor has succeeded better in
his answer to this, than the foregoing objection. I could wish, for his own
sake, he had acquitted himself more like a man of thorough understanding, 'that
came prepared' to plead for the truth only, and not 'to object at any rate,
rather than not to object at all'

OBJECTION III. 'THE church of England knows no such Bishops as are specified
in this plan, nor can they, in consistency with its constitution, be sent to
the colonies'. As this is an objection essentially destructive of the proposed
plan, if it exhibits the real truth, it was justly expected the Doctor would
have been particularly careful to demonstrate that it did not. And yet, to the
surprise of his readers, the whole he has thought fit to offer is contained in
these words, 'this objection, and all that has been said to support it, has
been fully answered already'. What must the public say of his solemn call for
objections to be fairly debated before their tribunal, when, upon this call's
being complied with, by mentioning, and supporting, an essentially important
objection, he virtually declines debating on it by dogmatically affirming,
'that it has been fully answered already, and all that has been said to support
it? And this is the more extraordinary, as he has not referred to the page, or
even the part of his book, in which this full and very particular answer is to
be found. I have carefully looked over the whole he had 'already' wrote, and
cannot find any thing that resembles the answer he describes. What he has
offered upon the King's supremacy, page 49, and three or four pages onwards,
looks the most this way; and this, I conjecture, is what he refers to: But it
is far, very far, from being an answer to 'all that was said' in support of the
present objection. This I shall now endeavor to make evident to the reader;
and may venture, in the doing of it, to engage his attention for a while,
without being charged with keeping out of sight the grand point in controversy,

THE plan says, 'The Bishops to be sent to America shall have no authority, but
purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical nature, such as is derived ALTOGETHER
from the CHURCH, and not from the STATE. The objection against this plan is,
'The church of England knows no such Bishops, nor can they, in consistency with
its constitution, be sent to the Colonies.' And why? Because the constitutional
supremacy of the King is such, that there can be no Bishops without his license
for their election; nor, when elected, and consecrated, can they exercise any
authority, not in purely spiritual matters, but BY and UNDER him, and within
the limits that have been pointed out by the STATE. They may not vary a title
in any one thing pertaining to the exercise of their authority. How then can
their authority be ALTOGETHER from the CHURCH, not from the STATE? If,
consistently with the constitution, they can exercise no authority, as officers
in the church of England, but BY and UNDER the King as SUPREME GOVERNOR. and in
exact conformity to the ORDERS of the STATE, how is it possible their authority
should be 'such as is ALTOGETHER from the CHURCH, not at all from the STATE?
This, to ordinary understandings, looks very like a direct contradiction. In
this way of arguing the objection was largely supported.

LET us now see, whether what the Doctor has offered upon the King's supremacy
is 'a full answer to all that has been here said.' He has cited the
thirty-seventh article of the church of England, which contains her doctrine of
the King's supremacy; he has cited also the Queen's injunctions to which this
article refers: But, it is to be particularly observed, in his whole arguing
upon this point, he attempts to prove no more than this, that 'the church was
believed to have certain powers of a spiritual nature, which this supremacy
does not include, and which our Princes are so far from pretending to convey,
that all manner of right to exercise them, in their own persons, is therein
formally and expressly disclaimed.' That this is what he endeavored to prove,
is made indisputably clear from the manner in which he illustrates his
argument. Says he, 'Let it be considered, that every man is, in some sense, a
King in his own house and family; and no clergyman has a right to come into it
to perform any ecclesiastical offices, to administer baptism for instance,
without his leave and consent. Upon him it altogether depends, whether the
Clergyman shall have a proper and lawful authority to perform this office in
his family. But is it not evident, that the giving him that authority is a very
different thing, from investing him with the general-power to administer the
sacraments? In like manner, as a Kingdom may be considered as a large family,
the King is the political father of this family; and as such is supreme over
all persons belonging to it, whether spiritual or temporal. And without his
consent or authority, no Bishop, or ecclesiastical person, can lawfully
officiate within his dominions. But the giving this authority, by commission,
or in any other way, does not convey to any man his sacred character; but
always supposes him to have been previously invested with it, by virtue of a
commission from CHRIST.' What the Doctor has here said, by way of illustration,
is highly exceptionable, and serves little to any other purpose than to make it
certain, that all he aims at proving is only this, that, notwithstanding the
King's supremacy, it is from CHRIST, not the King, that the authority of
Bishops, as such, in the church of England, is conveyed to them. It is, with
me, beyond all doubt, that his labor upon this head is altogether in vain. The
Queen's words, in her injunctions, as quoted by the Doctor, are these, 'Her
Majesty neither does, nor ever will, challenge any authority, other than that
was challenged and lately used by the said noble Kings of famous memory, King
Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, which IS, and was of ancient time,
due to the imperial Crown of this Realm.' What now is the authority that was
challenged and used by these noble Kings? It is nothing short of this; that
they were vested with 'ALL POWER to exercise ALL MANNER of jurisdiction; and
that Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other ecclesiastical persons,
have NO MANNER of jurisdiction ecclesiastical but BY and UNDER the KING's
MAJESTY, who has full power and authority to hear and determine ALL MANNER of
causes ECCLESIASTICAL, and to reform and correct all vice, sin, errors,
heresies, enormities, abuses whatsoever, which, by ANY MANNER of SPIRITUAL
AUTHORITY or jurisdiction, ought or may be lawfully reformed. Vid. Burn's
ecclesiastical law, under the word, supremacy, wherein the several acts of
Parliament relative to this subject, in the reign of Henry the Eighth and
Edward the Sixth are cited.
Who that believes such power is vested in the King, as supreme head of the
church, can, at the same time, believe, that the authority of Bishops, in their
ecclesiastical character, is ALTOGETHER from the CHURCH, not from the STATE? If
the Doctor should be able to prove this to be within the compass of
possibility, he would discover a far higher reach of thought than he has ever
yet done But we have no need to enlarge here. Should it be supposed, not
granted, that the authority of Bishops does not flow from the Crown, but from
the church, which is the utmost the Doctor has endeavored to prove, it will
not follow from hence, that he has answered, or so much as attempted to answer,
'all that is said in support' of the objection in debate. Dare he say, that the
authority of the clergy of the church of England, whether superior or inferior,
let him derive it from what source he pleases, can be constitutionally
exercised in any one instance, but as pointed out by the King and Parliament?
Can the whole Clergy of England, with all the power they are vested with from
CHRIST, make the least alteration in the established form of worship,
ordination, or government? Is there any one thing, in these most important
religious points, that they can depart or vary from? If now their authority, as
to ITS EXERCISE, is entirely under the direction, restraint, and sovereign
control of the King and Parliament, how grossly absurd must it be to propose
the mission of Bishops, with such authority only, as is ALTOGETHER from the
CHURCH, and not at all from the STATE? There are no such Bishops in the church
of England, nor can there be till the King is deprived of that supremacy, which
has been granted to him by acts of Parliament, and the present ecclesiastical
establishment is either nullified, or essentially altered. It will not be in
the power of the Doctor fully to answer 'all that has been said', until he has
intelligiby informed us, how that authority is ALTOGETHER from the CHURCH, and
not from the STATE, which can be exercised, neither in the affair of worship,
ordination, government, or discipline, but BY and UNDER the guidance, control,
and sovereignly prescribed order, not of the CHURCH, but of the STATE: This is
his proper business -- This he should have undertaken in his reply to this
objection -- And this is still incumbent on him, if he would entertain the
least hope, upon just grounds, of supporting so strange a proposal as that of
the mission of such Bishops to America, as are unknown to the church of
England, and cannot be sent but upon the subversion, or great alteration, of
the present ecclesiastical establishment.

I SHALL only add, the objection in debate was enforced by observing, 'That
this dependence on the STATE, notwithstanding the desired authority ALTOGETHER
from the CHURCH, is the true source of all the hardships and grievances, on
account of the want of Bishops in America, that have been so bitterly
complained of. Did Bishops of the church of England no more depend on the
STATE, than our ministers do, the episcopal churches here might as well be
supplied with Bishops, as our's are with Pastors,' etc. To all which the Doctor
has no where dropped a word, though he has 'fully answered all that was said.'
It certainly looks as though he did not know what to say, or he would have said
that which would have had a better tendency to serve his cause.

OBJECTION. IV. 'We are in principle, against all civil establishments in
religion; and as we do not desire any such establishment in support of our own
religious sentiments, or practice, we cannot reasonably be blamed, if we are
not disposed to encourage one in favor of the episcopal Colonists" The Doctor
observes upon this, 'If by WE, I mean those of the congregational persuasion in
New England in general, the objection contains an article of intelligence that
is to him NEW.' Nothing more follows from hence, than that he is informed of
something he did not know before. But though he would affect to be ignorant of
a real truth, he is free to declare his faith in an imaginary one, namely,
'That a large majority of the several persuasions, excepting the people called
Quakers, notwithstanding the declarations that have been published against
establishments in the gross, had always a reserve in favor of the
establishment of their own religion.' Was it to the purpose of the present
argument, I could easily, notwithstanding 'the historical accounts, and
authentic anecdotes, in the Doctor's possession,' make it appear, with a
meridian luster, 'That the Puritans, in the reign of Queen Elisabeth,' are
injuriously misrepresented in what he has here given us 'from Maddox's answer
to Neal.' And he must not take it amiss, if I tell him, that we are not
surprised at his endeavoring to uncover the nakedness 'of his ancestors,' as
he is a DESERTER from that GREAT CAUSE which brought them over to this then
desolate land: Nor is it beyond what we expected, to find him, and many of the
Society's Missionaries, who are either proselites themselves, or the sons of
proselites, fired with extraordinary zeal in propagating high-church
principles. This has all along been the way, on this side the Atlantic, in
which converts to the church, especially clerical ones, have endeavored to
give proof of the sincerity of their conversion.

HE now comes to the point in debate, and agrees with me, 'That if I, and those
of my persuasion, do not desire an establishment in support of our religious
sentiments, we cannot be reasonably blamed, if we are not disposed to encourage
one in favor of the episcopal Colonists.' But says he, 'What has the case of
religious establishments to do with the American Episcopate, which has been
offered to the Public?' He knew, or might have known, that the objection
supposed they had a great deal to do with it; and, instead of asking such a
needless question, he should have evinced, upon the foot of solid argument,
that they had no connection with, or relation to, each other. But he contents
himself with only going on asking, 'Does this plan propose an establishment of
the church?' It undoubtedly does. 'Will the execution of it imply, or amount
to, any such thing?' Yes; or it can never be carried into execution. 'Will the
introduction of Bishops, who shall have no authority, but purely of a spiritual
and ecclesiastical nature, such as is derived altogether from the church, and
not from the state; [and so on to the conclusion of the plan;] I say, will the
introduction of such Bishops as these amount to an establishment? Nay, can it
have any more aspect against the civil or religious privileges of the
Colonists, than against those of the Crim Tartars'? Surely the Doctor could not
but know, before he asked these questions, that it was only asking, whether we
thought there was any weight, or force, in the produced objection. How
unaccountable therefore is it, that he could imagine, that he had said any
thing to the purpose, by barely putting these questions! They are really
nothing more than so many strongly expressed affirmations: and will he call
this arguing? He proposed, that every objection should be fairly debated before
the tribunal of the Public; but, instead of debating upon this, he roundly and
repeatedly affirms, by way of query, that it has no validity in it. His proper
work was, to make it clearly evident, by good reasoning, that the proposed plan
did not imply an establishment, and that it could, without one, be carried into
effect; the contrary to which will, without all doubt, be found the truth of
fact, if ever this plan takes place. If it should, it must be by the
constitution of a new church of England in the Colonies; but how this can be
effected without an establishment, according to the true idea of this word, no
one, unless it be the Doctor, can explain. This is what he ought to have done
in answer to the present objection; and until we are thus favored, we shall
take the liberty to think, we are perfectly consistent with ourselves, while we
are not disposed to encourage the planned episcopal establishment, as we desire
no establishment of our own mode of religious government, or discipline.

THE Doctor now gives us a curious specimen of his talent at nice, strict,
close reasoning. I had said, 'It does not appear to us, that CHRIST has
entrusted the state with a right to make religious establishments. If the state
in England has this delegated authority, must it not be owned, that the state
in China, in Turkey, in Spain, must have this authority also? What should make
the difference in the eye of true reason? Has the state in England been
distinguished by Heaven by any peculiar grant, beyond the state in other
Countries? If it has, let the grant be produced. If it has not, all states
have, in common, the same authority. And as they must severally be supposed to
exert this authority in establishments conformable to their own sentiments in
religion; what can the consequence be, but infinite damage to the cause of GOD,
and true religion? And such in fact has been the consequence of these
establishments, in all ages, and in all places'. Some of these bad consequences
were then particularly mentioned. Let us now see the Doctor's reasoning to
invalidate what was thus offered against the right of states to make religious
establishments. Says he, 'The same argument with which the Doctor endeavors to
overthrow it [this right of states] is as forcible against the right of private
judgment. This will evidently appear from the following experiment. If a person
in England has this right, must it not be owned that a person in China, in
Turkey, in Spain, must have it also', and so on, applying what I had offered
against the right of states to make religious establishments, to the right of
private judgment; as though the argument was equally forcible against the
latter as the former. But surely the Doctor does not believe, that the right of
states to make religious establishments is as clearly and indubitably a grant
from GOD, as the right of private judgment! And if he does not, what does his
arguing prove? The cases must be parallel, or the reasoning from the one to the
other cannot be conclusive. It is allowed, the bad effects that follow from the
exercise of private judgment are no proof, that men have not universally a
right to judge for themselves. And why? Because they have this right granted to
them by GOD himself, and we are as sure of it as that he has granted them any
other right whatever. Is the case the same with respect to the right of states
to make religious establishments? Is not their pretended right founded entirely
on its supposed connection with the real interest of religion? It is therefore
a good argument against this right, though none at all against the right of
private judgment, that, instead of being advantageous, it has been infinitely
hurtful to the cause of GOD, and true virtue. The religion of Jesus, in
particular, has suffered more from the exercise of this pretended right, than
from all other causes put together; and it is, with me, past all doubt, that it
will never be restored to its primitive purity, simplicity, and glory, until
religious establishments are so brought down as to be no more. In short, when
the Doctor shall make it evident, that the state-right we are considering
stands upon the same bottom, and is as incontestably a grant from GOD, as the
right of private judgment, we shall then allow, that the bad consequences
flowing from the exercise of these rights are as forcible an argument against
the one as the other, that is, no argument at all; but, until then we shall
think this arguing altogether below one, who would be esteemed a gentleman
endowed with a good capacity for reasoning. I am obliged to say, the Doctor
seems to have no great talent at answering objections, or has been
unaccountably careless in the doing of it. Instead of recommending to the
reader what has been wrote against religious establishments, I would advise him
to consult his own reason, and to pay a regard to the dictates of COMMON SENSE,
and he need not then fear being led aside either by 'Bishop Warburton's
alliance between the church and the state, or Dr. Stebbing's essay concerning
civil government, or Dr. Roger's vindication of the civil establishment, or
Bishop Else on spiritual liberty, or a late elegant essay on establishments in
religion, in answer to the confessional.'

OBJECTION V. 'The church of England in the Colonies, in its comparative low
state, instead of an Episcopate, upon this plan, or any other, needs rather the
charitable assistance of its friends to support its present Ministers, and
others that are still wanted.' The reply begins, 'The Doctor forgets that the
church of England, in several of the Colonies, is not in that comparative low
state he speaks of; but is able to support, and does support, its Ministers in
general as amply as any set of Clergymen are supported in the British
dominions.' This I did not forget, though I took no notice of it, for this very
good reason, because it did not appear, that the church of England in any of
these Colonies had complained for want of Bishops, or were disposed to petition
for them. The only complainers and petitioners are residents in the other
Colonies, where the church of England is in the comparatively low state that
was represented. Neither Clergy, nor Laity in the Colonies where episcopal
Ministers are so 'amply supported,' have made any stir, that we know of, about
the want of Bishops, or signified their desire of their mission. But, says the
Doctor, 'Supposing the church throughout the Colonies needed the charitable
assistance of its friends to support its Ministers, yet this would be no proof
that it does not need also an Episcopate.' If it would be no proof of this, it
would fully prove, that the episcopal Clergy, in the Colonies, are boundless in
their desires of charity. One would think, the amazing sum that is annually,
and charitably, expended in supporting Missionaries, might satisfy the
^lurdiest beggars, without hankering after as much more charity as would be
sufficient for the support of Bishops. Besides, they cannot have Bishops, upon
the proposed plan, unless the church of England is, by the state, differently
constituted here from what it is at home.

I HAD said, 'In North Carolina, the religious state of things, by all
accounts, is deplorably sad -- They have few, very few, Ministers to officiate
in gospel-administrations. That charity, which might be sufficient for the
maintenance of as many Missionaries as would be needful there, would be
swallowed up by one Bishop only. And would this tend so much to the honor of
GOD, and the good of souls, as if it was expended in support of missions that
are really necessary?' Upon this the Doctor cries out, 'It is surprising to see
what advantages are claimed by some people! How they can make use of the same
argument to different purposes! When other ends are to be answered, the writers
against the church can tell us, that the Society have no power to apply their
funds to other uses than were intended by the donors -- But now an Episcopate
is in view, it is thought reasonable and just that the Society should alienate
a fund, more strictly appropriated to a particular use than any other in their
power, (for this may be truly said of the fund for the support of American
Bishops) and expend it upon Missionaries to be sent to Carolina, and other
places, provided always, that such places are at a due distance from
New England.' It is not easy to conceive, what could give occasion for this
strange remark. Not a word was said of the fund appropriated for the support of
American Bishops, or of the Society's expending one farthing of this fund to
other uses than were intended by the donors. It was only said in general, 'That
charity which might be sufficient for the maintenance of as many Missionaries
as were wanted would be swallowed up by one Bishop only.' H^ the Society
nothing put into their hands for the support of the gospel in America, besides
what is appropriated for the support of Bishops here? And as the fund for the
support of American Bishops is insufficient, might not the Society, with
fidelity to their trust, in the Doctor's opinion, make up this deficiency,
should Bishops be sent? This, and this only, is what I had in view. And as
Missionaries were peculiarly wanted in Carolina, and other places, it was
supposed, and I believe, upon just grounds, that it would be more for the
honor of GOD, it should be expended this way, than in supporting Bishops. What
the Doctor has here said is therefore quite aliene from what was really
intended, nor in the least an answer to it. Had he looked within, I can scarce
think his conscience would have suffered him to insinuate, that I spoke of
missions to Carolina, because at 'a due distance from New England.' He knows,
that the expressly named object of the Society's care is, the mission of
Clergymen for the administration of the word and sacraments in those Colonies,
where there was no provision at all, or a mean one, for the public worship of
GOD. And he must know likewise, unless he is strangely ignorant, that Carolina
is the Colony, if there is any one on the American Continent, where, as we have
often been told in the society-sermons, they had scarcely any form of public
worship; where even the LORD's day was hardly distinguished from other days,
but by greater idleness and profaneness; and where baptism and the LORD's
supper were scarcely known to be administered. Why then would he suggest, that I
mentioned Carolina, because 'duly distant from New England?' He has not herei^
discovered that christian concern for the propagation of the gospel, according
to the acknowledged design of the Society's charter, which might have been
expected from a Missionary in virtue of it. He adds, 'As the Society have never
acted the part of unfaithful stewards, in other cases, we can be under no
apprehensions that they will in this.' I say not, that they have acted an
unfaithful part; but this I will say, it is the real truth of fact, to whatever
cause it may be owing, that they have employed few Missionaries, next to none,
in Carolina, where they were most needed, and multiplied them where there was
little, if any need at all of them; and in some places they have supported, and
are still supporting them, where the churches to whom they minister are
abundantly able, without any assistance from them, to support the gospel. And
though guarding the Colonists against, or delivering them from, the delusions
and superstitions of POPERY, is one essential part of the business of the
Society, as pointed out in their charter, they have so strangely neglected
Canada, which, ever since the conclusion of the last war, has been a Province
in subjection to the British Crown, as to give occasion for a letter to them,
from the Chaplain to the garrison at Montreal, wherein he says, Abstract of the
proceedings of the Society, annexed to the society-sermon preached Feb. 17,
1769, by the Bishop of Bristol.
'That the Romish Priests avail themselves greatly of the neglected state of
the church of England in those parts; persuading the Canadians, that we have
not religion so much at heart as they.' Let the impartial Public judge, whether
it would not be a much stronger argument of the Society's faithfulness as
stewards, to take effectual care that Carolina and Canada have a full supply of
Missionaries, rather than New England, New York, the Jersies, or Pennsylvania,
where there is no pretense of any want of them, but merely to uphold a
different mode of administration in one and the same religion.

I HAD said, 'As to the Colonies, extending from Pennsylvania to the
northermost bounds of the Massachusetts-Province, notwithstanding the pious
care of the Society at home, and the vast charity they have been annually
expending in favor of the church of England, from their first incorporation to
this day, it has grown but little in comparison with the other denominations of
christians, not having got as yet beyond its infant state.' Says the Doctor in
reply, 'I conceive he must be mistaken as to the fact. In Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, and New York, I will not be positive that the church has increased
beyond the proportion of other denominations for fifty years past -- But in the
New England Colonies it appears, from good accounts, that the church has
considerably increased; and that the number of its professors at this day bears
a greater proportion to the number of inhabitants, than it ever has done
before. I may be mistaken with regard to some of the New England Colonies: But'
--. He has hitherto spoken cautiously, but not like one who appears to have a
sufficient acquaintance with the real truth of fact. Upon the strictest
examination, it would be found, that the increase of other denominations,
beyond the increase of Episcopalians, is greater in New England, than in
New York, New Jersey, or Pennsylvania; and this greater increase is rapidly
going on in all the Colonies that constitute what is called New England,
excepting the Colony of Connecticut, in which there has been the greatest
increase of the church of England; but there is nothing 'amazing,' as the
Doctor's epithet is, in this increase: Nor had he the least reason to go on
saying, 'I cannot at present recollect an example, in any age or country,
wherein so great a proportion of proselites has been made to any religion in so
short a time, as has been made to the church of England in the western division
of that populous Colony; unless where the power of miracles, or the arm of the
Magistrate, was exerted to produce that effect.' Notwithstanding the
hyperbolical mode in which the Doctor here flourishes, there are not one tenth
part so many Episcopalians, even in the western division of Connecticut, as
there have been sterling pounds expended in order to proselite them: Nor are
there more episcopal churches in all the New England Colonies, than there have
been thousands of pounds sterling spent to found and support them. And they
are, by far the greater part of them, not excepting those in the abovementioned
'western division,' in so weak and low a state, that there would be no hope of
their continued existence, if that charity was withdrawn, which, at first, gave
being to them, and has all along supported them in being: Whereas, the churches
of other denominations, without the help of charity from abroad, or the
expectation or desire of any, are become numerous, and continually increase in
number, beyond what has been known in any age, or place, since the first ages
of christianity.

I HAD spoken of the church of England here, 'as being in its infancy, not able
to stand upon its own legs, and so far from a state of maturity, as not to make
it worth while for a Bishop to come here.' The Doctor replies, 'infant and
feeble as she is, he has allowed that she may be ^70,000 strong in the Colonies
-- Now can he possibly think, when he allows himself time for consideration,
that the church of England in America, containing 270,000 members, in which are
included most of the governors and principal persons in the Colonies, is so
inconsiderable, that it is not worth while for a Bishop to take the charge of
it?' When I supposed the church of England might contain 270,000, I took into
the computation all the Episcopalians on the American Continent. But when I
spoke of her as in 'an infant feeble state, not able to stand upon her own
legs,' my view was (as may be seen in the passages with which these words are
connected) to her existence in the seven Colonies, extending from Pennsylvania
to the utmost north-east bounderies of the Massachusetts-Province; in all
which, though they contain by far the greatest number of inhabitants on this
Continent, there are not more than 26 or 27 thousand professors of the church
of England, who are scattered over an extent of 600 miles in length, and more
than an 100 in breadth. And 'of these, (as was observed in my answer, page 156,
to which the Doctor has made no reply) it would be no wrong to the truth, if it
should be said, a very considerable part went over to the church, not so much
upon sober inquiry and real principle, as from disgust at the parish-minister,
or unhappy prejudices arising from the placing a meeting house, or some such
important difficulty in the towns where they lived.' In this view of the church
of England, which is certainly a just one, what occasion is there for Bishops,
at least in these parts of America? I had nothing to do with the Colonies to
the southward of Pennsylvania. They have neither complained for want of
Bishops, or desired the mission of them. When this is the case, we shall
doubtless say that upon the matter, which is just and reasonable. The above
described seven Colonies only, contain the complainers and petitioners; and as
the Society's chief solicitude, as well as charity, has been laid out to
episcopise these Colonies, they are eminently,if not solely, the Colonies for
which Bishops have been so earnestly sought after. But the church of England
must make a more respectable figure in these Colonies, before she may hope for
such a superior order of men as Bishops. Will it become their dignity to be
supported by charity, and to be placed at the head of churches so dependant on
charity, as that if it is withheld, they must, by far the greater part of them,
fall into nonexistence? The church (as the Doctor loves to call it -- as
though there was no other church) must wait until it arrives at a state of much
greater maturity, before it will be worth while for Bishops to come here. It is
acknowledged the Governor, in most of these Colonies, is commonly in name, an
Episcopalian; though sometimes destitute of every thing else that looks like
religion. -- Surely such Governors cannot be supposed to have much at heart the
affair of an Episcopate, unless they should view it as connected with their
worldly interest in one shape or another. It is quite remote from the truth to
say, that 'most of the principal persons in the Colonies' are of this
persuasion, unless by principal persons are meant, those who are appointed to
their civil posts from home. In general there are 50 principal persons to one,
in the Non-episcopal Colonies, who are not members of the church of England,
but of churches of other denominations.

THE Doctor now leaves me for a while, in order to consider the objections I
had introduced as offered by Dr. Mayhew against this plan, in reply to a
supposed high dignitary of the church of England. As it was the professed
design of the 'appeal' to remove objections against the American Episcopate,
'the suffering these objections to lie against it, without lisping a word to
take off the force of them, 'was mentioned as a failure. The Doctor has excused
himself by saying, 'He had not seen these objections, though he had in vain
made inquiry after them.' The excuse is 'candidly accepted' as a good one. 'But
(says he) what excuse can Doctor Chauncy make for taking no notice of what was
powerfully offered by Mr. Apthorp in answer to these very objections of Dr.
Mayhew?' There is no need of making any excuse, as, in compliance with the
invitation given in the 'appeal,' my business was, not to answer objections,
but to bring them that they might be answered by the Doctor. Now he has adopted
what he imagines was 'powerfully offered by Mr. Apthorp,' it is become proper I
should take notice of it; but, had I done this before, I might have been taxed
with officiousness; I should certainly have acted out of character as an
objector, and prevented myself in that which ought not to have been expected
until now.

BEFORE the Doctor brings in Mr. Apthorp, he says a few words, which, I
suppose, he intended should be looked upon as an answer to the 'expedient I
suggested to compromise matters between Episcopalians and other denominations
in the Colonies;' but as he has silently passed over what I had largely offered
in illustration of the propriety and reasonableness of this expedient, I have
nothing to do here but to desire the reader to turn to p. 150, 169, 160 of the
answer to the 'appeal;' and he must then be convinced, that the Doctor, under
the pretense of saying something, has really said nothing.

NOW comes in Mr. Apthorp's answer to Dr. Mayhew's objections. This answer was
published before the Doctor's death, and the only reason he made no reply to it
was, that neither he, or his friends, thought it worthy of such notice. It was,
as they imagined, wrote principally with a view to recommend himself to a
certain great man, whose favor might be advantageous to him. However, if he
had been permitted, in the alwise government of Heaven, to have lived until
this time, he would, doubtless, upon this occasion, have pointed out the utter
insufficiency of this Gentleman's answer to his objections. And though he might
have done it to better purpose than I can, divine Providence has put a fatal
bar in the way of the Public's having this satisfaction. The reader, while he
remembers it is the Doctor's friend that appears in his behalf, will not
attribute to him any defect he may discern in the vindication of his objections.

'THE Doctor, (says Mr. Apthorp) affects to doubt whether the scheme proposed
by his answerer be not merely his own, instead of being, as is asserted, the
real and only one that has been in view; and says, that if this assertion be
true, he and others have been misinformed.' The reply is, 'Let his or their
informers say on what grounds they have ever affirmed a different one to have
been framed; or else let them take shame to themselves for inventing falsehoods,
or venting imaginations for facts; and let the Doctor set a mark on them, and
be more cautious whom he believes hereafter.' What was said by the Doctor is
here set in a very partial and unfair light. Instead of properly quoting his
words, as he used them in a connected course of reasoning, this writer has
given them, or rather the sense in which he understood them, in a disjoined
absolute form. The writer the Doctor replies to, after he had proposed a scheme
for a Colony-Episcopate, assures us, 'This is the real and only scheme that
has been planned for Bishops in America; and whoever has heard of any other
has been misinformed through mistake or design.' Says the Doctor in answer,
'To speak for myself, then, I am one of those who have been thus misinformed;
and I know of others who have been so, in common with me -- He speaks of this
scheme with great assurance, as if he were at headquarters, and certainly knew
it to be the real and only one. Possibly, this may be the case. But he is not
known; nor has he informed us ^on what ground or authority he goes in giving
this account of the matter. The declaration of an anonymous writer, how
confidently soever he may express himself, is not, surely, sufficient to
satisfy us, that this is the true scheme planned. -- It may possibly be only
his own scheme, the scheme of a private man; and until it comes with better
authority, or in a more authentic way, we may consider it as an imaginary one.'
-- Let Mr. Apthorp 'take shame to himself' for pretending to answer an
objection, without so much as saying a word to invalidate such pertinent and
solid reasoning in support of it. I cannot suppose Dr. Chandler himself will
think, that what is here said is 'powerfully offered;' if he should, without
all doubt, the impartial Public will judge otherwise.

HE goes on to tell us of 'successive proposals for American Bishops, made at
different times, through a long course of years, by men of high rank and
character in the church; all which agree with what the answerer has avered.' He
likewise gives us at large 'Bishop Butler's scheme, as one 'that might have
peculiar weight with the Doctor;' and speaks of it as exactly similar to that
in the answer to his observations.' What is all this to the purpose? We know,
and the Doctor knew, there has long been a design to introduce Bishops into the
Colonies, and that plans have been formed to accomplish this design. But should
there have been a general agreement in these plans, they may be nothing more
than the schemes of private men; and this indeed is the truth of fact. They are
not to be looked on as schemes set forth upon the foot of proper authority. The
planners of them had no such authority; and whatever they might intend, or
pretend, if ever an Episcopate is authoritatively settled in America, it may
be, for aught any or all of them can say, upon a plan very different from that
which they have proposed. Mr. Apthorp is pleased to say of the proposed plan,
'That it is such a simple and beautiful plan of the most ancient and moderate
Episcopacy, that it should, not only remove all the Doctor's apprehensions, but
the scruples of every rational and learned Dissenter against that apostolic
form of government.' Where does this writer find, in any of apostolic epistles,
the model of an episcopate without any authority to govern the Laity? Let him,
if he can, produce a text, in any part of the new testament, wherein ruling the
Clergy, in distinction from the Laity, is made the proper work of Bishops. He
would likewise do what was never done before, if he would point out that part
of the christian word, where the Bishop's diocese, in the 'most ancient times,'
extended an hundred miles in breadth, and several hundred in length. Until he
it able to prove, that such was 'the most ancient Episcopacy,' no rational or
learned Dissenter against the proposed plan, will entertain an opinion of it
as, in any measure, agreeing with the 'apostolic form of government.' This
Gentleman has not discovered here the most intimate acquaintance, with either
the apostolic Episcopacy, or that which took place in the most ancient times.

HE goes on, 'Supposing this to be the real scheme, the Doctor owns that it
sets the matter in a less exceptionable point of view, than he had seen it in
before.' Very true; and I am ready to own the same thing. But this does not
make the scheme unexceptionable. He now complains, 'The Doctor cannot forbear
going fifty years back to ridicule some harmless, though ill chosen, phrases,
in which the substance of it [the scheme] is expressed.' As he had occasion to
speak of the Society's abstract, printed in 1715, in which, among other reasons
for an Episcopate in the Colonies, 'the blessing all manner of people
susceptible of such holy impressions as are made by the imposition of the
Bishops hands,' is particularly mentioned; it will, I believe, be thought
excusable in him, if he has called this a matter 'sublime, mysterious and
sacred,' passing it over with nothing more than a contemptuous sneer. But, says
this writer, 'He well knows, or easily may, that we ascribe no more efficacy to
the laying on of Bishops hands, then his brethren do to the laying on of
Presbyter's hands.' The Doctor could not possibly know this, because it is not
the truth of fact. Mr. Apthorp must be very ignorant of the sentiments of
Non-episcopalians, if he does not know, that we conceive quite differently of
the laying on of Presbyters hands, from what many, at least, of the church of
England do of the laying on of Bishops hands. Do Episcopalians never speak of
an indelible character as impressed by the Bishop's hand in ordination? Do they
never lead people to think, as if there was an instituted connection between
the imposition of his hand in confirmation, and the bestowment of the Spirit in
his gracious influences? These are the false and ridiculous notions they
deride, not ordination or confirmation, merely as such, by the laying on of
Bishops hands. And, perhaps, ridicule is the fittest way in which such
mysteriously sacred matters can be treated. Neither Dr. Mayhew, or any of his
brethren, object to the performance of the offices of ordination or
confirmation by persons of that order, to which Episcopalians conceive they are
committed.' But, says this writer, 'The Doctor thinks we are possessed
sufficiently of the whole exercise of our religion, because our young people
may be confirmed, and Clergymen ordained for us, and properly inspected
afterward; provided they will all go from America to Europe for these
purposes. Can he say with a good conscience, that liberty like this is all he
should desire for himself, and his brethren?' And here he is entreated 'to read
over some words of his answerer, to which he has made no reply'. The words are
these; 'The American Dissenters from our communion, would think it
insupportably grievous to have no ministers, but such as received ordination in
England or Ireland; or to be witheld from the use of any religious rite, which
they esteemed as highly as we do confirmation; or to have their church
destitute of a super-intendency, which they conceived to be of apostolical
institution. I should in such a case be a zealous advocate for them, as not yet
enjoying the full toleration to which they had a right. And surely they ought
to ask their consciences very seriously, why they oppose our application for
such indulgence, as they would claim for themselves; and whether indeed such
opposition is not downright persecution; and that in a matter merely spiritual,
without the mixture of any temporal concern'. The reason why the Doctor made no
reply to these words was, not because 'they admit of none,' but because they
are quite beside the case in dispute. The American Non-episcopalians neither
enjoy or desire to enjoy, any other liberty than to provide such Pastors, to
officiate in such services among them, as they think are agreeable to the word
of GOD. Such liberty is equally possessed by Episcopalians. If the other
denominations more fully and conveniently enjoy the exercise of their religion,
it is not in the least measure owing to their being favored with greater
liberty, but to their greater care of themselves under that permission, which
is equally granted to all denominations. If there is any one purely spiritual
privilege, which Episcopalians do not as fully enjoy as any of the other
denominations, it is owing to themselves, and not to any want of liberty in
this respect. Their liberty is precisely the same with the liberty of the other
persuasions. Was it not, I should be as 'zealous an advocate for them,' as this
Gentleman could be for us under like circumstances; as thinking that they were
hardly used. The true reason why Episcopalians do not AS FULLY enjoy the
exercise of their religion, as the other denominations is, not because they are
not possessed of equal liberty, but because they do not make the like full use
of it. These other denominations would continue until doomsday without Pastors
to officiate in any religious service among them, if they waited for their
mission from the state at home: Nor would they complain of this as a burden,
much less an insupportable one. They are entirely satisfied, as they have the
grant of liberty to provide for themselves the full enjoyment of all the
spiritual privileges of the Kingdom of CHRIST. Episcopalians are equally
partakers in the same granted liberty; and they should be contented herewith,
and not complain of it as an insuperable hardship, that the state at home does
not furnish them with Bishops in order to the complete exercise of their
religion. Did christian churches in the first ages of the gospel, make such
complaints? If they might be permitted to provide spiritual officers for the
spiritual services of christianity, it was all they desired; and it is all that
can reasonably be desired at this day. And such permission is as completely
enjoyed by Episcopalians, as by any of the other denominations on the Continent.

Mr. Apthorp proceeds, 'The Doctor, still flying to ridicule in defect of
argument, intimates, how much the Episcopalians in America need to be well
ruled and governed -- how much the Clergy need to be united, and reduced to
order'. The Doctor did not undertake to argue upon these things, as is here
suggested. He purposely avoided it, lest he should not 'express himself with
quite so much gravity and solemnity' as some might think proper. It is not
therefore easy to account for this remark upon what the Doctor mentioned in
transit^ only, unless it was that occasion might be here from taken to tell us,
'that the American Clergy are unanimous in their wishes to be under the
immediate inspection of Bishops resident among them; which concurrence implies
quite the contrary to a present disorderly state of that Clergy'. That those
among the Clergy, who petitioned for Bishops are 'unanimous" at least in
pretense, in their wishes to have them, is not disputed; but that the whole
American Clergy are thus unanimous is far from being a 'known' fact. No
evidence has yet been given, that the Clergy, any more than the Laity, in those
Colonies which are called Episcopal, are at all desirous of being under the
'immediate inspection of Bishops'; nor is it thought to be a fact capable of
being evidenced. How far this may imply 'a present disorderly state of that
Clergy', I leave with this writer to say. He adds, with reference to the
American episcopal Clergy in common, 'they are, perhaps, as faithful to their
trust, and as blameless in their manners, as any body of men in the christian
ministry'. It would give me real and great pleasure, was I as fully satisfied
of this, as this w^iter seems to be.

HE now brings in the Doctor saying, 'great inconveniences are likely to follow
from the sending Bishops to America'; and then answers, 'He says also, it is
readily owned that our apprehension of what may possibly or probably be the
consequences of it, ought not to put us on infringing the religious liberty of
our fellow subjects and christian brethren. Nay, he adds, neither have we any
power to do so, if we were unreasonable and wicked enough to desire it; our
charter granting such liberty to all protestants'. What now is the consequence
of these concessions? 'Therefore, says this writer, Bishops may, by that
charter, settle even in New England'. So purely spiritual Bishops might without
it, or in any part of the christian world, in virtue of that liberty wherewith
CHRIST has made the professors of his religion free. It follows, 'And if the
having Bishops among them be part of the religious liberty of the
Episcopalians, as it evidently is; the Dissenters ought not to oppose it on
account of apprehended consequenes'. There is a great and wide difference (as
has been abundantly proved) between purely spiritual Bishops, and such Bishops
as are specified in the proposed plan. We make no opposition to Bishops that
have 'authority altogether from CHRIST, and not the state'. If we oppose
Bishops of a contrary species, we oppose no part of that episcopal liberty
which is RELIGIOUS; and should great inconveniences be likely to follow from
the sending such Bishops, opposition to their mission would, on this account,
be highly reasonable, and not the least infringement on RELIGIOUS liberty.

BUT, says this writer, 'What are the bad consequences apprehended?' He
answers, 'Bishops, the Doctor tells us, are ambitious and unquiet'. In reply
whereto he says, 'So are Presbyters, and all sorts of men too often.' But this
proves nothing, unless he could have said further, that their sphere of
influence was equally extensive, in consequence of which there was equal
danger, from their intrieguing with great men at home, or with Governors and
principal men here, of carrying into execution such schemes as might be greatly
hurtful, both in a civil and religious sense. It follows, 'The Doctor will own
that Bishops are now, and long have been as quiet an order of men as any in the
nation.' He will be far from owning this, 'if it be true, as many affirm [these
are the Doctor's words, p. 64] that high church tory-principles are lately
revived in England, and greatly favored by some, whose influence may go far
toward bringing them into as much reputation, as they have been in disgrace
since the death of Queen Ann.'

THE Doctor had said, 'Let us suppose, that Bishops are to be at first sent to
America with such limited powers [as are mentioned in the proposed plan,] to
reside in the episcopal Colonies, and to have no concern, but with
Episcopalians. Have we sufficient ground to think, that they and their
successors would, to the day of doom, or for a long time, remain contented with
such powers, or under such limitations? In a word, that they would continue
such inoffensive harmless creatures as this Gentleman supposes.' -- To this the
reply is, 'Who knows whether the New-Englandlers will not hang Quakers and
Witches again?' It is conceded, no one knows that they will not, should the
proposed mission of Bishops take place; for, in England, where there is no
complaint for want of Bishops, both Quakers and Witches have been hanged in
much greater numbers than they ever were here. This writer goes on 'The Clergy
of England are in general friends to religious freedom: The people of England,
Whigs and Tories, are unfavourable to clerical power; and a far greater danger,
than the Doctor's imaginary one, is that of their laying aside all regard to
the christian ministry, and to christianity itself.' The Doctor himself, in
answering a like reply of his Antagonist, fully answered what is here said;
though this writer, instead of attending to it as he ought, has only repeated,
in effect, the same thing over again. I have nothing therefore to do here, but
to quote the Doctor's own words. Says he, 'All this being t^n for granted, yet
may not times alter, and administrations change? Who knows what the next reign
and administration may be? or whether attempts toward an oppressive
enlargement of power, may not be as much encouraged, ae it is supposed they
would be frowned on, during the present?' Mr. Apthorp says further, 'There
never was so little prospect, that a spirit of religious intolerance would
revive here,' that is, in England. I heartily wish there was no reason to
suspect the truth of what is here affirmed. He goes on, 'If it should, it might
not extend to New England -- But even supposing it to reach thither, the
effects would be very little by the circumstance of no Bishop being already
placed in America.' -- The Doctor shall speak for himself here also. Says he,
'We are certainly much more secure against such oppression in the absence of
Bishops, than we should be if they were once fixed here. Obsta principiis was
never thought an ill maxim by wise men,' and so on, with pertinency, the best
part of a page; all which, this writer has been so wise as to pass over in
silence. But, says he, 'The whole apprehension [of bad consequences] is
groundless'. And why? 'The English Dissenters, who have six and twenty Bishops
established among them fear no harm from them. Why then should the New England
Dissenters fear any, if one or two should be established, with much less power,
in one or two neighboring Provinces?' It is more than this writer knows, that
the Dissenters at home 'fear no harm:' or should this be true, it is far from
being so that they suffer none. They now are, and ever will be, in suffering
circumstances; unless the establishment of the church of England is dissolved,
or greatly altered from what it is at present. And there is nothing felt or
feared by Dissenters at home, but we, in this part of the world, may feel, or
have reason to fear, should the desired Bishops be sent to the Colonies. The
paragraph we have been considering is thus concluded, 'So public a declaration
as has been made of the model of Episcopacy, proposed to be followed in
America, will itself be an effectual barrier against any undue extension of
ecclesiastical power; of which the Doctor affects to be so apprehensive,' This
being a mere naked, unsupported affirmation, nothing more is needful to be said
upon it, than only to affirm the direct contrary, that it will not be an
effectual barrier, and that the Doctor did not affect to be apprehensive, but
really was so, and upon just grounds.

THE Doctor observed, 'If Bishops are sent to America, they must be well
supported; this is beyond doubt. By whom? or by what means?' And here he
largely argued to show it to be highly probable, 'that it would be, if not at
first, yet in time, by a tax laid on the Colonies to this end.' Among other
things, he pertinently remarked, 'If Bishops were speedily to be sent to
America, it seems not wholly improbable from what we hear of the unusual tenor
of some late parliamentary acts and bills, for raising money on the poor
Colonies without their consent, that provision might be made for the support of
these Bishops, if not of all the church-clergy also, in the same way.' To all
which Mr. Apthorp is pleased to give us the following weighty answer, 'If no
proper maintenance can be found for them, he needs not be uneasy at the project
of sending them; and that it is not to be at the expense of the Colonies, he
has seen in Bishop Butler's scheme, with which the others agree' It is not
possible any one should have a conception of the pertinency, force, and
elegance of the Doctor's objection, as set forth at large in his reasoning upon
it, by reading only this cursory, slighty, and, I may say, trifling answer to
it.

AMONG the inconveniences that might result from the appointment of Bishops in
America, the Doctor mentioned these, 'That, by the increase of the episcopal
party [which might be effected by this appointment, and is doubtless one
principal reason why it is so much desired] they might get a majority in our
houses of assembly; that, in consequence thereof, the church of England might
become the established religion of all these Colonies; that a sacramental test,
or something like it, might ensue, to exclude Non-conformists from places,
preferment, and civil offices, as in England; and that taxes might be imposed
on us all in common, for the maintenance of these Bishops, and the episcopal
Clergy'. -- Upon these inconveniences the Doctor argued largely, closely, and
cogently. What now says Mr. Apthorp? In taking notice of this objection, he
does as he had all along done before, that is, contents himself with nibling at
here and there a sentence which he is pleased to pick out, without concerning
himself with the Doctor's whole reasoning in connection. Let us take a view of
his reply. Says he, 'The Doctor imagines, that appointing Bishops in America
would probably increase the episcopal party there; and then great evils might
follow.' What a poor, lame, lank representation is this of what the Doctor had
offered! However, let us attend to what follows. 'I cannot discern in what
other way it can increase their party, than by supplying them more easily with
a competent number of ministers; taking care that these ministers should be
diligent and exemplary; and promoting an early sense of piety among their young
people, These are no evils.' -- The Doctor never lisped a word in complaint of
them as such. But surely this writer's knowledge of mankind is very scanty, if
he is capable of 'discerning' no other ways, than those he has specified, in
which the episcopal party might be increased. Would the glare of episcopal
dignity have no influence upon some sort of persons? Would the connection of
American Bishops with those at home, and their power with great men there, have
no effect upon the sons of this world, who might have in view this or the other
post of honor or profit? A variety of other ways might easily be mentioned,
wherein the episcopal party might be increased -- But I forbear. He goes on,
'The Doctor indeed says, that pretexts might easily be found for enlarging the
power of these Bishops, and increasing the number.' The reply is, 'But
enlarging their power would immediately raise a clamor that could not be
withstood.' Is not this as good a reason, at least a very good one, why they
should not be sent at all, unless with such powers as are 'altogether from
CHRIST, not from the state?' Should they be sent, would it not raise a clamor?
And if it could be withstood, it would not, perhaps, be with so much ease as
some may be ready to imagine. But 'if a few Bishops proved disagreeable, more
would not be added.' This is more than this Gentleman knows, or has any
authority to affirm. Nay, 'though they should prove agreeable and useful, more
would be sent only to such Provinces as chose them.' Perhaps, by Provinces are
meant the comparatively few Episcopalians that live in them; and by their
choice of Bishops, their being contented with having them sent to them: In this
sense, it may be true, 'more Bishops would be sent only to such Provinces as
chose them'; but, in the common and ordinary sense in which these words are
understood, it is not true, that even the first proposed Bishops would be sent,
or chosen, by any Province on the Continent. It follows, 'In the short stay
which one of them would choose to make in New England, he would not bring over
many persons to our church. And therefore how terrible things soever
Episcopalians, if they should become the majority, may attempt and perform
there, they will be almost, if not quite as likely to accomplish, without a
Bishop among them, as with seeing one now and then.' If Bishops were sent,
though New England should not be, at first, the place of their residence, it
would be the diocese of one of them; and though, when he came upon a
visitation, he might 'chuse to make but a short stay,' he would, by reason of
his superiority in dignity and influence, be able to effect more 'terrible
things' than all the Episcopalians put together, should they be the majority.
Most certainly, he would not be such a Bishop as is desired, if this 'majority'
would be 'almost, if not quite, as likely' to accomplish their schemes 'without
ever seeing him, as with seeing him now and then.' This writer would make us
believe, if Episcopalians, by becoming the majority, 'had power, there is no
reason to think they would be oppressive; for they are not oppressive in the
Colonies where they actually have it: Or that they would attempt, for they
could not with any modesty, or any hope of success, such laws against the
Dissenters, as the Dissenters have not attempted against them.' Is an
establishment, obliging Dissenters to pay, in common with Episcopalians,
toward the support of the church of England, no degree of oppression? Such an
establishment has been attempted 'with success,' if not with 'modesty' in one
or two of the Colonies, where Episcopalians are the majority; -- Nay, even in
New York, where there are ten to one that are not Episcopalians, episcopal art
and policy, if I have not been misinformed, has subjected one County to this
same kind of oppression. So that, instead of there being no reason to think
there would be such oppressive establishments in all the Colonies, there is the
highest reason to think this would be the case, if Episcopalians should become
the majority. It is added, if the zeal of the New England Clergy threatens
(...) danger, Bishops would temper it, as they have done in England, instead of
inflaming it.' It would tend greatly to the ease of our minds, if this could be
as strongly proved, as it is here affirmed. Bishops have not been remarkable,
in any ages that are past, for 'tempering, instead of inflaming', a zeal in
their Clergy that portended danger.

UPON the whole, it appears, that this writer had no good foundation for his
hope, 'that the Doctor would, on considering further, endeavor to reconcile
his Countrymen to the admission of Bishops'; that is, such Bishops as the plan
proposes should be sent to the Colonies. Far from being in the least disposed
to this, he was abundantly confirmed in the reasonableness of what he had wrote
to prevent such a reconciliation, by the weakness of this lame effort to remove
away the objections he had made against the planned American Episcopate.

DOCTOR Chandler now appears again in person, and seemingly pleased, that the
offered objections could, 'within a much smaller compass, be answered and
confuted.' Without all doubt, was he to be the judge, the confutation would be
accounted absolutely complete; but, it is to be remembered, not he, but the
impartial Public are the determiners in this case: and, possibly they may
think, the feeble attempt he has made to invalidate these objections, is rather
a confirmation, than a confutation of them.

I COMPLAINED of the Doctor for giving us only a long string of needless
questions, instead of good reasoning, in order to justify the proposed plan for
an American Episcopate. This took up one paragraph. In the next, my demand was,
'What right have they to this Episcopate? How came they by it'? And here I was
explicit and large in endeavoring to show, that they had no such right. What
says the Doctor? He replies, 'I am unable to account for so great a confusion
of ideas as discovers itself in these two paragraphs.' If the first of these
paragraphs 'discovers any confusion of ideas,' it must be a confusion of them
in his own mind, or in his manner of expressing them; for it was nothing more
than a repetition of his own questions, with this application of them, 'Surely
he could not imagine, that any man of good understanding would be otherwise
moved by them, than to wonder he should only harangue, when it was his business
to argue!' As to the 'confusion' in the other paragraph, it is nowhere
discovered, unless in what he has said upon it. And, in truth, his arguing here
very evidently discovers, that his conceptions of it were indistinct, or rather
that he did not understand it; though it was expressed as clearly and fully as
any thing that was offered on the controversy. Dr. Chauncy, says he, 'seems
very strenuous to deny that the church of England in America has any right to
the Episcopate proposed; but then he declares himself perfectly willing we
should have it.' It is impossible, if he had entertained in his mind a clear
and just conception of what I had said, that he should affirm 'I had declared
myself perfectly willing they should have the proposed Episcopate,' unless he
had uttered a downright falsehood. I challenges him to produce any sentence in
this paragraph, or in any other part of my answer, in which this is declared
either directly, or even consequentially. It is indeed a flat contradiction to
all that I had said. What he means, in the following words, by my 'choosing,
perhaps, that this Episcopate should be granted as a matter of favor, rather
than of right,' is beyond me to investigate. I said not a word about 'favour'
in this respect; but confined myself wholly to the matter of 'right.' It must
therefore be owing to some strange 'confusion in his ideas,' that he should go
on, and inquire, 'What need is there of this distinction, and to what purpose
will it serve, if it is not to operate against us?' This is a 'distinction'
entirely of his own framing. It never entered into my heart, not is there a
word contained in this whole paragraph that could lead him to make it. It is to
me altogether unaccountable, how he came to think of it. He proceeds, 'Our
claim is, that we may be upon an equal footing with the other denominations in
America.' I have more than once affirmed, and abundantly proved, in these
papers, that they are upon this equal footing; and call upon him to prove the
contrary. Says he, 'In order to this, [our being upon an equal footing it is
necessary, that we should be allowed the enjoyment of our ecclesiastical
constitution in the same complete manner, as it is enjoyed by them.' By ' our
ecclesiastical constitution,' he must mean here the constitution of the church
of England; but to enjoy this in as complete a manner, as other denominations
enjoy their's, is not to enjoy it agreeably to the proposed plan, but to the
utter subversion of it; as will presently appear. He goes on, 'of our
ecclesiastical constitution Bishops make an essential part, and therefore
without an Episcopate we cannot enjoy it.' Neither can they completely enjoy it
with Bishops, unless they have authority over the Laity as well as Clergy; for
such authority is an essential part of the constitution. Nay further, this
constitution cannot be completely enjoyed without spiritual courts, and the
exercise of episcopal authority in the precise way and manner that has been
solemnly established by King and Parliament. The Doctor has here insensibly
endeavored to prove a great deal too much, unless he intended to give us a
remote insinuation of what might be expected, should the proposed plan be
complied with, namely, that the church of England was not yet in the full and
complete enjoyment of her constitution; her enjoyment must rise still much
higher. He adds, 'Our claim is justified by the common principles of human
nature, of the christian religion, and of civil society' If so, the claim is as
well founded as a claim can be. But what proof has he given us that their claim
is thus founded? It follows in these most remarkable words, 'We call it a right
because all good writers agree in calling a right thus founded by that name.'
What is this to the purpose? Who ever questioned, whether a claim thus founded
might be called a right? His business was to prove, that their claim, or right,
to the proposed Episcopate was thus founded, that is, upon the principles he
had before specified. But not a word is offered in proof of this. It rests upon
nothing more than his naked affirmation. He says yet further, 'For words we do
not contend. What we insist upon is this, that the church of England is, in all
respects, fairly entitled to as full a toleration in the Colonies, as other
churches in the Colonies enjoy. And it cannot be thus tolerated unless it be
suffered to EXIST IN ALL ITS PARTS.' If the church of England cannot be FULLY
TOLERATED in the Colonies, unless it is suffered to EXIST IN ALL ITS PARTS, it
is at once evident, that we must have in America not only Bishops, but Deans,
Prebends, Archdeacons, spiritual courts with their Chancellors, and the whole
train of officers employed in managing that SPIRITUAL authority which is
exercised over both Clergy and Laity: For these are PARTS of the constituted
church of England. It is strange the Doctor, while arguing for nothing more
than that limited Episcopate he had proposed, should endeavor to do it upon a
plan that would make it reasonable, that the church of England should exist
here IN ALL RESPECTS, and IN ALL ITS PARTS, as it does at home. But he ought to
know, that in order to this, something more than 'a fair and full toleration'
would be necessary. There must be an ESTABLISHMENT, which he will not allow he
ever thought of; as we shall see presently. The plain truth is; as it was 'our
business as opponents,' we have shown, that the Colony-Episcopalians are
treated in precisely 'the same manner' with the other denominations -- They are
all, without exception, upon the same footing of liberty, in virtue of the
granted toleration; and if Episcopalians do not enjoy any spiritual privileges
so fully as any of the other denominations, it is not owing, in the least
measure, to the want of a PERMISSION herefor^; for the GRANTED PERMISSION is
the same to all; making no manner of difference between one denomination and
another.

I HAD said, appeal answered p. 180, 'If Episcopalians think Bishops, in the
appropriated sense, were constituted by CHRIST, or his Apostles, we object not
a word against their having as many of them as they please, if they will be
content to have them with authority ALTOGETHER FROM CHRIST. But they both claim
and desire, a great deal more. They want to be distinguished 'by having Bishops
upon the footing of a STATE ESTABLISHMENT'? I then went on to argue somewhat
largely against their having a right to such an establishment. The Doctor
replies, 'Where did he learn that we want Bishops upon such a footing?' and
affirms, 'That I could learn it, neither from the appeal, or from any thing
that has been published on the side of the church;' yea, he solemnly declares,
'I know of no such thing, I have seen nothing that has been written, since the
reign of Queen Ann, either in England or America, in print or in manuscript,
that indicates such a desire'. He goes on yet farther, and says, 'I have met
with nothing in conversation with Clergymen or Laymen, in or out of convention,
from whence I can learn or suspect, that there is an Episcopalian, within the
British dominions, that aims at or expects an Episcopate here upon the footing
of a state establishment'. The Doctor, when he wrote thus, must have had in his
thoughts an establishment for the support of the episcopal Clergy, either
superior, or inferior, or both. In this view, an establishment was not proposed
in the 'appeal,' nor is it pleaded for in the writings on the side of the
church that I know of; nor can I say, that it was ever mentioned by the
convention: Though I am far from thinking it to be a truth, that there is no
Clergyman or Layman, in the American Colonies, that does not expect and wish,
that an establishment upon this footing, will be brought into event sooner or
later. I said nothing about such an establishment. But an establishment, and a
state one too, must take place, or the church of England here can never have
the Episcopate that has been proposed and desired. The Doctor will own, the
Episcopate that has been planned for the Colonies is widely different from that
which exists at home. American Bishops shall have no authority over the Laity;
-- their spiritual courts must not be held in this part of the world; -- and
they themselves are to be confined in their power within certain prescribed
boundaries. How is all this to be accomplished? Must there not be the
interposition of the state? Can it be effected in any other way? And if the
state interposes to constitute a Colony Episcopate, it must be under their
patronage, guidance, and control, as to the exercise of its powers. And what
is this, in real meaning, but an establishment? The church of England, in this
case, will be distinguished from all the other denominations; and, instead of
being only tolerated as they are, will be as truly, if not as fully, an
established church here, as it is in Great Britain. But Colony-Episcopalians
have no right to be thus distinguished; as was abundantly proved in answer to
the appeal, to which the Doctor has said nothing by way of reply, for no other
reason, it may well be supposed, but because he could not. If he had here
pointed out, as it was his proper business to do, the way in which the
Episcopate proposed in the appeal, and by the writers on the side of the
church, could be carried into effect without a state-establishment, he would
have said something to the purpose; but, having wisely avoided this, we are
left to think, the American Episcopate they have planned is virtually, and in
reality of sense, the same thing with a planned episcopal establishment. It is
to us inconceivable, how their desired Episcopate could, in any other way, take
place in the Colonies. In vain therefore does he complain, that 'they are
abused by petulent tongues and abusive pens for being charged with aiming at a
state establishment.' We should feel 'remorse of conscience, if we did not
without hesitation' object against the proposed Episcopate for this very
reason, because, by aiming at it, an establishment of Episcopacy in America is
equally aimed at. The impartial Public are to determine, not Dr. Chandler,
whether they are justly charged, or 'unwarrantably condemned.'

HE still goes on, in his defense, a number of pages; but, as there is scarce
any thing in them that relates to the grand point, and nothing, so far as I am
able to judge, of sufficient weight to call for particular notice; if the
reader will only compare what he has offered in these pages, with the answer to
the appeal, I am perfectly willing, without saying a word more, to leave the
dispute to the determination of his impartial judgment. But, at the same time,
I would assure the Doctor, that his 'fear,' least he should have 'somewhat
broken in upon my repose,' is entirely groundless. He may fondly imagine, he
has 'pleaded the cause he undertook' with such superiority of good sense, and
sound reasoning, as to give me 'disturbance;' but he has been the occasion of
no other uneasiness to me than that of disappointment; for he has fallen much
below my wishes as well as expectations; not having wrote so as to give
opportunity for a trial of strength. He has heartily excused my insufficiency,
as it was my hard lot to prove, 'that good is evil, and evil good; that
darkness is light, and light is darkness, which could not be done without 'such
a genius and abilities as are not to be found'. I wish I could make so good an
apology for him. His task was easy. He had only to plead the cause of truth;
and yet, he has done it with so little appearance of ingenuous solid arguing,
that, I fear, his cause will suffer in the opinion of all that are capable of
discernment.

I INTENDED to have come to a conclusion here, by presenting to the reader, in
one view, the sum of what has been said on both sides, that he might the more
easily make a judgment in the ca^e. But I must omit this, that I may have room
for a matter of much greater importance; the treatment of the Presbyterian
church at New York, in relation to the charter they petitioned for, both to the
government there, and to the King at home. And I the rather choose to hold this
up to public view, as it is an alarm to all the Colonies on the Continent,
giving them solemn notice what they may expect, should Episcopalians ever come
to have the superiority in their influence. Nothing has been offered, in a way
of reasoning, against the planned American Episcopate, that carries with it
such FEELING FORCE as the negative to the prayer of this petition, with the
reasons upon which it is grounded.

THAT the reader may perceive the propriety of my introducing this affair, I
would just remind him, that the Doctor, in his appeal, had spoken of the
'mildness, tenderness, and moderation of the English Bishops for a course of
years past;' insomuch, that they had 'scarcely afforded an instance of
reasonable complaint, especially to Dissenters:' In answer whereto, he was told
of the rejection of the petition of the Presbyterian church at New York for a
charter;' which was effected through the interposition, particularly, of the
Bishop of London, occasioned, without all doubt, by ungenerous representations
from Episcopalians in America.

As I am not, from personal knowledge, acquainted with this affair any more
than the Doctor, what I propose is to hand to the Public, in an appendix, the
clear, full, and yet concise, account of it, which has been transmitted to me
from New York: previously giving this intimation, that the facts, contained in
the account to be exhibited, came with their proper vouchers, copies of the
original papers, which would have been printed, but that they are most of them
long; and it was thought, it would be too great a trespass on the readers's
patience to call his attention to them. They may, however, be seen, should it
be desired, either here or at New York.

ERRATA.
P. 1. l. 17, for have r. what has -- p. 9. l. 25, for could r. would -- p. 12.
l. 38, for ingenious r. ingenuous -- p. 14. l. 12, for ingenious r. ingenuous
-- p. 48. l. 37, for wree r. were -- p. 52. l. 12, after where dele of -- p.
54. l. 18, for entertains r. entertain -- p. 69. l. 12, for rectorship, r.
deanery. p. 126. l. 33, for there r. here -- p. 132. l. 26, for were r. was.

APPENDIX.
THE true history of the various applications of the Presbyterians of the City
of New York for a charter, and of their various disappointments, is succinctly
this.

A number of Gentlemen purchased a lot of ground in 1719, for the erecting of a
church to worship in, after the mode of the established persuasion in
North-Britain. There was not then in this Colony, nor is there to this day, any
general provision made by law, for the regulation of churches, or for the
support of the Ministers of the gospel -- It is therefore expedient in this
Country, for the preservation of the temporalities of every church, and the
maintenance of good order, that the congregation be incorporated -- Charters
for such purposes had been granted to the low Dutch, and episcopal churches;
and the Colony being peopled from Scotland as well as England, the Scotch
founders of the Presbyterian church in New York, thought they had reason to
hope government would not be less favorable to them, than to the Emigrants
from South-Britain; and could not imagine that the sons of the church of
Scotland, united to England by act of Parliament, and the ties of allegiance as
natural born subjects, were not to have equal countenance, with those of the
foreign reformed church of the united Netherlands, between which and the church
of Scotland, there is no essential disparity, and very little even in point of
mere form. With confidence therefore they presented a petition to Col. Schyler,
who commanded in chief in 1721, for letters of incorporation. The Episcopalians
opposed the grant, though they were themselves then just emerging from their
obscurity; for, at that time, the low Dutch congregations figured as the first
churches in Town, and are still the most numerous, though many of their richest
families are gone off for the sake of the language, to the English churches.
When Governor Burnet arrived, the Presbyterians renewed their attempt, and the
vestry of trinity church their opposition. They were heard against the
petition, and to the scandal of the council board were indulged in their
contemptible narrow minded bigotry. The Governor, though favorably inclined to
his countrymen, was unwilling to proceed without direction from home -- He
wrote to the board of trade in 1724, and their Lordships consulted Counse^ or
West, who subscribed an o^ion in the following terms.

'UPON consideration of the several acts of uniformity that have passed in
Great Britain I am of opinion, that they do not extend to New York, and
consequently an act of toleration is of no use in that Province; and therefore,
as there is no provincial act for uniformity according to the church of
England, I am of opinion, that by law such patents of incorporation may be
granted as by the petition is desired.

Richard West, Aug. 20. 1724.

No charter could however be obtained, and discouraged by successless
solicitations, the congregation for the preservation of their estate, vested
it in March 1730, in the general assembly of the church of Scotland, who still
hold the fee, but have issued a declaration continuing the application of it,
to the pious uses, for which it was originally purchased.

NOTWITHSTANDING all opposition, the Scotch church flourished under the long
and laborious ministry of the Rev. Mr. Pemberton, who settled here in 1727; and
when the Lutherans applied for a charter to Lieutenant Governor Delancy in
1759, the Presbyterians made a third application -- The Lutherans were
encouraged by gentlemen then in the council, who promised to be-friend them;
and the Presbyterians by favorable expressions from the Lieutenant Governor,
who had frequently declared his abhorrence of the former opposition as illegal
and unreasonable; and when the petition was preferred, he received Mr.
Bostwick, the then Minister, and his Elders and Deacons, politely, and
professed his readiness to grant their request, if the Council would concur.

MR. Smith, since one of the Judges, was one of the board, when the petition of
the Presbyterians was read, and referred to a committee; but no opportunity was
given for a trial of Mr. Delancey's sincerity: for Mr. Smith, the only
Non-episcopalian member, was chosen chairman of the Committee, and was unable
to prevail upon the rest of the council to meet; and, if he could, would have
lost his own vote by being in the chair.

OBLIGING the Lutherans at that time, if any such intention there really was,
would have discovered a partiality too barefaced; and therefore, while the
Presbyterians petition was neglected, that of the Lutherans was ^ily pretended
to be put in a way for obtaining the royal order from home; and thus the
council were to be behind the curtain, and avoid popular censure. -- It so
happened however, and perhaps by intriegues from this quarter, that the Lords
of trade could not see it expedient to advise the gratification of their
request; and accordingly a letter came from their Lordships to Mr. ^olden,
which cut off the reasonable expectations of that society of loyal Protestants.

THE Presbyterians had experienced many inconveniences for want of a charter;
and though the just, and generous administration of Sir Henry Moore, prompted
them to make a fourth attempt, yet upon a doubt now started, whether his
commission authorized him to grant incorporating patents, and from a want of
confidence in his council, it was thought most prudent to lay the case, of this
distant dispersion of the church of Scotland, before his Majesty -- A petition
was accordingly prepared, and transmitted with a draft of the charter desired
in March, 1767.

THE negotiation of this business was trusted to the late Dr. Samuel Chandler,
and Mr. Debert; but it fell solely upon the latter, Dr. Chandler, dying about
the time of the arrival of the papers in London. The Earl of Dartmouth, so
renowned for his catholicism, and readiness to promote the interest of our
common christianity, then presided at the board of trade, and entered fully
into an opinion of the reasonableness of the request, and advised Mr. Debert to
put the petition into the King's hand, before the cooperation of certain
friends, whose aid was asked, could be obtained.

HIS Majesty was pleased to lay the petition before the Lords of the privy
council, and to refer it to the board of trade. The Lords Commissioners for
Plantation affairs suspended a report, until they had an answer, from Sir Henry
Moore, to a letter they wrote to him on the 29th of July, 1766.

THIS letter was accompanied with a copy of the petition and the draft of the
charter -- They were all communicated by the Governor to his council; and on
the 17th of July, 1767, the petitioners offered to attend the call of the
board, for the support of their allegations, by a petition which was that day
read in council, and left with their clerk, for the use of the committee. -- A
few days after Mr. Horsemanden, as the oldest member of the board, was waited
upon to appoint a time to receive a request for this purpose, but declined it.

NO report was delivered until the 15th of April, although the letter from the
Lords of trade arrived here on the 4th of November preceding, and there were
many intermediate meetings of the council. I believe the minutes will prove
that the members met every week. -- At one of these meetings, in the latter end
of March, the Chief Justice was called out, and in answer to an entreaty for a
speedy report to the Governor, said with tartness ' That the matter need not be
pushed, and that he wished the government had not troubled them with the
petition'. A Gentleman took the liberty to say, that all the Lords of trade
required was to be informed, whether the allegations were true; to which he
replied, ' Of that there is no doubt.'

THE report appears, however, by its date, to have been finished about that
time. We do not learn, that the committee were waited upon now by the vestry of
trinity church, nor was it necessary, as their church war^ens were of the
council. Mr. Chief Justice was one, and Mr. Read the other, and as chairman of
the committee had the honor to make their report. That it was not earlier
delivered, may be imputed to a desire to render the petition abortive, or to
the then ticklish state of things, a dissolution of the assembly in pursuance
of a septennial act being at hand, and James Delancey named as a candidate for
the City of New York, who had two uncles in council, zealous for the public
confidence, and interested in retarding a report which would naturally give
offense; but the Governor's importunity forced them to speak out. -- It does
not appear that there was a single member dissenting to this report.

THE petitioners asked for a copy on the 20th of April, 1767, but this request
was denied, and by this means their adversaries had frequent opportunity for ex
part representations against the measure, in a course of private
correspondence; which was doubtless improved by the Clergy, and the draftsmen
who fabricated the report.

SIR Henry Moore lost no time in transmitting it. -- The petitioners (who one
would imagine had a right to be heard) were ignorant of its contents, and under
all possible disadvantages; nor could give any suitable directions to their
Agent. -- Whether the council kept the secret from the Episcopalians without
doors, judge you. The Bishop of London, notwithstanding the boasted moderation
of the order, appeared twice to oppose the petition before the Commissioners
for trade and Plantations, as thought he grant of the privilege, of securing a
house set apart by Protestants, worshipping according to the usage in North
Britain, was repugnant to the benevolence enjoined by the gospel of CHRIST: and
though Lord Clare, whose zeal for liberty, and the rights of private judgment,
may be argued from a well known event in the history of his life, was then
premier at the board of trade, a report was made to his Majesty, which soon
after issued in a final rejection of the petition. In this report, the
question, Whether his Majesty, consistently with the obligations he was under
by his coronation oath, founded on the act of the fifth of Queen Ann, entitled,
'an act for securing the church of England as by law established,' could grant
the requested charter, being left undecided; the report was, it would be
'inexpedient, upon the principles of general policy, to give the Presbyterian
church of New York any other privileges than it is entitled to by the law of
toleration.'

WHATEVER liberties the people of England may think fit to take at this day, in
remarking upon the acts of their Sovereign, the Americans conceive themselves
bound to speak on such occasions, with the most profound deference. The light,
however, in which his servants have thought fit to hold up the request of the
Scotch church of New York, every man may nevertheless consider and animadvert
upon with some freedom. They are answerable to the whole world for their
conduct; and have proceeded upon a principle, that deserves the consideration
of all the Colonies. Nothing has contributed more to the acquisition and
cultivation of these essential parts of the Empire, than the seasonable and
well policed assurance we have had for free indulgence in matters of religion:
And a repugnant spirit will be as ruinous to our peace and prosperity, as it is
disgraceful to a Gentleman, and inconsistent with religion and philosophy,
freedom of enquiry, and human felicity. We have seen an A -- m-s -- n of
corrupt and dissolute M-n -- rs, mercilessly grasping at our liberties and
estates; and it is some consolation, that our disappointment in a request
friendly to the rights of conscience, may be attributed to men, whose influence
at the court of a good King, will probably very soon be at an end.

I ONLY add, that although there have long since been petitions preferred here,
by the French Protestants, and the Low Dutch churches of Orange Town,
New-Hempsted, Marble Town, Bodchester and Wawarsing, nothing final is
determined upon them; while it is the usual practice, to grant charters to the
episcopal churches without the least hesitation. It is not long, since the
little congregation at Albany was incorporated with power to hold an immense
revenue. Another patent is issued to provide for Clergymen's widows, by an
income of many thousands per annum; and at this very juncture the Society for
propagating the gospel, though restrained from taking real estates at home, are
asking for grants of the crown lands here in mortmain for the episcopal
churches, to the amount of thousands of acres. In some instances they have been
gratified already. These facts are mentioned, to show the spirit of the
opposition to the petitions of the non-episcopal churches, who, instead of
soliciting for ample endowments, desire nothing more than purchased estates,
barely sufficient for the support of the gospel; and to justify our fears that
the present struggles of the Missionaries and others to introduce Episcopacy
into America, originate from ambitious designs for establishing an o^ulent
hierarchy in this Country, with prelatical distinction and power.

THE reader will not, I trust, be out of patience, if he is detained, while I
contrast the above account with an act of the Massachusetts-government,
conspicuously exemplifying that candor, fairness, and impartial equity in
Non-Episcopalians, which were so remarkably wanting in those of the contrary
denomination, with reference to the affair that has been just related.

THIS act, having had the ROYAL SANCTION, without the least obstruction from
the fl^msy pretense of 'a breach of the coronation oath,' or a 'violation of
any acts of uniformity,' or its being 'inconsistent with sound policy,' has,
from the ^h of the reign of George the 2nd, been a standing law of this
Province.

IT was occasioned by a motion made in the house of representatives, in behalf
of the Pastors and Deacons of the church to which I am related, that they might
be strengthened in their endeavors to secure the payment of an annuity, given
to them by will, out of the rents of a valuable farm, to be by them yearly
disposed of forever for the benefit of a well-disposed, and promising, but
needy, student at Harvard-College, in Cambridge. It was at once thought, that
this was a matter of common concern; and, accordingly, an act was prepared, and
passed by both houses, (in which, unless we should except one or two, there
were no episcopal members) and readily signed by the Governor; taking in all
Protestant denominations, EPISCOPALIANS by name: And the whole was done of
their own m^er motion, under the influence of candor, honor, and a becoming
sense of the regard that ought to be paid to the rule of right, without
partiality. Episcopal applications were not needed, (...) they made. The act,
wherein it is necessary it should be recited, is as follows,

' WHEREAS many grants and donations have heretofore been made by sundry
well-disposed persons, in and by such expressions and terms as plainly show it
was the intent and expectation of such grantors and donors, that their several
grants and donations should take effect so as that the estates granted should
go in succession: But doubts have arisen in what cases such donations and
grants may operate, so as to go in succession:

For ascertaining whereof:

'BE it enacted by the GOVERNOR, COUNCIL, and house of REPRESENTATIVES, That
the Deacons of all the several Protestant churches, not being episcopal
churches, and the Church Wardens of the several episcopal churches, are, and
shall be, deemed so far bodies corporate, as to take in succession all grants
and donations, whether real or personal, made either to their several churches,
the poor of their churches, or to them and their successors, and to sue and
defend in all actions touching the same; and wherever the Ministers, Elders or
Vestry shall in such original grants or donations have been joined with such
D^acons o^ Church Wardens as donees or grantees in succession, in such cases
such officers and their successors, together with the Deacons or Church
Wardens, shall be deemed the corporation for such purposes as aforesaid. And
the Minister or Ministers of the several protestant churches of whatever
denomination, are and shall be de^med capable of taking in succession any
parso^age land, or lands granted to the Minister and his successors, or to the
use of the Ministers, and of suing and defending all act^ons touching the same;
saving that nothing in this act shall be construed to make void any final
judgment of any court of common law or Judge of probate; saving also, that no
alienation of any lands belonging to churches hereafter made by the Deacons
without the consent of the church or a committee of the church for that purpose
appointed, or by Church W^rdens without the consent of the Vestry, shall be
sufficient to pass the same. And that no alienation hereafter made by Ministers
of lands by them held in succession shall be valid any longer than during such
alienors continuing Ministers, unless such Ministers be Ministers of particular
Towns, Districts, or Precincts, and make such alienation with the consent of
such Towns, Districts, or Precincts, or unless such Ministers so aliening be
Ministers of Episcopal Churches, and the same be done with the consent of the
Vestry'. --

HAD Episcopalians at New York been in the exercise of like candor and
impartiality with Non-episcopalians in this Province, their Presbyterian
brethren would have met with no difficulty in obtaining, from the Government
there, the charter they desired: Nor, had they sent no ungenerous unfriendly
representations to dignified Clergymen at home, is it in the least probable the
KING would have rejected the petition they made to him. As there was no
episcopal opposition to the Massachusetts act, it readily obtained the KING's
fiat. And there is no reason to think, but he would as readily have granted the
charter petitioned for, by the New York Presbyterians, as it meant precisely
the same thing with the Massachusetts-act, had not episcopalian Yorkers, in
council, or out of council, or both, transmitted such illiberal accounts, to
great men in England, as excited their zeal, and urged them on to endeavors to
bring this petition to naught.

IT is to be hoped, the generous candor, and impartial justice, exemplified by
the non-episcopal Massachusetts-Province, will have some good effect upon
Episcopalians in the other Colonies. It is powerfully adapted to such a
purpose; and cannot well fail, if duly considered, of putting to shame that
narrowness of spirit, that bigotry of sentiment, and party-partiality, which
are inconsistent with a freedom in doing to others, as we would they should do
to us. It may reasonably be expected, the noble example of undistinguished
candor and goodness, that has been brought to view, will engage the New York
Episcopalians, from a sense of honor, friendliness, impartiality, and justice,
heartily to join with the Presbyterians there in endeavors, that they may be
put upon the same equitable footing with themselves, by being favored with a
charter of incorporation for the temporalities of their church. Unless there
should be the discovery of such a temper and conduct, in vain it will be to
expect, that our fears, respecting the proposed American Episcopate, should be
silenced. If Episcopalians of inferior station, and comparatively small
importance, can, by handing accounts to dignitaries at home, effect such
mischief to the other denominations, what may not be feared from the influence
of Bishops, residing in the Colonies!


