Engraved Printed and Sold by PAUL REVERE BOSTON


A Short NARRATIVE OF The horrid Massacre in BOSTON, PERPETRATED In the Evening
of the Fifth Day of March, 1770. BY Soldiers of the XXIXth Regiment; WHICH WITH
The XIVth Regiment Were then Quartered there: WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE
STATE OF THINGS PRIOR TO THAT CATASTROPHE.

Printed by Order of the Town of BOSTON, And Sold by EDES and GILL, in
Queen Street, And T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill, 1770.

BOSTON, ss. At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town
of Boston, duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting assembled
at Faneuil- Hall, on Monday the 12 th Day of March, Anno Domini, 1770.
THAT Article in the Warrant, for calling this Meeting, viz. What Steps may be
further necessary for obtaining a particular Account of all Proceedings
relative to the Massacre in King Street on Monday Night last, that a full and
just Representation may be made thereof, was read, Whereupon,

VOTED, That the Honorable James Bowdoin, Esquire Doctor Joseph Warren, and Samuel
Pemberton, Esquire be a Committee for this important Business; and they are desired
to report as soon as may be.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.
THE following Report, containing a Narrative of the late Massacre, is
submitted to the Town. In the Name of the Committee,

JAMES BOWDOIN.



AT the Town Meeting held on the 19th of March, 1770, by Adjournment.
THE aforementioned Report was Read and Considered, whereupon Voted
Unanimously, That the same be accepted, and that it be immediately Printed, and
the Committee are desired to transmit Copies thereof as soon as possible to the
following Gentlemen, viz. The Right Honorable Isaac Bar, Esquire one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; Thomas Pownall, Esquire late Governor of
the Massachusetts; William Bollan, Esquire Agent for his Majesty's Council; Dennys
DeBerdt, Esquire Agent for the House of Representatives; Benjamin Franklin, Esquire L.
L. D. and Barlow Trecothick, Esquire a Member of Parliament for the City of London.

Attest. William Cooper, Town Clerk.

A short Narrative of the horrid Massacre in Boston, perpetrated in the Evening
of the Fifth Day of March, 1770, by Soldiers of the XXIXth Regiment; which with
the XIVth Regiment were then quartered there: with some Observations on the
State of Things prior to that Catastrophe.
IT may be a proper introduction to this narrative, briefly to represent the
state of things for some time previous to the said massacre: And this seems
necessary in order to the forming a just idea of the causes of it.

At the end of the late war, in which this Province bore so distinguished a
part, a happy union subsisted between Great Britain and the Colonies. This was
unfortunately interrupted by the Stamp Act: but it was in some measure restored
by the Repeal of it. It was again interrupted by other acts of parliament for
taxing America; and by the appointment of a Board of Commissioners, in
pursuance of an act* which by the face of it was made for the relief and
encouragement of commerce, but which in it is operation, it was apprehended,
would have, and it has in fact had, a contrary effect. By the said act the said
Commissioners were "to be resident in some convenient part of his Majesty's
dominions in America". -- This must be understood to be in some part convenient
for the whole -- But it does not appear, that in fixing the place of their
residence, the convenience of the whole was at all consulted, for Boston being
very far from the center of the colonies, could not be the place most
convenient for the whole. -- Judging by the act, it may seem this town was
intended to be favored, by the Commissioners being appointed to reside here;
and that the consequence of that residence would be the relief and
encouragement of commerce: but the reverse has been the constant and uniform
effect of it: So that the commerce of the town, from the embarassments in which
it has been latety involved, is greatly reduced. For the particulars on this
head, see the state of the trade not long since drawn up and transmitted to
England by a committee of the merchants of Boston.

The residence of the Commissioners here, has been detrimental not only to the
commerce, but to the political interests of the town and province; and not only
so, but we can trace from it the causes of the late horrid massacre. Soon after
their arrival here in November 1767, instead of confining themselves to the
proper business of their office, they became partisans of Governor Bernard in
his political schemes; and had the weakness and temerity to infringe upon one
of the most essential rights of the house of commons of this province -- that
of giving their votes with freedom, and not being accountable therefore but to
their constituents. One of the members of that house Capt. Timothy Folgier,
having voted in some affair contrary to the mind of the said Commissioners, was
for so doing dismissed from the office he held under them.

These proceedings of theirs, the difficulty of access to them on
office-business, and a supercilious behavior, rendered them disgustful to
people in general, who in consequence thereof treated them with neglect. This
probably stimulated them to resent it: and to make their resentment felt, they
and their coadjutor Governor Bernard, made such representations to his
Majesty's ministers as they thought best calculated to bring the displeasure of
the nation upon the town and province: and in order that those representations
might have the more weight, they are said to have contrived, and executed plans
for exciting disturbances and tumults, which otherwise would probably never
have existed; and when excited, to have transmitted to the ministry the most
exaggerated accounts of them.

These particulars of their conduct his Majesty's Council of this province have
fully laid open in their proceeding in council, and in their address to General
Gage, in July and October 1768; and in their letter to Lord Hillsborough of the
15th of April 1769. -- Unfortunately for us, they have been too successful in
their said representations, which in conjunction with Governor Bernard's, have
occasioned his Majesty's faithful subjects of this town and province to be
treated as enemies and rebels, by an invasion of the town by sea and land: to
which the approaches were made with all the circumspection, usual where a
vigorous opposition is expected. While the town was surrounded by a
considerable number of his Majesty's ships of war, two regiments landed and
took possession of it; and to support these, two other regiments arrived some
time after from Ireland: one of which landed at Castle Island, and the other
the town.

Thus were we, in aggravation of our other embarrassments, embarrassed with
troops, forced upon us contrary to our inclination -- contrary to the spirit of
Magna Charta, -- contrary to the very letter of the Bill of Rights, in which it
is declared, that the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in
time of peace, unless it be with the consent of parliament, is against law --
and without the desire of the civil magistrates, to aid whom was the pretense
for sending the troops hither: who were quartered in the town in direct
violation of an act of parliament for quartering troops in America: and all
this in consequence of the representations of the said Commissioners and the
said Governor, as appears by their memorials and letters lately published.

As they were the procuring cause of troops being sent hither, they must
therefore be the remote and a blameable cause of all the disturbances and
bloodshed that have taken place in consequence of that Measure.

But we shall leave them to their own reflections, after observing, that as
they had some months before the arrival of the troops, under pretense of safety
to their persons, retired from town to the Castle, so after the arrival of the
troops, and their being quartered in the town, they thought proper to return:
having answered, as they doubtless thought, the purpose of their voluntary
flight.

We shall next attend to the conduct of the troops, and to some circumstances
relative to them. -- Governor Bernard without consulting the Council, having
given up the State-house to the troops at their landing, they took possession
of the chambers, where the representatives of the province and the courts of
law held their meetings; and (except the council chamger) of all other parts of
that house: in which they continued a considerable time, to the great annoyance
of those courts while they sat, and of the merchants and gentlemen of the town,
who had always made the lower floor of it their exchange. They had a right so
to do, as the property of it was in the town: but they were deprived of that
right by mere power. -- The said Governor soon after, by every stratagem and by
every method, but a forcible entry, endeavored to get possession of the
manufactory-house, to make a barrack of it for the troops: and for that purpose
caused it to be besieged by the troops, and the people in it to be used very
cruelly; which extraordinary proceedings created universal uneasiness, arising
from the apprehension; that the troops under the influence of such a man would
be employed to effect the most dangerous purposes: but failing of that other
houses were procured, in which, contrary to act of parliament, he caused the
troops to be quartered. After their quarters were settled, the main guard was
posted at one of the said houses, directly opposite to, and not twelve yards
from, the State-house, (where the General Court, and all the Law Courts for the
County were held) with two field pieces pointed to the State-house. This
situation of the main guard and field pieces seemed to indicate an attack upon
the constitution, and a defiance of law; and to be intended to affront the
legislative and executive authority of the province.

The General Court, at the first Session after the arrival of the troops,
viewed it in this light, and applied to Governor Bernard to cause such a
nuisance to be removed; but to no purpose. Disgusted at such an indignity, and
at the appearance of being under duresse, they refused to do business in such
circumstances; and in consequence thereof were adjourned to Cambridge, to the
great inconvenience of the members.

Besides this, the challenging the inhabitants by sentinels posted in all parts
of the town before the lodgings of officers, which (for about six months, while
it lasted) occasioned many quarrels and great uneasiness --

Capt. Wilson's, of the 59th, exciting the negroes of the town to take away
their masters lives and property, and repair to the army for protection, which
was fully proved against him. -- The attack of a party of soldiers on some of
the magistrates of the town -- the repeated rescues of soldiers from peace
officers -- the firing of a loaded musket in a public street, to the
endangering a great number of peaceable inhabitants -- the frequent wounding of
persons by their bayonets and cutlassas, and the numerous instances of bad
behavior in the soldiery made us early sensible, that the troops were not sent
here for any benefit to the town or province, and that we had no good to expect
from such conservators of the peace. The inhabitants, instead of making
application to the military officers on these occasions, chose rather to oppose
the civil authority and the laws of the land to such offenders; and had not the
soldiery found means to evade legal punishments, it is more than probable their
insolence would have received a check and some of the most melancholy effects
of it been prevented.


It was not expected however, that such an outrage and massacre, as happened
here on the evening of the fifth instant, would have been perpetrated. There
were then killed and wounded, by a discharge of musquetry, eleven of his
Majesty's subjects, viz.

Mr. Samuel Gray, killed on the spot by a ball entering his head.

Crispus Attucks, a molatto, killed on the spot, two balls entering his breast.

Mr. James Caldwell, killed on the spot, by two balls entering his back.

Mr. Samuel Maverick, a youth of seventeen years of age, mortally wounded: he
died the next morning.

Mr. Patrick Carr mortally wounded: he died the 14th instant.

Christopher Monk and John Clark, youths about seventeen years of age,
dangerously wounded. It is apprehended they will die.

Mr. Edward Pain, merchant, standing at his door: wounded.

Messi'rs John Green, Robert Patterson and David Parker: all dangerously
wounded.

The actors in this dreadful tragedy were a party of soldiers commanded by
Capt. Preston of the 29th regiment: This party, including the Captain,
consisted of eight, who are all committed to goal.

There are depositions in this affair which mention, that several guns were
fired at the same time from the Custom-House; before which this shocking scene
was exhibited. Into this matter inquisition is now making. -- In the mean time
it may be proper to insert here the substance of some of those depositions.

Benjamin Frizell, on the evening of the 5th of March, having taken his station
near the west corner of the Custom-House in Kingstreet, before and at the time
of the soldiers firing their guns, declares (among other things) that the first
discharge was only of one gun, the next of two guns, upon which he the deponent
thinks he saw a man stumble: the third discharge was of three guns, upon which
he thinks he saw two men fall, and immediately after were discharged five guns,
two of which were by soldiers on his right hand, the other three, as appeared
to the deponent, were discharged from the balcony, or the chamber window of the
CUSTOM-HOUSE, the flashes appearing on the left hand, and higher than the right
hand flashes appeared to be, and of which the deponent was very sensible,
although his eyes were much turned to the soldiers, who were all on his right
hand.

Gillam Bass, being in King Street at the same time, declares that they (the
party of soldiers from the main guard) posted themselves between the
custom-house door, and the west corner of it; and in a few minutes began to
fire upon the people: Two or three of the flashes so high above the rest, that
he the deponent verily believes they must have come from the CUSTOM-HOUSE
windows.

Jeremiah Allen declares, that in the evening of the 5th day of March current,
being at about nine o'clock in the front chamber in the house occupied by Col.
Ingersoll in King Street, he heard some guns fired, which occasioned his going
into the balcony of the said house. -- That when he was in the said balcony in
company with Mr. William Molineux jun'r. and John Simpson, he heard the
discharge of four or five guns, the flashes of which appeared to be to the
westward of the centry box, and immediately after, he the deponent heard two or
three more guns and saw the flashes thereof from out of the house, now called
the CUSTOM-HOUSE, as they evidently appeared to him, and which he the said
deponent at the same time declared to the aforesaid Molineux and Simpson being
then near him, saying to them, (at the same time pointing his hand toward the
custom-house) there they are out of the custom-house.

George Coster being in King Street at the time above mentioned, declares that
in five or six minutes after he stopped, he heard the word of command given to
the soldiers fire, upon which one gun was fired, which did no execution, as the
deponent observed, about half a minute after two guns, one of which killed one
Samuel Gray a ropemaker, the other a molatto man, between which two men the
deponent stood, after this the deponent heard the discharge of four or five
guns more, by the soldiers; immediately after which the deponent heard the
discharge of two guns or pistols, from an open window of the middle story of
the CUSTOM-HOUSE, near to the place where the centry box is placed, and being
but a small distance from the window, he heard the people from within speak and
laugh, and soon after saw the casement lowered down; after which the deponent
assisted others in carrying off one of the corpse.

Cato, a Negro man, servant to Tuthill Hubbart, Esquire declares, that on Monday
evening the fifth of March current, on hearing the cry of fire, he ran into
Kingstreet, where he saw a number of people assembled before the Custom-House,
that he stood near the centry-box and saw the soldiers fire on the people, who
stood in the middle of said street; directly after which he saw two flashes of
guns, one quick upon the other, from the chamber window of the CUSTOM-HOUSE;
and that after the firing was all over, while the people were carrying away the
dead and wounded, he saw the Custom-House door opened, and several soldiers
(one of whom had a cutlass) go into the Custom-House and shut the door after
them.

Benjamin Andrews declares, that being desired by the committee of enquiry to
take the ranges of the holes made by musket balls, in two houses near opposite
to the Custom-House, he finds the bullet hole in the entry door post of Mr.
Payne's house (and which grazed the edge of the door, before it entered the
post, where it lodged, two and a half inches deep) ranges just under the stool
of the westernmost lower chamber window of the CUSTOM-HOUSE.

Samuel Drown, toward the end of his deposition (which contains a pretty full
account of the proceedings of the soldiers on the evening of the 5th instant)
declares, that he saw the flashes of two guns fired from the CUSTOM-HOUSE, one
of which was out of a window of the chamber westward of the balcony, and the
other from the balcony; the gun (which he clearly discerned) being pointed
through the ballisters, and the person who held the gun, in a stooping posture
withdrew himself into the house, having a handkerchief or some kind of cloth
over his face.

These depositions show clearly that a number of guns were fired from the
Custom-House. -- As this affair is now enquiring into, all the notice we shall
take of it is, that it distinguishes the actors in it into Street-Actors and
House-Actors; which is necessary to be observed.

What gave occasion to the melancholy event of that evening seems to have been
this. A difference having happened near Mr. Gray's ropewalk, between a soldier
and a man belonging to it, the soldier challenged the ropemakers to a boxing
match. The challenge was accepted by one of them, and the soldier worsted. He
ran to the barrack in the neighborhood, and returned with several of his
companions. The fray was renewed, and the soldiers were driven off. They soon
returned with recruits and were again worsted. This happened several times,
till at length a considerable body of soldiers was collected, and they also
were driven off, the ropemakers having been joined by their brethren of the
contiguous ropewalks. By this time Mr. Gray being alarmed interposed, and with
the assistance of some gentlemen prevented any further disturbance. To satisfy
the soldiers and punish the man who had been the occasion of the first
difference, and as an example to the rest, he turned him out of his service;
and waited on Col. Dalrymple, the commanding officer of the troops, and with
him concerted measures for preventing further mischief. Though this affair
ended thus, it made a strong impression on the minds of the soldiers in
general, who thought the honor of the regiment concerned to revenge those
repeated repulses. For this purpose they seem to have formed a combination to
commit some outrage upon the inhabitants of the town indiscriminately; and this
was to be done on the evening of the 5th instant or soon after: as appears by
the depositions of the following persons, viz.

William Newhall declares, that on Thursday night the first of March instant,
he met four soldiers of the 29th regiment, and that he heard them say there
were a great many that would eat their dinners on Monday next, that should not
eat any on Tuesday.

Daniel Calfe declares, that on Saturday evening the 3d of March a camp-woman,
wife to James McDeed a grenadier of the 29th, came into his father's shop, and
the people talking about the affrays at the rope-walks, and blaming the
soldiers for the part they had acted in it, the woman said, the soldiers were
in the right; adding that before Tuesday or Wednesday night they would wet
their swords or bayonets in New England people's blood.

Mary Brailsford declares, that on Sabbath evening the 4th March instant a
Soldier came to the house of Mr. Amos Thayer where she then was. He desiring to
speak with Mr. Thayer was told by Mrs. Mary Thayer, that her brother was
engaged, and could not be spoke with. He said, your brother as you call him, is
a man I have a great regard for, and I came on purpose to tell him to keep in
his house, for before Tuesday night next at Twelve o'clock, there will be a
great deal of bloodshed, and a great many lives lost: and added, that he came
out of a particular regard to her brother to advise him to keep in his house,
for then he would be out of harm's way. He said, your brother knows me very
well: my name is Charles Malone. He then went away. -- Of the same import, and
in confirmation of this declaration, are the depositions of Mary Thayer and Asa
Copeland, who both live with the said Mr. Thayer, and heard what the soldier
said as abovementioned. It is also confirmed by the deposition of Nicholas
Ferriter.

Jane Usher declares, that about 9 o'clock on monday morning the 5th of March
current, from a window she saw two persons in the habit of soldiers, one of
whom being on horse back appeared to be an officer's servant. The person on the
horse first spoke to the other, but what he said, she is not able to say,
though the window was open, and she not more than twenty feet distant: the
other replied, He hoped he should see blood enough spilt before morning.

Matthew Adams declares, that on monday evening the 5th of March instant
between the hours of 7 and 8 o'clock, he went to the house of corporal Pershall
of the 29th regiment, near Quaker-lane, where he saw the corporal and his wife,
with one of the fifers of said regiment. When he had got what he went for, and
was coming away, the corporal called him back, and desired him with great
earnestness to go home to his master's house as soon as business was over, and
not to be abroad on any account that night in particular, for the soldiers were
determined to be revenged on the ropewalk people; and that much mischief would
be done. Upon which the fifer (about 18 or 19 years of age) said, he hoped in
God they would burn the town down. On this he left the house, and the said
corporal called after him again, and begged he would mind what he said to him.

Caleb Swan declares, that on monday night the 5th of March instant, at the
time of the bells ringing for fire, he heard a woman's voice whom he knew to be
the supposed wife of one Montgomery, a grenadier of the 29th regiment, standing
at her door, and heard her say, it was not fire; the town was too haughty and
too proud; and that many of their arses would be laid low before the morning.

Margaret Swansborough declares, that a free woman named Black Peg, who has
kept much with the soldiers, on hearing the disturbance on monday evening the
5th instant said, the soldiers were not to be trod upon by the inhabitants, but
would know before morning, whether they or the inhabitants were to be masters.

Joseph Hooton, junr. declares, that coming from the South-end of Boston on
monday evening the 5th of March instant, against Dr. Sewall's meeting he heard
a great noise and tumult, with the cry of murder often repeated. Proceeding
toward the townhouse he was passed by several soldiers running that way, with
naked cutlasses and bayonets in their hands. He asked one of them what was the
matter, and was answered by him, by God you shall all know what is the matter
soon. Between 9 and 10 o'clock he went into King Street, and was present at the
tragical scene exhibited near the Custom-house; as particularly set forth in
his deposition.

Mrs. Mary Russell declares, that John Brailsford a private soldier of the
fourteenth regiment, who had frequently been employed by her (when he was
ordered with his company to the Castle, in consequence of the murders committed
by the soldiers on the evening of the 5th of March) coming to the deponent's
house declared, that THEIR regiment were ORDERED to hold themselves in
readiness, and accordingly was ready THAT EVENING, upon the inhabitants firing
on the soldiery, to come to the assistance of the soldiery. On which she asked
him, if he would have fired upon any of the inhabitants of this town. To which
he replied, yes, if he had orders: but that if he saw Mr. Russell he would have
fired wide of him. He also said, it is well there was no gun fired by the
Inhabitants, for had there been, WE should have come to the soldiers assistance.

By the foregoing depositions it appears very clearly, there was a general
combination among the soldiers of the 29th regiment at least, to commit some
extraordinary act of violence upon the town; that if the inhabitants attempted
to repel it by firing even one gun upon those soldiers, the 14th regiment were
ordered to be in readiness to assist them; and that on the late butchery in
King Street they actually were ready for that purpose, had a single gun been
fired on the perpetrators of it.

It appears by a variety of depositions, that on the same evening between the
hours of six and half after nine (at which time the firing began) many persons,
without the least provocation, were in various parts of the town, insulted and
abused by parties of armed soldiers patroling the streets: particularly --

Mr. Robert Pierpont declares, that between the hours of 7 and 8 in the same
evening, 3 armed soldiers passing him, one of them who had a bayonet gave him a
back-handed stroke with it, on complaint of this treatment he said the deponent
should soon hear more of it, and threatened him very hard.

Mr. Henry Bass declares, that at 9 o'clock a party of soldiers came out of
Draper's alley leading to and from Murray's barracks, and they being armed with
large naked cutlasses, made at every body coming in their way, cutting and
slashing, and that he himself very narrowly escaped receiving a cut from the
foremost of them, who pursued him.

Samuel Atwood, declares, that 10 or 12 soldiers armed with drawn cutlasses,
bolted out of the alley leading from Murray's barracks into dock-square, and
met the deponent, who asked them if they intended to murder people? they
answered, yes, by God, root and branch; saying here is one of them; with that
one of them struck the deponent with a club, which was repeated by another: the
deponent being unarmed turned to go off, and he received a wound on the left
shoulder, which reached the bone, disabled him and gave him much pain. Having
gone a few steps the deponent met two officers, and asked them, gentlemen, what
is the matter? they answered, you will see by and by; and as he passed by Col.
Jackson's he heard the cry, turn out the guards.

Capt. James Kirkwood, declares, that about nine of the clock in the evening of
the fifth day of March current, he was going by Murray's barracks: hearing a
noise he stopped at Mr. Rhoads's Door, opposite the said barracks, where said
Rhoads was standing, and stood some time and saw the soldiers coming out of the
yard from the barracks, armed with cutlasses and bayonets, and rushing through
Boylstone's alley into cornhill, two officers* viz. Lieuts. Minchin and Dickson
came out of the mess house, and said to the soldiers, my lads come into the
barracks and don't hurt the inhabitants, and then retired into the mess house.
Soon after they came to the door again, and found the soldiers in the yard; and
directly upon it, Ensign Mall came to the gate of the barrack yard and said to
the soldiers, turn out and I will stand by you; this he repeated frequently,
adding, kill them! stick them; knock them down, run your bayonets through them,
with a great deal of language of like import. Upon which a great number of
soldiers came out of the barracks, with naked cutlasses headed by said Mall,
and went through the aforesaid alley, that some officers came and got the
soldiers into their barracks, and that Mall with his sword or cutlass drawn in
his hand, as often had them out again, but were at last drove into their
barracks by the aforesaid Minchin and Dickson.

Mr. Henry Rhoads's declaration agrees with Capt. Kirkwood's.

Mr. Matthias King of Halifax in Nova Scotia, declares, that in the evening of
the fifth day of March instant about nine of the clock, he was at his lodgings
at Mrs. Torrey's near the town pump, and heard the bells ring and the cry of
fire; upon which he went to the door and saw several soldiers come round the
south side of the town house, armed with bayonets, and something which he took
to be broad swords; that one of those people came up almost to him and Mr.
Bartholomew Kneeland; and that they had but just time to shut the door upon
him; otherwise he is well assured they must have fell victims to their
boundless cruelty. He afterward went into the upper chamber of the said house,
and was looking out of the window when the drum and the guard went to the
barrack, and he saw one of the guards kneel and present his piece with a
bayonet fixed, and heard him swear he would fire upon a parcel of boys who were
then in the street, but he did not: He further declares, that when the body of
troops was drawn up before the guard house (which was presently after the
massacre) he heard an officer say to another, that this was fine work, and just
what he wanted; but in the hurry he could not see him, so as to know him again.

Robert Polley declares, that on monday evening the 5th instant, as he was
going home, he observed about ten persons standing near Mr. Taylor's door,
after standing there a small space of time he went with them toward Boylston's
alley opposite to Murray's barracks; we met in the alley about eight or nine
armed soldiers, they assaulted us, and gave us a great deal of abusive
language, we then drove them back to the barracks with sticks only; we looked
for stones or bricks, but could find none, the ground being covered with snow;
some of the lads dispersed, and he the said Polley with a few others were
returning peaceably home, when we met about nine or ten other soldiers armed:
one of them said, "Where are the sons of bitches": They struck at several
persons in the street, and went toward the head of the alley. Two officers
came and endeavored to get them into their barracks; one of the lads proposed
to ring the bell; the soldiers went through the alley, and the boys huzza'd and
said they were gone through royal exchange lane into Kingstreet.

Samuel Drown declares, that about nine of the clock of the evening of the
fifth of March current, standing at his own door in Cornhill, he saw about 14
or 15 soldiers of the 29th regiment, who came from Murray's barracks armed with
naked cutlasses, swords, etc. and came upon the inhabitants of the town, then
standing or walking in Cornhill, and abused some, and violently assaulted
others as they met them; most of whom were without so much as a stick in their
hand to defend themselves, as he very clearly could discern, it being moon
light, and himself being one of the assaulted persons. All or most of the said
soldiers he saw go into King Street, (some of them through Royal Exchange lane)
and there followed them, and soon discovered them to be quarrelling and
fighting with the people whom they saw there, which he thinks were not more
than a dozen, when the soldiers came there first, armed as aforesaid. Of those
dozen people, the most of them were gentlemen, standing together a little below
the Townhouse, upon the exchange. At the appearance of those soldiers so
armed, the most of the twelve persons went off, some of them being first
assaulted.

The violent proceedings of this party, and their going into King Street,
"quarrelling and fighting with the people whom they saw there" (mentioned in
Mr. Drowne's deposition) was immediately introductory to the grand catastrophe.

These assailants, who issued from Murray's barracks (so called) after
attacking and wounding diverse persons in Cornhill, as above mentioned, being
armed, proceeded (most of them) up the Royal Exchange lane, into King Street;
where making a short stop, and after assaulting and driving away the few they
met there, they brandished their arms, and cried out, where are the Boogers!
where are the Cowards. At this time there were very few persons in the street
beside themselves. -- This party in proceeding from Exchange lane into
King Street must pass the centry posted at the westerly corner of the Custom
House, which butts on that lane and fronts on that street. This is needful to
be mentioned, as near that spot and in that street the bloody tragedy was
acted, and the street-actors in it were stationed: Their station being but a
few feet from the front side of the said Custom House. -- The outrageous
behavior and the threats of the said party occasioned the ringing of the
meeting house bell near the head of King Street: which bell ringing quick as
for fire, it presently brought out a number of the inhabitants, who being soon
sensible of the occasion of it, were naturally led to King Street, where the
said party had made a stop but a little while before: and where their stopping
had drawn together a number of boys, round the centry at the Custom-House.
Whether the boys mistook the centry for one of the said party, and thence took
occasion to differ with him, or whether he first affronted them, which is
affirmed in several depositions, -- however that may be, there was much foul
language between them: and some of them in consequence of his pushing at them
with his bayonet, threw snow balls at him: Since writing this narrative,
several depositions have appeared, which make it clear, that the centry was
first in fault. -- He overheard a barber's boy, saying that a captain of the
14th (who had just passed by) was so mean a fellow as not to pay his barber for
shaving him; upon this the centry left his post and followed the boy into the
middle of the street, where he told him to show his face; the boy pertly
replied, I am not ashamed to show my face to any man: Upon this the centry gave
him a sweeping stroke on the head with his musket, which made him reel and
stagger and cry much. A fellow apprentice asked the centry what he meant by
this abuse? He replied, damn your blood, if you do not get out of the way I
will give you something; and then fixed his bayonet and pushed at the lads, who
both run out of his way. This dispute collected a few persons about the boy
near the custom house. Presently after this, the party abovementioned came
into kingstreet, which was a further occasion of drawing people thither, as
above related. (See deposition of Benj^. Broaders and others.)
which occasioned him to knock hastily at the door of the Custom-House. From
hence two persons thereupon proceeded immediately to the main guard, which was
posted (opposite to the State-house) at a small distance near the head of the
said street. The officer on guard was Capt. Preston, who with seven or eight
soldiers with fire arms, and charged bayonets, issued from the guard house, and
in great haste posted himself and his soldiers in the front of the Custom House
near the corner aforesaid. In passing to this station the soldiers pushed
several persons with their bayonets, driving through the people in so rough a
manner that it appeared they intended to create a disturbance. This occasioned
some snow balls to be thrown at them: which seems to have been the only
provocation that was given. Mr. Knox (between whom and Capt. Preston there was
some conversation on the spot) declares, that while he was talking with Capt.
Preston, the soldiers of his detachment had attacked the people with their
bayonets; and that there was not the least provocation given to Capt. Preston,
or his party: the backs of the people being toward them when the people were
attacked. He also declares, that Captain Preston seemed to be in great haste
and much agitated; and that according to his opinion there were not then
present in Kingstreet above seventy or eighty persons at the extent.

The said party was formed into a half circle, and, within a short time after
they had been posted at the Custom-House, began to fire upon the people.

Capt. Preston is said to have ordered them to fire, and to have repeated that
order. One gun was fired first: then others in succession, and with
deliberation, till ten or a dozen guns were fired; or till that number of
discharges were made from the guns that were fired. By which means eleven
persons were killed, and wounded, as above represented.

These facts with diverse circumstances attending them, are supported by the
depositions of a considerable number of persons: and among others, of the
following viz. Messir's. Henry Bass Samuel Atwood, Samuel Drown, James
Kirkwood, Robert Polley, Samuel Condon, Daniel Usher, Josiah Simpson, Henry
Knox, Gillam Bass, John Hickling, Richard Palms, Benjamin Frizzel, and others;
whose depositions are in the appendix.

Soon after the firing, a drum with a party from the main guard went to
Murray's and the other barracks, beating an alarm as they went, which with the
firing had the effect of a signal for action. Whereupon all the soldiers of the
29th regiment, or the main body of them, appeared in Kingstreet under arms; and
seemed bent on a further massacre of the inhabitants, which was with great
difficulty prevented. They were drawn up between the State House and main
guard: their lines extending across the street and facing down Kingstreet,
where the town-people were assembled. The first line kneeled; and the whole of
the first plattoon presented their guns ready to fire, as soon as the word
should be given. They continued in that posture a considerable time. But by the
good Providence of God, they were restained from firing.

That they then went into Kingstreet with such a disposition will appear
probable by the two following depositions.

Mrs. Mary Gardner, living in Atkinson street, declares, that on Monday evening
the 5th of March current, and before the guns fired in Kingstreet, there were a
number of soldiers assembled from Green's barracks toward the street, and
opposite to her gate; that they stood very still until the guns were fired in
Kingstreet, then they clapped their hands and gave a cheer, saying, this is all
that we want. They ran to their barrack, and came out again in a few minutes,
all with their arms, and ran toward Kingstreet.

William Fallass declares, that (after the murder in Kingstreet) on the evening
of the 5th instant, upon his return home he had occasion to stop opposite to
the lane leading to Green's barracks, and while he stood there, the soldiers
rushed by him with their arms, toward Kingstreet, saying, this is our time or
chance: and that he never saw men or dogs so greedy for their prey as those
soldiers seemed to be, and the sergeants could hardly keep them in their ranks.

These circumstances with those already mentioned, amount to a clear proof of a
combination among them to commit some outrage upon the town on that evening;
and that after the enormous one committed in Kingstreet, they intended to add
to the horrors of that night by making a further slaughter.

At the time Capt. Preston's party issued from the main guard, there were in
Kingstreet about two hundred persons, and those were collected there by the
ringing of the bell in consequence of the violences of another party, that had
been there a very little while before. When Captain Preston had got to the
Custom-house, so great a part of the people dispersed at sight of the soldiers,
that not more than twenty or thirty then remained in Kingstreet, as Mr. Drown
declares, See his Deposition.
and at the time of the firing not seventy, as Mr. Palms thinks. See his
Deposition.


But after the firing, and when the slaughter was known, which occasioned the
ringing of all the bells of the town, a large body of the inhabitants soon
assembled in Kingstreet, and continued there the whole time the 29th regiment
was there under arms, and would not retire till that regiment and all the
soldiers that appeared, were ordered, and actually went, to their barracks:
after which, having been assured by the Lieutenant Governor, and a number of
the civil magistrates present, that every legal step should be taken to bring
the criminals to justice, they gradually dispersed. For some time the
appearance of things was dismal. The soldiers outrageous on the one hand, and
the inhabitants justly incensed against them on the other: both parties seeming
disposed to come to action. In this case the consequences would have been
terrible. But by the interposition of his Honor, some of his Majesty's council,
a number of civil magistrates, and other gentlemen of weight and influence, who
all endeavored to calm and pacify the people, and by the two principal
officers interposing their authority with regard to the soldiers, there was
happily no further bloodshed ensued; and by two o'clock the town was restored
to a tolerable state of quiet. About that time, Capt. Preston, and a few hours
after, the party that had fired, were committed to safe custody.

One happy effect has arisen from this melancholy affair, and it is the
general voice of the town and province it may be a lasting one -- All the
troops are removed from the town. -- They are quartered for the present in the
barracks at Castle-Island; from whence it is hoped they will have a speedy
order to remove entirely out of the province, together with those persons who
were the occasion of their coming hither.

In what manner this was effected, it is not foreign from the subject of this
narrative to relate.

The morning after the massacre, a town-meeting was held; at which attended a
very great number of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the town. They
were deeply impressed and affected by the tragedy of the preceding night, and
were unanimously of opinion, it was incompatible with their safety that the
troops should remain any longer in the town. In consequence thereof they chose
a committee of fifteen gentlemen to wait upon his Honor the Lieutenant Governor
in Council, to request of him to issue his orders for the immediate removal of
the troops.

The message was in these words: That it is the unanimous opinion of this
meeting that the inhabitants and soldiery can no longer live together in
safety; that nothing can rationally be expected to restore the peace of the
town and prevent further blood and carnage, but the immediate removal of the
troops; and that we therefore most fervently pray his Honor, that his power and
influence may be exerted for their instant removal.

His Honor's reply, which was laid before the town then adjourned to the old
south meeting house, was as follows: Gentlemen,
I am extremely sorry for the unhappy differences between the inhabitants and
troops, and especially for the action of the last evening, and I have exerted
myself upon that occasion, that a due enquiry may be made, and that the law may
have its course. I have in council consulted with the commanding officers of
the two regiments who are in the town. They have their orders from the General
at New York. It is not in my power to countermand those orders. The Council
have desired that the two regiments may be removed to the Castle. From the
particular concern which the 29th regiment has had in your differences, Col.
Dalrymple, who is the commanding officer of the troops, has signified that that
regiment shall without delay be placed in the barracks at the castle, until he
can send to the General and receive his further orders concerning both the
regiments, and that the mainguard shall be removed, and the 14th regiment so
disposed, and laid under such restraint, that all occasion of future
disturbances may be prevented.




The foregoing reply having been read and fully considered -- the question was
put, Whether the report be satisfactory? Passed in the Negative (only one
dissentient) out of upwards of 4000 voters.

A respectable committee was then appointed to wait on his Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, and inform him, that it is the unanimous opinion of this meeting,
that the reply made to a vote of the inhabitants presented his Honor in the
morning, is by no means satisfactory; and that nothing less will satisfy, than
a total and immediate removal of all the troops.

The committee having waited upon the Lieut. Governor, agreeable to the
foregoing vote, laid before the inhabitants the following vote of Council
received from his Honor.

His Honor the Lieutenant Governor laid before the Board a vote of the town of
Boston, passed this afternoon, and then addressed the Board as follows:

Gentlemen of the Council,
I lay before you a vote of the town of Boston, which I have just now received
from them, and I now ask your advice what you judge necessary to be done upon
it.

The Council thereupon expressed themselves to be unanimously of opinion, "that
it was absolutely necessary for his Majestys service, the good order of the
town, and the peace of the province, that the troops should be immediately
removed out of the town of Boston, and thereupon advised his Honor to
communicate this advice of the Council to Col. Dalrymple, and to pray that he
would order the troops down to Castle William." The committee also informed the
town, that Col. Dalrymple, after having seen the vote of Council, said to the
committee,

"That he now gave his word of honor that he would begin his preparations in
the morning, and that there should be no unnecessary delay until the whole of
the two regiments were removed to the Castle."

Upon the above report being read, the inhabitants could not avoid expressing
the high satisfaction it afforded them.

After measures were taken for the security of the town in the night by a
strong military watch, the meeting was dissolved.

IN the concluding Paragraph of the foregoing Narrative it is said, that the
Town-Meeting was dissolved after the measures were taken for the security of
the Town in the night, by a strong military watch.

Our implacable enemies, in pursuance of their plan of misrepresentation, have
taken pains to misrepresent this most necessary measure, by declaring it to
have been contrary to the mind of the Commander in Chief, and against Law.

This matter will be judged of, by stating the fact, and producing the Law.

When the Committee, who had waited on the Lieutenant Governor, had reported to
the Town, that the Troops would be removed to Castle-Island, (at which time it
was near night) it was thought necessary for the safety of the Town, and for
preventing a rescue of the persons committed to goal for firing upon, and
killing a number of, his Majesty's subjects, that there should be a military
watch: and diverse Gentlemen were desired to take the needful steps for that
purpose. It being then night, it was impossible a regular notification should
issue from the officers of the militia: a considerable number of respectable
persons therefore offered themselves volunteers, and did the duty of a military
watch under the direction of the Lieutenant Colonel, who attended that service
with the approbation of the chief Colonel of the Boston regiment. The next day,
with two of the Selectmen of the Town, the chief Colonel went to the
Lieutenant Governor, and they informed him it was apprehended absolutely
necessary for the safety of the Town, there should be a military watch kept;
and that the Colonel then waited upon him to receive his orders. The Lieutenant
Governor declined giving any orders concerning it, but said the Law was clear,
that the Colonel, as chief officer of the regiment, might order a military
watch; and that he might do about it as he thought fit. In consequence of this,
and knowing the Law gave him such a power, the Colonel issued his orders for
that purpose, and a regular watch was kept the following night. The next day
the Lieutenant Governor sent for the Colonel, and let him know, that he was in
doubt about the legality of the appointment of the military watch: and
recommended to the Colonel to take good advice, whether he had a right by Law
to order such a watch.

This being quite unexpected, occasioned the Colonel to express himself with
some fervor. He also said, he had already taken advice, and had no doubt of his
own power; but had the preceding day waited upon his Honor as Commander in
Chief to receive his orders: which as his Honor had declined giving, and left
the matter with himself, he had appointed a military watch: and judged it a
necessary measure to quiet the fears and apprehensions of the town. The
interview ended with the Lieut. Governor's recommending again, that the Colonel
would take care to proceed according to law; and without his forbidding a
military watch.

This military watch was continued every night, till Col. Dalrymple had caused
the two Regiments under his command to be removed to the barracks at
Castle-Island. During the continuance of the watch, the Justices of the Peace
in their turns attended every night: and the utmost order and regularity took
place through the whole of it.

This is the state of the fact, upon which every one is left to make his own
observations.

Now for the Law: with respect to which nothing more is necessary than just to
recite it. It runs thus, "That there be military watches appointed and kept in
every town, at such times, in such places, and in such numbers, and under such
regulation, as the chief military officers of each town shall appoint, or as
they may receive orders from the chief officer of the regiment." See a Law of
the Province for regulating the Militia. made in the 5th year of William and
Mary, Chap. 7. Sect. 10.
-- This needs no comment. It clearly authorizes the chief officer of the
regiment to appoint military watches. The late military watch in Boston being
founded on such an appointment was therefore according to Law.

APPENDIX Containing the several Depositions referred to in the preceding
NARRATIVE; and also other Depositions relative to the Subject of it.
(No. 1.)
I John Wilme of lawful age, testify that about ten days before the late
massacre, Christopher Rumbly of the 14th regiment was at my house at the north
part of the town, with sundry other soldiers; and he the said Rumbly did talk
very much against the town, and said if there should be any interruption, that
the grenadiers company was to march up King Street; and that if any of the
inhabitants would join with them, the women should be sent to the castle, or
some other place; and that he had been in many a battle; and that he did not
know but he might be soon in one here; and that if he was, he would level his
piece so as not to miss; and said that the blood would soon run in the Streets
of Boston; and that one Sumner of the same regiment did say that he came here
to make his fortune; and that he would as soon fight for one King as another;
and that the two gaps would be stopped, said one of the soldiers; and that they
would soon sweep the streets of Boston.

And further says, that he heard a soldier's wife, named Eleanor Park say,
that if there should be any disturbance in the town of Boston, and that if any
of the people were wounded, she would take a stone in her handkerchief and beat
their brains out, and plunder the rebels -- And further I say not.

JOHN WILME.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. John Wilme abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 2.)
I Sarah Wilme of lawful age, testify that about ten days before the late
massacre, Christopher Rumbly of the 14th regiment was at our house at the north
part of the town, with sundry other soldiers; and he the said Rumbly did talk
very much against the town, and said if there should be any interruption, that
the grenadiers company was to march up King Street; and that if any of the
inhabitants would join with them, the women should be sent to the castle or
some other place; and that he had been in many a battle; and that he did not
know but he might be soon in one here; and that if he was, he would level his
piece so as not to miss; and said that the blood would soon run in the streets
of Boston; and that one Sumner of the same regiment did say that he came here
to make his fortune, and that he would as soon fight for one King as another;
and that the two gaps would be stopped said one of the soldiers; and that they
would soon sweep the streets of Boston. And further says not.

SARAH WILME.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. Sarah Wilme abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN TUDOR, Justice Peace.


(No. 3.)
I David Cockran of lawful age, testify that I went to the house of Mr. John
Wilme to pay him a visit in the evening about ten days before the late
massacre, and there I found 4 or 5 soldiers, and after some time the said Wilme
told me not to be out in the night of such a day (though I cannot positively
say what day) whereupon I asked him what he meant, and he told me that there
would be disturbances, or words to that effect; and that one of said soldiers
took me by the arm, and said the blood would soon run in the streets of Boston.
And further says not.

David Cockran. his Mark. ^
Attest. ELISHA STORY.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. David Cockran abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 4.)
WILLIAM NEWHALL, living in fish-street, of lawful age, testifies and says,
that on Thursday night, being the first of March instant, between the market
and Justice Quincey's, he met four soldiers of the 29th regiment, all unarmed,
and that he heard them say, there was a great many that would eat their dinners
on monday next, that should not eat any on tuesday.

WILLIAM NEWHALL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. William Newhall abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 5.)
I Nicholas Feriter, of lawful age testify, that on Friday the second instant,
about half after 11 o'clock, A.M. a soldier of the 29th regiment came to Mr.
John Gray's ropewalks, and looking into one of the windows said, By God i will
have satisfaction! with many other oaths; at the last he said he was not afraid
of any one in the ropewalks. I stepped out of the window and speedily knocked up
his heels. On falling his coat flew open, and a naked sword appeared, which one
John Willson following me out took from him, and bro't into the ropewalks. The
soldier then went to Green's barrack, and in about twenty minutes returned with
8 or 9 more soldiers armed with clubs, and began as I was told with three or
four men in Mr. Gray's warehouse, asking them why they had abused the soldier
aforesaid? These men in the warehouse passed the word down the walk for the
hands to come up, which they did, and soon beat them off. In a few minutes the
soldiers appeared again at the same place, reinforced to the number of 30 or
40, armed with clubs and outlasses, and headed by a tall negro drummer with a
cutlass chained to his body, with which at first rencounter I received a cut on
the head, but being immediately supported by nine or ten more of the
rope-makers, armed with their wouldring sticks, we again beat them off. And
further I say not.

NICHOLAS FERITER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Nicholas Feriter abovementioned, after
due examination, made oath to the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to perpetuate the
remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and of the Quorum.
And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 6.)
I Jeffrey Richardson, of lawful age testify and say, that on Friday the second
instant, about eleven o'clock, A. M. eight or ten soldiers of the 29th
regiment, armed with clubs, came to Mr. John Gray's rope-walks, and challenged
all the rope-makers to come out and fight them. -- All the hands then present
to the number of 13 or 14, turned out with their wouldring sticks, and beat
them off directly. They very speedily returned to the ropewalk, reinforced to
the number of thirty or forty, and headed by a tall negro drummer, again
challenged them out, which the same hands accepting, again beat them off with
considerable bruises. And further I say not.

JEFFREY RICHARDSON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19, 1770. Jeffrey Richardson abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above Affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 7.)
JOHN Fisher, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on the second day of
March, between eleven and twelve o'clock, A. M. he saw about six soldiers going
toward Mr. John Gray's rope-walk, some with clubs; they had not been there
long, before they returned quicker than they went and retreated into their
barracks, and bro't out the light infantry company* with many others, and went
against the rope makers (...) but were soon beat off as far as Green's-lane,
the soldiers following and chasing many persons they could see in the lane with
their clubs, and endeavoring to strike them, when a corporal came and ordered
them into the barracks. -- And further says that on Saturday the third
instant, he saw the soldiers making clubs; and by what he could understand from
their conversation, they were determined to have satisfaction by Monday. And
further says not.

JOHN FISHER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17, 1770. John Fisher abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above Affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. And, SAM. PEMBERTON, Just. Peace.


(No. 8.)
I JOHN Hill, aged sixty-nine, testify, that in the forenoon of Friday the
second of March current, I was at a house the corner of a passage way leading
from Atkinson's-street to Mr. John Gray's rope-walks, near Green's barracks so
called, when I saw eight or ten soldiers pass the window with clubs. I
immediately got up and went to the door, and found them returning from the
ropewalks to the barracks. Whence they again very speedily re-appeared, now
increased to the number of thirty or forty, armed with clubs and other weapons.
In this latter company was a tall negro drummer, to whom I called, you black
rascal, what have you to do with white people's quarrels? He answered, I
suppose I may look on, and went forward. I went out directly and commanded the
peace, telling them I was in commission; but they not regarding me, knocked
down a ropemaker in my presence, and two or three of them beating him with
clubs, I endeavored to relieve him; but on approaching the fellows who were
mauling him, one of them with a great club struck at me with such violence,
that had I not happily avoided it might have been fatal to me. The party last
mentioned rushed in toward the rope-walks, and attacked the rope-makers nigh
the tar-kettle, but were soon beat off, drove out of the passage-way by which
they entered, and were followed by the rope-makers, whom I persuaded to go
back, and they readily obeyed. And further I say not.

JOHN HILL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19, 1770. John Hill, Esquire abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before RI: DANA, JOHN RUDDOCK.
Justices of the Peace and of the Quorum.

(No. 9.)
I JOHN Gray, of lawful age, testify and say, that on the Saturday preceding
the massacre on the Monday evening of the 5th instant, Middleton the
chimney-sweeper being at my house, said to my maid, as she informed me, that he
was well acquainted with the soldiers, and they had determined to have their
revenge of the rope-walk people; being alarmed with this news, I determined to
see Col. Dalrymple on Monday morning. At sabbath noon I was surpised at
hearing that Col. Carr, and his officers had entered my rope-walk, opened the
windows, doors, etc. giving out that they were searching for a dead sergeant of
their regiment; this put me upon immediately waiting upon Col. Dalrymple, to
whom I related what I understood had passed at the rope-walk days before, he
replied it was much the same as he had heard from his people; but says he,
"your man was the aggressor in affronting one of my people, by asking him if he
wanted to work, and then telling him to clean his little-house." For this
expression I dismissed my journeyman on the Monday morning following; and
further said, I would do all in my power to prevent my peoples giving them any
affront in future. He then assured me, he had, and should do every thing in his
power to keep his soldiers in order, and prevent their any more entering my
enclosure. Presently after, Col. Carr came in, and asked Col. Dalrymple what
they should do, for they were daily losing their men; that three of his
grenadiers passing quietly by the rope-walks were greatly abused, and one of
them so much beat that he would die. He then said he had been searching for a
sergeant who had been murdered; upon which, I said, Yes Colonel, I hear you
have been searching for him in my rope-walks; and asked him, whether that
sergeant had been in the affray there on the Friday; he replied, no: for he was
seen on the Saturday. I then asked him, how he could think of looking for him
in my walks; and that had he applied to me, I would have waited on him, and
opened every apartment I had for his satisfaction.

JOHN GRAY.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 22, 1770. John Gray above named after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit. Taken to
perpetuate the Remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA. Justice of the Peace
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 10.)
ARchibald McNeil, jun. of lawful age, testifies and says, that on Saturday the
third instant, about half an hour after four in the afternoon, the deponent
with two apprentices were spinning at the lower end of Mr. McNeil's ropewalk,
three stout grenadiers, armed with bludgeons, came to them, and addressing the
deponent said. You damned dogs, don't you deserve to be killed? Are you fit to
die? The deponent and company being quite unarmed gave no answer. James Bayley,
a seafaring young man, coming up, said to the deponent, etc. Why did you not
answer? One of the grenadiers, named Dixson, hearing him, came up to Bayley and
asked him if he was minded to vindicate the cause? Bayley also unarmed did not
answer till James Young came up, who, though equally naked, said to the
grenadier, Damn it, I know what a soldier is. That grenadier stood still, and
the other who had threatened the deponent came up and struck at him, which
Young fended off with his arms, and then turning aimed a blow at the deponent,
which had it reached might probably have been fatal. Patrick --, Mr. Winter
Calef's journeyman, seeing the affray, went into the tan-house, and bringing
out two batts gave one to a bystander, who together with Patrick soon cleared
the walk of them, and further says not,

ARCHIBALD McNEIL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Archibald McNeil above named, after due
examinatoin, made oath to the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate the
remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the Quorum.
JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 11.)
MAry Thayer of lawful age testifies and says, that on Sabbath day evening, the
4th current, a soldier of the 29th named Charles Malone, came into Mr. Amos
Thayer's house, brother to the deponent, and sent a young lad belonging to Mr.
Thayer up stairs to his master, desiring him to come down to him. Mr. Thayer
refused to come down or have any thing to say to him. The deponent going down
on other occasion, said she would hear what the soldier had to say. And coming
to the soldier told him her brother was engaged. The soldier said, your brother
as you call him is a man I have a very great regard for, and came here to
desire him to keep in the house and not be out, for there would be a great deal
of disturbance and blood between that time and Tuesday night at 12 o'clock. He
repeatedly said he had a greater regard for Mr. Thayer than any one in Boston,
and on that account came to desire him to keep in the house, which if he did
there would be no danger. After repeating the above frequently, he even turned
at the door, and said my name is Charles Malone, your brother knows me well,
and insisted very earnestly that the deponent would not neglect informing her
brother, and further says not.

MARY THAYER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Mary Thayer abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 12.)
I Mary Brailsford of lawful age testify and declare, that on Sunday evening
the 4th instant, a person knocked at the door of Mr. Thayer's house; Mr.
Thayer's lad went to see who it was, the boy went up stairs to his master and
the soldier came into the room where I then was, Miss Mary Thayer and the boy
came down stairs into the same room. Miss Thaver told the soldier, her brother
was engaged and could not be spoke with, he said " your brother as you call him
is a man I have a great regard for, and I came on purpose to tell him to keep
in his house, for before Tuesday night next at twelve o'clock there will be a
great deal of blood shed, and a great many lives lost," and added, that he came
out of particular regard to her brother to advise him to keep in his house for
then he would be out of harms way, he said your brother knows me very well, my
name is Charles Malone, he then went away. And further says not.

her MARY M BRAILSFORD, Mark.
Attest, Wm. Palfrey.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Mary Brailsford abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 13.)
I Asa Copeland of lawful age testify and declare, that on Sunday evening the
4th instant, a soldier named Malone, came to the house of my master, Mr. Amos
Thayer, and asked for the young man that lived in the house. I asked him what
young man he meant; he said, the young man a carpenter. I supposing he meant my
master, told him he was up stairs. He then asked me to go and call him, and
said he wanted to speak with him: I then went up and told my master that Malone
was below and wanted to speak with him. My master told me to tell him he was
engaged and could not go down, and said if he had any thing to say he must say
it to his sister Miss Mary Thayer. I then went down and heard said Malone
saying to Miss Thayer. "I would have him keep in for I have a greater regard
for Mr. Thayer than for any other person in town," and added, I would have him
keep in his own place, for by Tuesday night next before twelve o'clock there
will be a great many lives lost, and a great deal of blood shed, which he
repeated several times. As he was going out of the door he turned back and said
Mr. Thayer knew him very well, and had drank with him, that his name was
Charles Malone. And further says not.

ASA COPELAND.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Asa Copeland abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 14.)
I John Brailsford of lawful age testify, that on Monday evening the 5th
instant as I was passing by the centry at Col. Dalrymple's house in Green's
Lane, I asked a soldier named Swan of the 29th regiment, what was the reason of
their people's going about armed with clubs in such a manner, and troubling the
town's people. Swan told me you will see, you had better go home, and more to
the same purpose. When the guns were fired I returned back and asked Swan what
that could mean; Swan waving his head, said it is the guards, there is no shot
there: You had better go home, and by all his behavior and discourse he
manifested his full acquaintance with the whole affair, and further says not.

JOHN BRAILSFORD.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. John Brailsford abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 15)
NAthaniel Noyes of lawful age testifies and says, that on last Sabbath
evening, the 4th day of March current, a little after dark, he saw five or six
soldiers of the 14th and 29th regiments, each of them with clubs, passing through
Fore-street, and heard them say, that if they saw any of the inhabitants of
this town out in the street after nine o'clock, they swore by God, they would
knock them down, be they who they will.

NATH. NOYES.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Nathaniel Noyes abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 16.)
RIchard Ward, of lawful age, does testify and say, that on the Lord's Day
evening preceding the fifth day of March instant, about dusk, he went to see
one Mr. Dines (who is a soldier in the twenty-ninth regiment, and who worked,
when he was not upon duty, in Mr. John Piemont Perukemaker's shop with the
deponent a journeyman to said Piemont) the said Dines lives near the barracks
at New-Boston; when your deponent was there, he heard one of the officers of
the said 29th regiment say to the sergeants, Don't let any of your people go
out unless there be eight or ten together.

RICHARD WARD.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16 1770. Richard Ward abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 17.)
JAne Usher of lawful age testifies and says, that about nine of the clock in
the morning of Monday the fifth day of March current, she being in the front
chamber of the house of John Scollay, Esquire on Dock-square; from the window saw
two persons in the habit of soldiers, one of whom being on horse back appeared
to be an officer's servant: The person on the horse first spoke to the other,
but what he said she is not able to say, though the window was open, and she not
more than twenty feet distant; the other replied, he hoped he should see blood
enough spilt before morning.

JANE USHER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Jane Usher abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 18.)
MAtthew Adams (living with Mr. John Arnold) being of lawful age, testifies and
says, that on Monday evening the fifth day of March instant, between the hours
of seven and eight of the clock, he went to the house of corporal Pershal, of
the twenty ninth regiment, near Quaker-lane, where he saw the corporal and his
wife, with one of the fifers of said regiment; when he had got what he went
for, and was coming away, the corporal called him back, and desired him with
great earnestness to go home to his master's house as soon as business was
over, and not be abroad on any account that night in particular, for the
soldiers were determined to be revenged on the ropewalk people; and that much
mischief would be done; upon which the fifer (about eighteen or nineteen years
of age) said he hoped in God they would burn the town down; on this he left the
house, and the said corporal called after him again, and begged he would mind
what he had said to him, and further says not.

MATTHEW ADAMS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Matthew Adams above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 19.)
CAleb Swan, of lawful age, testifies and says, that last Monday night, the 5th
of March 1770, being at Mr. Sample's door, at the north part of the town near
the north battery, at the time of the bells ringing for fire, he heard a
woman's voice, whom he knew to be the supposed wife of one Montgomery, a
grenadier of the twenty-ninth regiment, standing at her door, and heard her say
it was not fire; the town was too haughty and too proud; that many of their
arses would be laid low before the morning: Upon which Susanna Cathcart said to
her, I hope your husband will be killed. On which the woman replied, My husband
is able and will stand his ground.

CALEB SWAN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston March 21. 1770. Caleb Swan abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 20.)
MArgaret Swansborough, of lawful age, testifies and says, that a free woman,
named Black Peg, who has kept much with the soldiers, on hearing the
disturbance on Monday evening the fifth instant, said, The soldiers were not to
be trod upon by the inhabitants, but would know before morning, whether they or
the inhabitants were to be masters. Since which time, the said Black Peg has
sold off her household stuff and left the town, on her hearing what she had said
before, was given in to the committee of enquiry,

Margaret Swansborough, her mark.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Margaret Swansborough aforenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. BELCHER NOYES, Justice o'Peace.


(No. 21.)
RObert Pierpont of lawful age testifies and says, that going to see a sick
neighbor between the hours of seven and eight on Monday evening the fifth
current, two soldiers armed, one with a broad sword, the other with a club
passed him near the hay market, going toward the townhouse, seeming in great
haste. In a few minutes they returned and hallowed very loud, Colonel. Before
the deponent reached Mr. West's house, where he was going, they passed him
again, joined by another, with a blue surtout, who had a bayonet with which he
gave the deponent a back-handed stroke, apparently more to affront than hurt
him. On complaint of this treatment, he said, the deponent should soon hear
more of it, and threatened him very hard, and further says not.

ROB. PIERPONT.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Robert Pierpont, above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 22.)
JOhn Brown of lawful age testifies and says, that coming homewards about nine
of the clock on Monday evening the fifth current, he fell in with Nathaniel
Bosworth, and walking slowly together, a little to the southward of
Liberty-tree so called, they met a parcel of soldiers about six or seven in
number, walking very fast into town, one of the foremost said, damn you stand
out of the way, and struck the deponent a blow on the breast, which made him
stagger and fall nearly to the ground, though he had sheared out of the way. The
soldiers pressed along cursing and damning, toward the townhouse with naked
bayonets in their hands.

JOHN BROWN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. John Brown, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL. Just. Peace.


The following Deposition should have immediately preceeded No. 5. (No. 23.)
SAmuel Bostwick, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on Friday the second
instant, between 10 and 11 o'clock in the forenoon, three soldiers of the 29th
regiment, came up Mr. Gray's ropewalk, and William Green, one of the hands,
spoke to one of them, saying, Soldier, will you work? The soldier replied, Yes.
Green said, then go and clean my f -- t-house. The soldier swore by the Holy
Ghost that he would have recompense, and tarried a good while swearing at
Green, who took no further notice of him, and then went off, and soon after
returned to the ropewalk with a party of thirty or forty soldiers, headed by a
tall negro drummer, and challenged the ropemakers to come out. All hands then
present, being about 13 or 14, turned out and beat them off, considerably
bruised. And further says not.

SAMUEL BOSTWICK.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19. 1770. Samuel Bostwick, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 24.)
I William Tyler, of lawful age, do testify and say, that on the evening of the
fifth of March, a little after nine o'clock, as I was coming up kingstreet,
just before I got to the custom-house I saw the sentinel running after a boy,
and immediately heard him cry out as though in great distress. I asked the boy
what was the matter, he told me the sentinel had struck him with his gun and
bayonet because he asked Capt. Goldfinch for some money that he owed him. The
sentinel said that he should not use an officer ill in the street. Soon after
the boy left the sentinel and went away, and immediately ten or twelve soldiers
came running up Silsby's alley, crying out, where are your Sons of Liberty? and
went from thence to Cornhill. I further testify that when the above complaint
was made of the centinel's striking the barber's boy, there were few people in
the street. I saw but five or six about them, who immediately dispersed. I then
left Kingstreet and went up to Cornhill.

WILLIAM TYLER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. William Tyler, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 25.)
HEnry Bass of lawful age testifies and says, that going from his house in
Winter-street, on Monday evening the fifth of March, to see a friend in the
neighborhood of the Rev. Dr. Cooper's meeting house; that the bell was ringing
for nine o'clock when he came out of his house, and that he proceeded down the
main-street, and going near Draper's alley, leading to Murray's barracks, through
which he purposed to pass, heard some boys huzzaing, and imagines that there
were six or seven of them and not more; and presently after he saw two or three
persons in said alley with weapons, but cannot possitively say what they were.
-- Soon after several more came into the alley and made a sally out, and those
that came out were soldiers, and thinks were all grenadiers, as they were stout
men, and were armed with large naked cutlasses; they made at every body coming
in their way, cutting and slashing; the said deponent very narrowly escaped
receiving a cut from the foremost of them, who pursued him below Mr. Simpson's
stone shop, where he made a stand; presently after, going up Cornhill he met an
oyster man, who said to the deponent, damn it, this is what I got by going up,
and showed the deponent a large cut he had received from one of the soldiers
with a cutlass over his right shoulder; said deponent thinking it not safe but
very dangerous for him to go through the alley, he returned home by the way of
Kingstreet through Royal Exchange lane, and passed by the sentinel at the
corner of the Custom-house; and said deponent further says, that he never saw
fewer persons in Kingstreet, considering the pleasantness of the evening, and
verily believes there was not twelve persons between the Crown Coffee-house and
the bottom of the Townhouse; he imagines it to be then about fifteen or twenty
minutes after nine: After said deponent got to the head of the Townhouse, he
met a great many persons who enquired of him about the affair; the said
deponent told them there had been an affray by Murray's barracks, but that it
was then over, and further this deponent says not.

HENRY BASS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. The abovenamed Henry Bass personally
appearing, and being carefully examined and duly cautioned to testify the whole
truth, makes solemn oath to the fore-written deposition by him subscribed,
taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of
Peace and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 26.)
I William LeBaron of Boston, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday
evening the fifth day of this instant March, about ten minutes after nine
o'clock, being in kingstreet with my brother Francis LeBaron, saw a soldier;
the centry of the custom-house door, running after a barber's boy, the boy
called out as if he was in distress, and the soldier pursuing him with his
firelock told him if he did not hold his tongue he would put a ball through him,
after which the soldier returned to his post; immediately after this I heard a
great noise in Silsby's lane, so called, and immediately about thirteen or
fourteen soldiers appeared in kingstreet, near the watch-house, with their
drawn swords, cutlasses and bayonets, calling out, where are the damned
boogers, cowards, where are your Liberty boys; at which time there was not more
than eight or ten persons in kingstreet; one of the soldiers came up to me,
damned me, and made several passes at me with a drawn sword, the last of which,
the sword went between my arm and breast, and then I run, as I had nothing to
defend myself, and was pursued by a soldier with a naked bayonet, who swore he
would run me through; at which time your deponent cried Fire! and soon after
the bells rung, and further your deponent says not.

WILLIAM LeBARON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19. 1770. William Le Baron above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 27.)
WIlliam Lewis testifies and says, that on the evening following Monday the
fifth instant, about nine o'clock, he passing through Kingstreet in order to go
into Cornhill street, while he was crossing Kingstreet heard some people
wrangling at the Custom-house door, and he immediately see four soldiers of the
29th regiment jump out from between the Watch-house and the Townhouse steps,
at the east end of the house, in their short jackets with drawn swords in their
hands, two of whom run after the deponent and pursued him close until he got to
his home in Cornhill street, where just as he entered the door one of the
soldiers struck at him either with his sword or bayonet, but the deponent
rather thinks it was the latter, as he afterward found a three square hole cut
in the skirt of his surtout, which he verily believes was made by the blow that
the soldier struck at him; and further says not.

WILLIAM LEWIS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. William Lewis abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 28.)
NAthaniel Thayer, of lawful age, testifies, that on Monday evening the 5th of
March, about nine of the clock, as he sat in his house in Cornhill he heard a
great noise, at which he went to the door, and saw a number of people by Mr.
Quincy's door, near Murray's barracks, where he heard the sticks and clubs
going, upon which fire was cried, and presently ran 5 soldiers as he supposes
from the main-guard, with swords or cutlasses, swearing and damning, and saving
"where are they? cut them to pieces." The soldiers in their waistcoats came to
his door and insulted him; so he shut his door and went in.

NATH. THAYER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 10. 1770. Nathaniel Thayer abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 29.)
I Isaac Parker, of lawful age, testify and say, that being at Mr. Richard
Salter's house on the evening of the fifth current, heard a great noise in the
street, upon which I went to the entry door and saw a great number of soldiers
in their jackets without sleeves, having naked cutlasses in their hands,
flourishing them over their heads, one of whom assaulted me with a naked
cutlass, aiming a stroke at my head, which I happily avoided by a sudden
retreat in-doors.

ISAAC PARKER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March, 19. 1770. Isaac Parker, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI Dana, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 30.)
I Bartholomew Kneeland, of Boston, merchant, being of lawful age, testify and
say, that on Monday evening the fifth instant, (being at my lodgings at the
house of my sister Mrs. Mehetabel Torrey, widow of the late Mr. Samuel Torrey,
deceased) about fifteen minutes after nine of the clock, hearing a bell ring,
which I supposed was for fire, went immediately to the front door, followed by
Mr.Matthias King, Mrs. Torrey and two others of the family; standing at the
door for the space of four or five minutes, I saw a number of soldiers with
broad swords and bayonets in the main street near the town pump, making a great
noise; one of the said soldiers, when nearly opposite to me, spoke to me the
following words, viz. Damn you, what do you do there? get in: To which I made
no answer; the same soldier immediately crossed the gutter, and coming up to me
pointed his naked bayonet within six inches of my breast; I told him to go
along, and then I retired into the house. In about half an hour's time after
the above, I heard a volley of small arms fired off in Kingstreet; and upon
enquiry was told that three men were killed and one wounded.

BART. KNEELAND.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 12. 1770. Bartholomew Kneeland abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the above-written affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI DANA, Just. of Peace and of the Quorum.
JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 31.)
I Nathaniel Appleton, of lawful age, testify, that on Monday evening the 5th
instant, between nine and ten o'clock, I was sitting in my house in Cornhill,
heard a noise in the street, I went to my front door and saw several persons
passing up and down the street, I asked what was the matter? was informed that
the soldiers at Murray's barrack were quarrelling with the inhabitants.
Standing there a few minutes, I saw a number of soldiers, about 12 or 15, as
near as I could judge, come down from the southward, running toward the said
barrack with drawn cutlasses, and appeared to be passing by, but on seeing me
in company with Deacon Marsh at my door, they turned out of their course and
rushed upon us with uplifted weapons, without our speaking or doing the least
thing to provoke them, with the utmost difficulty we escaped a stroke by
retreating and closing the door upon them.

I further declare, that at that time my son, a lad about 12 years old, was
abroad on an errand, and soon came home and told me that he was met by a number
of soldiers with cutlasses in their hands, one of which attempting to strike
him, the child begged for his life, saying, pray soldier save my life, on which
the soldier replied, No damn you, I will kill you all, and smote him with his
cutlass, which glanced down along his arm and knocked him to the ground where
they left him, after the soldiers had all passed, the child arose and came
home, having happily received no other damage than a bruise on the arm -- I
further declare that the above related transactions happened but a few minutes
before the soldiers fired upon the people in Kingstreet, and further says not.

NATH. APPLETON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Nathaniel Appleton, abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 32.)
JEremiah Belknap of lawful age testifies and says, that on the first
appearance of the affray in Cornhill on Monday evening the fifth instant,
hearing a noise he ran to his door and heard Mr. William Merchant say he had
been struck by a soldier, and presently saw to the number of eight or nine
soldiers come out of Boylstone's alley into the street, armed with clubs and
cutlasses. The deponent went out into the street and desired them to retire to
their barracks, upon which one of them with a club in one hand and cutlass in
the other, with the latter made a stroke at the deponent; when finding there
was no prospect of stopping them, the deponent ran to the main guard, and
called for the officers of the guard. The reply was, there is no officer here.
Several of the soldiers came out of the guard house, and the deponent told them
if there was not a party sent down there would be bloodshed: Just as the
deponent spoke these words he was attacked by two soldiers with drawn cutlasses
supposed of the party from Murray's barracks, one at his breast and the other
over his head. One of the guards said this is an officer, meaning the deponent,
I believe a Constable; on which the two assailants retired and put up their
cutlasses, and further says not.

JEREMIAH BELKNAP.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. The abovenamed Jeremiah Belknap
personally appeared, and being carefully examined, and duly cautioned to
testify the whole truth, makes solemn oath to the forewritten deposition by
him subscribed. Taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI.
DANA, Just. of Peace and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No.33.)
I John Coburn of lawful age testify and say, that on the evening of the 5th of
March instant being alarmed by the cry of fire, and ringing of bells, ran out
of my house with my bags and buckets; upon going to Mr. Payne's door, he told
me it was not fire it was a riot, I sent my buckets home again, and went to Mr.
Amory's corner with Mr. Pain, and Mr. Walker the builder came along and said
the soldiers were in the street in Cornhill and dock-square, with their drawn
cutlasses, cutting and slashing every body in their way, and the inhabitants
wanted help, and said, pray gentlemen run, or words to that purpose. I returned
again to my house, and a few minutes after, at the head of royal exchange lane,
in the street, I saw a few, not exceeding fifteen or twenty persons, stop, as I
supposed talking what had happened. I went to Mr. Payne's door and stood in his
entry with him, I believe, about ten or fifteen minutes, and heard some words
with the people and the sentinel, such as, Do fire if you dare, but no further
than words, not so much as to touch him, as I saw, neither did I see more than
five or six that had so much as sticks in their hands, all entirely unarmed,
without any weapons. Mr. Harrison Gray, jun. came into the entry to us, and
upon this immediately came an officer with a party of six or seven men with
their guns breast-high and cleared the way, and by their behavior I did not
know but they would fire, I said it was not prudent to tarry there, went
directly into my own house and called all my family in. To the best of my
judgment, there was not more than fifty or sixty people in the street when the
party came and I believe it was not exceeding two minutes from the time that I
left Mr. Pain to the firing of the guns and farther your deponent says not.

JOHN COBURN.
Suffolk. ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. The abovenamed John Coburn personally
appearing and being carefully examined and duly cautioned to testify the whole
truth, makes solemn oath to the afore-written deposition by him subscribed,
taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of
Peace and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 34.)
I Robert Polley of lawful age testify and declare that on Monday evening the
5th instant as I was going home observed about ten persons standing near Mr.
Taylor's door, after standing there a small space of time I went with them
toward Boylston's alley opposite to Murray's barracks; we met in the alley
about eight or nine soldiers some of whom were armed with drawn swords and
cutlasses, one had a tongs, another a shovel with which they assaulted us, and
gave us a great deal of abusive language, we then drove them back to the
barracks with sticks only; we looked for stones or bricks but could find none,
the ground being covered with snow: Some of the lads dispersed, and myself with
a few others were returning peaceably home, when we met about nine or ten other
soldiers armed with a naked cutlass in one hand and a stick or bludgeon in the
other. One of them said, " Where are the sons of bitches?" They struck at
several persons in the street and went toward the head of the alley. Two
officers came and endeavored to get them into the barracks. One of the lads
proposed to ring the bell. The soldiers went through the alley, and the boys
huzza'd and said they were gone through royal exchange lane into kingstreet.
Myself and some of the boys then went into kingstreet. I saw two or three
snow-balls strike the side of the custom-house, near which a sentinel stood.
The sentinel kept the boys off with his bayonet charged breast-high, which he
frequently pushed at them. I then saw eight or nine soldiers with a leader come
from the main guard toward the custom-house, where they drew up, three facing
up the street and three fronting the street. They kept continually striking and
pushing with their bayonets at the people who pressed toward them, without
offering any insult as I saw. I then went down royal exchange lane, when I was
in the middle of the lane I heard the discharge of a gun, which was immediately
followed by about seven others. And further says not,

Robert Polley. his mark.
Attest. Wm. Palfrey.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17, 1770. Robert Polley abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above Affidavit. Taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Jus. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No. 35.)
SAMUEL Atwood of Welfleet, of lawful age, testifies and says, that a few
minutes after nine of the clock on Monday evening last, lying on board a vessel
in the town dock, he heard a noise and disturbance at the upper end of Dock
Square, and going up he found the soldiers and inhabitants engaged in the
narrow passes round Murray's barracks so called; the latter being mostly boys
unarmed, dispersed, on which ten or twelve soldiers armed with drawn cutlasses,
clubs and bayonets bolted out of the alley into the square and met the
deponent, who asked them if they intended to murder people? They answered, yes,
by God, root and branch, saying here is one of them; with that one of them
struck the deponent with a club, which was repeated by another: the deponent
being unarmed turned to go off, and he received a wound on the left shoulder,
which reached the bone, disabled him, and gave him much pain. Having gone a few
steps, the deponent met two officers, and asked them, Gentlemen, what is the
matter? They answered you will see by and by* and as he passed by Colonel
Jackson's, he heard the cry, Turn out the guards.

SAMUEL ATWOOD.
Suffolk, ss. March 16, 1770. The abovenamed Samuel Atwood appeared before us,
two of his Majesty's Justices of the peace for the said county of Suffolk, and
being carefully examined, and duly cautioned to declare the whole truth, made
oath to the truth of the above testimony by him subscribed. Taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Justice of Peace, and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No 36.)
CAPTAIN James Kirkwood, of lawful age, testifies and says, that about nine of
the clock in the evening of the fifth day of March current, he was going by
Murray's barracks, hearing a noise, stopped at Mr. Rhoads's door, opposite to
said barracks, where said Rhoads was standing, and stood some time and saw the
soldiers coming out of the yard from the barracks, armed with cutlasses and
bayonets, and rushing through Boylston's alley into cornhill. Two officers, viz.
Lieuts. Minchin and Dickson came out of the mess-house and said to the
soldiers, my lads come into the barrack and don't hurt the inhabitants, and
then retired into the mess-house. Soon after they came to the door again, and
found the soldiers in the yard; and directly upon it, Ensign Mall came to the
gate of the barrack yard, and said to the soldiers, turn out, and I will stand
by you! this he repeated frequently, adding, kill them! stick them! knock them
down, run your bayonets through them, with a great deal of language of like
import. Upon which a great number of soldiers came out of the barracks, with
naked cutlasses, headed by said Mall, and went through the aforesaid alley, some
officers came and got the soldiers into their barracks; and that Mall with his
sword or cutlass drawn in his hand, as often had them out again; but they were
at last drove into their barracks by the aforesaid Minchin and Dickson.

JAMES KIRKWOOD.
Suffolk, sc: Boston, March 21, 1770. James Kirkwood above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit. Taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 37.)
MATTHIAS King, of Halifax in Nova Scotia, of lawful age, testifies and says,
that in the evening of the fifth day of March instant, about nine of the clock,
he was at his lodgings at Mrs. Torrey's near the town pump, and heard the bells
ring and the cry of fire; upon which he went to the door, and saw several
soldiers coming round the south side of the townhouse armed with bayonets, and
something which he took to be broad-swords; that one of those people came up
almost to him and Mr. Bartholomew Kneeland; and they had but just time to shut
the door upon him, otherwise he is well assured they must have fell victims to
their boundless cruelty: He afterward went into the upper chamber of the said
house and was looking out of the window when the drum and the guard went to the
barrack; and he saw one of the guards kneel and present his piece with a
bayonet fixed, and heard him swear he would fire upon a parcel of boys who were
then in the street, but he did not. He further declares, that when the body of
troops was drawn up before the guard-house, (which was presently after the
massacre) he heard an officer say to another, that this was fine work, and just
what he wanted; but in the hurry he could not see him, so as to know him again.

MATTHs. KING.
Suffolk, sc. Boston, March 17, 1770. Matthias King abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit. Taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace, and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 38.)
BArtholomew Broaders, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on Sunday
evening being the 4th instant preceding the massacre, he went up to see Patrick
Dines, a soldier of the 29th regiment, who worked with Mr. Piemont, and in
Dawson's room heard sergeant Daniel's say, that the officers said, since
patience would not do, force must. -- And that the soldiers must not bear the
affronts of the inhabitants any longer, but resent them, and make them know
their distance; and further, that the inhabitants would never be easy, and that
he should desire to make the plumbs fly about their ears, and set the town on
fire round them, and then they would know who and who were of a side. Said
Daniel's asked Edward Garrick, fellow-apprentice to the deponent, if he knew
where he could get a stick that would bear a good stroke? Garrick replied, you
must look for one. And the deponent further says, that about eight o'clock on
Monday evening he went down Kingstreet and met twelve of the Town's people with
clubs, who said that they had been attacked by the soldiers; that he followed
the town's people to the conduit, and then returned home. Soon after Mr.
Green's maid and his daughter called him out of the shop, and asked him to go
to the apothecary's; and then they with the deponent returned to the
custom-house; in going he met his fellow-apprentice, and they went and stood
upon the custom-house steps, and Mr. Hammond Green came out, saying, come in
girls; then the deponent and his fellow apprentice, by the maid's invitation,
went in also -- Soon after Sawny Irving, so called, came in as he thought
without a hat, seemed a little angry, and he thinks asked for a candle (the
maid has since told him he did ask for one) then he went through the room along
with Hammond Green, the latter returned into the kitchen, then he left the
house and went home; after which the deponent came down Kingstreet, and went
through Quakerlane, and coming up the lane again, saw the sentinel at the
custom-house leave his post and come into the middle of the street, and said to
the deponent's fellow-apprentice, who he thought had said something of an
officer's not paying his debts, let me see your face; the boy answered, I am
not ashamed to show my face; immediately upon which the sentinel fetched a
sweeping stroke with his gun, upon the side of his head, which made him reel
and stagger about, and cry much. The deponent asked what he was struck for; he
answered for nothing. he then asked the sentinel what he meant by thus abusing
the people. He replied, damned your blood, if you do not get out of the way, I
will give you something; he then fixed his bayonet, and pushed at them, and they
both run -- then one Richard Ward, another fellow-apprentice, asked the one
struck, what it was for, and endeavored to get his stick to strike the
sentinel, but he told him not to, and came away; then he heard a huzza or two,
and as he got up Silsby's alley, up came a number of grenadiers, as he though it
about ten, with clubs, cutlasses and bayonets, crying out, where are the damned
Yankeys. He replied, what is the matter -- they answered, we will let you know.
-- He then run into his master's entry, and as running in, saw near twenty
other soldiers with bayonets, etc. flourishing coming from the guard house as
he though it; immediately after, he heard the bells ring, and then as he took it,
the same party with a sergeant at their head, came running by, knocking down
and slashing all the town's people they met with; then he heard people who were
running, ask where the fire was. He told them it was no fire, but the soldiers
near Justice Quincey's were fighting with the inhabitants. -- He then went
toward Justice Quincey's, and found the soldiers had retired to their
barracks, when 3 cheers were given by the inhabitants -- He then went down to
Kingstreet, and heard the people talking of the abuse his fellow-apprentices
had received from the sentinel, but saw no insult offered the sentinel, the
people being in the middle of the street. -- One came up with a cane, appeared
a gentleman, and spoke to the sentinel, and then went away; then the sentinel
went up the steps of the custom-house and pointed his gun; some of the
inhabitants then said he is going to fire -- then he took down his gun and
loaded it, while he was loading, one Thomas Greenwood a waiter went into the
custom house door, and it was shut immediately; and then Mr. Green's son John
said the sentinel was a going to fire; but he saw no abuse offered him, or any
danger he was in. He then went down royal exchange-lane, met a number of people
who were also dispersing near dock square. He then said to one Cox, and the
people, that the soldiers were going to fire upon the inhabitants at the
commissioners steps; some of the people went up upon this news to Kingstreet;
another man came from Kingstreet, and said to them, come up into Kingstreet. He
then went up Silsby's alley, and when he got to Mrs. Eustis's shop, heard a gun
go off, and afterward several others in a short space of time after one
another. Soon after he was told that three men were killed; then heard the
bells ring, and saw the people assemble fast in Kingstreet. The deponent
further says, that on the night abovesaid, the Snow was deep upon the ground,
and well remembers that when the centry called for the main guard, there were
not above 10 or 20 people in Kingstreet near the custom house. And further
says not.

BARTHOLOMEW BROADERS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19, 1770. Bartholomew Broaders abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the Truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken
to perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 39.)
JOHN Goddard of Brookline testifies and says, as he was passing the street on
Saturday last, being the 3d instant, he stopped near the barracks in
Water-street, and sold several of the barrack people some potatoes about five
of the clock in the afternoon, and found by their discourse some of the
soldiers had returned from a Fray near the ropewalks, and a number of soldiers
came out of the barracks, he supposed about 20, with clubs, seemingly much
enraged; and one in a profane manner swore he would be revenged on them, if he
fired the town.

JOHN GODDARD.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 22, 1770. John Goddard abovementioned, after due
examination made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 40)
DAniel Calfe of lawful age testifies and says, that on Saturday evening the
third instant, a camp woman, wife to James McDeed, a grenadier in the 29th,
came into Daniel Calfe's shop, father to the deponent, and the people talking
about the affrays at the ropewalk, and blaming the soldiers for the part they
had acted in it. The woman said the soldiers were in the right, adding that
before Tuesday or Wednesday night they would wet their swords or bayonets in
New England people's blood. The deponent further says, that on the evening of
the fifth current, hearing the bells ring, which he took for fire, he went out,
and near the old south meeting house heard the soldiers were fighting with the
inhabitants in Kingstreet, whereupon he came into kingstreet, and seeing a
number of people ( about one hundred) he went up to the custom-house, where
were posted about a dozen soldiers with an officer. That this deponent heard
said officer order the soldiers to fire, and gave the second word to fire
before they fired; and upon the officers ordering the soldiers to fire the
second time this deponent ran off about thirty feet distance when turning about
he saw one Caldwell fall and likewise a molatto man.

DANIEL CALFE.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. Daniel Calfe abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 41.)
I Thomas Marshall, of lawful age, do testify and declare, that on Monday night
the fifth of March, four or five minutes after nine o'clock, coming from Col.
Jackson's house on dock-square to my house in kingstreet, next door to the
custom-house, I saw no person in the street but the sentinel at the
custom-house in perfect peace; after I had been in my house ten or twelve
minutes, being in my shop in the front of the house, I heard the cry of Murder
at a distance, on which I opened the door, but saw no person in the street; but
in half a minute I saw several persons rushing out from the main guard house,
crying out, Damn them* where are they? They came down as far as the corner of
Mr. Phillips's house; I saw their swords and bayonets glitter in the
moonlight, crying out as before, and by Jesus let them come; at which time I
was called into the house by one of my family, but returned again in half a
minute, and saw ten or twelve soldiers, in a tumultuous manner, in the middle
of kingstreet, opposite to royal exchange lane, flourishing their arms, and
saying damn them where are they, and crying fire; the bells then rung as for
fire; I was then called in again for half a minute, and returning again to the
door, the inhabitants began to collect. -- Soon after a party of soldiers came
down the south side of kingstreet and crossed over to the custom-house
sentinel, and formed in a rank by him, nor did I see any manner of abuse
offered the sentinel, and in three minutes at the farthest they began to fire
on the inhabitants, by which several persons were killed, and several others
were wounded. Some time after this, the party marched off very leisurely, and
without molestation, and presently after the main guard was drawn out in ranks
between the guard-house and townhouse, and was joined by the piquet in the
same manner, with fixed bayonets and muskets shouldered, except the front rank,
who stood with charged bayonets, until the Lieutenant Governor came up. -- And
I do further declare, as near as I could judge, there was not more than 100
persons in the street, at the time the guns were discharged.

THO. MARSHALL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Thomas Marshall, Esquire above named, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the afore-written affidavit, taken
to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and
of the Quorum. SAM. PEMBERTON, Just. Peace.


(No. 42.)
I John Leach jun'r. of lawful age do testify and say that on Monday night
between the hours of nine and ten in the evening of the 5th instant three
youths and myself were passing through the alley leading from Justice Quincey's
to Murray's barracks (so called) when we had got about half way through the alley
a soldier of the 29th regiment with a dirty looking man overtook us, the
soldier being armed with a cutlass or sword, and the man with a short thick
club and rushing through us, one of the youths asked what the matter was -- by
that the man that had the club struck one of the youths on the shoulder,
another of the youths asked him what he meant, by that the soldier came up and
struck the youth with his sword or cutlass on his arm which did him
considerable damage, then we all ran up the alley and asked for assistance,
when soon came up some more soldiers out of their barracks through the alley
armed with cutlasses, swords, shovels and tongs, cutting and slashing that we
were obliged to run up the alley and stand at the head of the alley and keep
them in as long as we could -- but there were so many that we were obliged to
run, but they immediately made after us and knocked several of us down, myself
for one -- some time after 2 officers of the 29th regiment came up the alley
and drove the soldiers home to their barracks, and then the people chiefly
dispersed, myself for one, as I was going down dock square to go home I heard a
number of people hallow run up Kingstreet, for the soldiers are knocking people
down, after some time considering what the matter was I ran up Royal Exchange
alley, so called, when I had got to the head of the alley, I saw about eight
soldiers standing round the centry box by the Custom-House with their guns
levelled breast high and a considerable number of people stand in Kingstreet,
when I had been there about three minutes I heard the word fire (but who it
came from I cannot say) but nobody seemed to mind it, about half a minute after
I heard the word fire again, and some other words but could not tell what they
were; directly the soldier on the right hand fired, I had a blow on my back
which I though it was from the butt of a gun, I was then a-going off when I heard
five or six guns go off which I took to be nothing but powder at first till I
see two men drop by this the people seemed to disperse, then I was going up by
the Town House when I saw the people bringing along two dead men, a little
while after the whole of the 29th regiment drew up by the Town House I stayed a
little while longer and made the best of my way home, and further I say not.

JOHN LEACH. Jun.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21, 1770. John Leach, jun. abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL* Jus. Peace.


(43)
I The subscriber, of lawful age, testify and say, That on Monday evening the
5th instant March 1770, being at the south part of the town between the hours
of nine and ten of clock, I heard the bells in the center of the town ring, and
fire cried, ran immediately for kingstreet, where I supposed it was, and to my
great astonishment I saw a number of soldiers with presented bayonets,
commanded by an officer whom I did not hen know; the soldiers formed a
semicircle round the ceninel box to the custom-house door -- I went
immediately up to them and spoke to the fourth man from the corner, who stood
in the gutter, and asked him if the soldiers were loaded, he replied Yes! I
then asked (addressing myself to the whole) if they intended to fire, was
answered positively, Yes, by the Eternal God. I then looked round to see what
number of inhabitants were in the street, and computed them to be about fifty,
who were then going off as fast as possible; at the same time I observed a tall
man standing on my left hand, who seemed not apprehensive of the danger he was
in, and before I had time to speak to him I heard the word Fire! and
immediately the report followed, the man on my left hand dropped, I asked him if
he was hurt, but received no answer, I then stooped down and saw him gasping
and struggling with death. -- I then saw another man laying dead on my
right hand, but further advanced up the street. I then saw the soldiers loading
again, and I ran up the street to get some assistance to carry off the dead and
wounded. Doctor Jos. Gardner and David Bradley came down with me to the corpse,
and as we were stooping to take them up, the soldiers presented at us again; I
then saw an officer passing busily behind them. -- We carried off the dead
without regarding the soldiers. I then saw an officer pass before the soldiers
and hove up their arms, and said stop firing, don't fire any more, upon which
they shouldered. -- I then went close up to them, and addressing myself to the
whole, told them I came to see some faces that I might be able to swear to
another day -- Capt. Preston, who was the officer, turned round and answered
(in a melancholy tone) perhaps you may. After taking a view of each man's face
I left them. They soon after ran up to the main guard house. I have nothing
farther to say.

BENJ. BURDICK, jun.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Benjamin Burdick, jun. abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 44.)
I Charles Hobby of lawful age testify and say, that on Monday evening the 5th
instant, between the hours of 9 and 10 o'clock being in my master's house, was
alarmed with the cry of fire, I ran down as far as the townhouse, and then
heard that the soldiers and the inhabitants were fighting in the alley by Dr.
Cooper's meeting house, I went through the alley, I there saw a number of
soldiers about the barracks, some with muskets, others without, I saw a number
of officers at the door of the mess-house, almost fronting the alley, and some
of the inhabitants entreating the officers to command the soldiers to be
peaceable and retire to their barracks. One of the officers, viz. Lieut.
Minchin, replied, that the soldiers had been abused lately by the inhabitants,
and that if the inhabitants would disperse, the soldiers should follow the
example. Capt. Goldfinch was among the rest of the officers in or about the
steps of the mess-house door, but did not command the soldiers. I then left
them and went to kingstreet. I then saw a party of soldiers loading their
muskets about the custom-house door, after which they all shouldered. I heard
some of the inhabitants cry out, heave no snow balls; others cried they dare
not fire. Captain Preston was then standing by the soldiers, when a snow ball
struck a grenadier, who immediately fired, Capt. Preston standing close by him.
The Captain then spoke distinctly, Fire, Fire! I was then within four feet of
Capt. Preston and know him well, the soldiers fired as fast as they could one
after another. I saw the Molatto fall, and Mr. Samuel Gray went to look at him,
one of the soldiers, at the distance of about four or five yards, pointed his
piece directly for the said Gray's head and fired. Mr. Gray, after struggling,
turned himself right round upon his heel and fell dead. Capt. Preston some time
after ordered them to march to the guard-house. I then took up a round hat and
followed the people that carried him down to a house near the post office. And
further says not.

CHARLES HOBBY.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Charles Hobby abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. BELCHER NOYES, Justice o'Peace.


(No. 45.)
I WILLIAM Tant, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday 5th instant,
being then in a house on the Long Wharff, hearing a bell ring, imagined it was
for fire: whereupon I run up King Street, and inquiring the cause, was
informed, that there had been a number of the inhabitants of the town insulted
by the soldiers in different places: As I got abreast of Quaker-lane, I met a
number of persons, to the amount of thirty or forty, mostly boys, and
youngsters, who assembled in King Street, before the custom-house, and gave
three cheers, and some of them being near the centry, at the custom-house door,
damned him, and bid him fire and be damned; and some snow balls were throwed,
or other things: whereupon the centry stepped on the steps of the custom-house
door, and loaded his piece, and struck the butt of it against the steps,
presented it at the people several times: at length the people drawing nearer
to him, he knocked at the custom-house door, and I saw it opened about
halfway. In the space of six or seven minutes, I saw a party of soldiers come
from the main guard, and draw themselves up in a line from the corner of the
custom-house to the centry-box; the people still continued in the street,
crying, fire, fire and be damned, and hove some more snow-balls: Whereupon I
heard a musket go off, and in the space of 2 or 3 seconds, I heard the word
fire given, but by whom I know not, and instantly the soldiers fired one after
another. I then stood between the centry-box and the custom-house door. And
further I know not.

WILLIAM TANT.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. William Tant abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace, and
of the Quorum. BELCHER NOYES, Justice o'Peace.


(No. 46.)
I THOMAS Cain of lawful age, testify and say, that on monday the 5th instant,
being in a house on the long wharff, I heard a bell ring, which I imagined was
for nine o'clock, but being informed by a person in my company that it was 12
minutes past that hour by his watch, I then concluded the bell rung for fire,
so I run up King Street, in company with Mr. William Tant, and asking a few
people whom I met, the cause of the bell's ringing, was answered the soldiers
had insulted some of the town's people by the ropewalks. I then went down
Quaker-lane as far as justice Dana's house, where I met a number of people
coming up, and asked them if there had been any disturbance at or near the
ropewalks, they answered me that there had been several people insulted, and
knocked down by the soldiers in different parts of the town. I then came up
into King Street, where they assembled together below the town house, (to the
best of my knowledge) between 30 and ^0 persons, mostly youngsters or boys, and
when there, they gave three cheers, and asked where the soldiers where, (I
imagine they meant them that had insulted them) some of the people assembled
being near the centry at the Custom-house door, damned him, and I saw some snow
balls or other things throw'd that way, whereupon the centry stepped on the
steps at the custom-house door and loaded his piece, and when loaded struck the
butt of his firelock against the steps three or four times, in the interim the
people assembled, continuing crying fire, fire and be damned, and some of them
drawing near to him he knocked at the custom-house door very hard, whereupon
the door was opened about half way, and I saw a person come out, which I
imagined to be a servant without a hat, his hair tied and hung down loose.

In the space of about five minutes, to the best of my remembrance, I perceived
a party of soldiers come from the main guard directly through the concourse of
people that was then in Kingstreet, with their muskets and fixed bayonets,
pushing too and fro, saying, make way; when they had got abreast of the
Custom-house they drew up in a line from the corner of royal exchange lane to
the centry box at the Custom-house door, and being in that position for the
space of five or six minutes, with their muskets levelled breast high and
pointed at the people that was still in the street, huzzaing, etc and crying
fire, as before, and some more snow balls or other things being hove, I heard
and saw the flash of a gun that went off near the corner of the aforementioned
lane, and in the space of two seconds I heard the word fire given, but by whom
I cannot ascertain, but the soldiers fired regularly one after another, and
when discharged, loaded again; I then stood behind the centry box, between the
soldier next it and the Custom-house.

THOMAS CAIN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Thomas Cain after due examination, made
oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to perpetuate the
remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and of the Quorum,
BELCHER NOYES, Jus. o'Peace.


(No. 47.)
I Peter Cunningham, of lawful age, testify that on Monday evening the 5th
current, on the cry of fire, a few minutes after 9 o'clock, coming into King
street, I saw Capt. Preston, standing before the door where the main guard was
kept, and heard him say, Turn out the guard! Then I passed down Kingstreet, and
saw the centry at the custom-house with his bayonet charged, dodging it about
as if pushing at the boys, who seemed to be laughing at him, and none of them
within 12 or 15 feet of him. In a few minutes after, Capt. Preston arrived with
a party of soldiers, perhaps 7 or 8, and took post between the custom-house
door and the west corner of said house, round the centry box. As soon as they
had taken their post, they began to push their bayonets at the people, though
none seemed to offer them any offense. The captain quickly commanded them to
prime and load, which being effected, they began to push as before. The captain
came before them and put his arm under three or four of their pieces, and
putting them into an upright posture, then retired from my sight; and presently
they again levelled and the firing began, and proceeded till ten or eleven
pieces were discharged. On the people's scattering a little, I saw two men near
me lay dead on the street, and observed the soldiers to load again, and moved
off. And further I say not.

PETER CUNNINGHAM.
Suffolk, sc. Boston, March 20, 1770. Peter Cunningham above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit. Taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Justice of Peace
and Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No. 48.)
I SAMUEL Condon of lawful age testify and say, that on the night of the 5th
instant March, being on the long wharff, between the hours of 9 and 10 o'clock,
and hearing the bells ring as for fire, I ran up Kingstreet, on my coming nigh
the townhouse I saw a number of people, about 30 or 40, chiefly consisting of
boys and lads, who proceeded down said street opposite the Custom-house; the
sentinel on their approach placed himself on the custom-house steps, and
charged his musket and presented the same against the body of the people who
offered him no insult or violence, in a few minutes after, a party came down
from the main guard, consisting of about eight soldiers with their guns and
bayonets in a charged position, headed by an officer, and posted themselves by
the west corner of the Custom-house round the centry box in a half circle; at
this time I stood near the door of the royal exchange tavern, but apprehending
danger as the soldiers stood with their muskets and bayonets in a charged or
presented position, moved from thence down said royal exchange lane, and stood
nigh the west end of the custom house, during this interim I saw no violence
offered the soldiers, in a few minutes after having placed myself as aforesaid,
a musket was fired by the soldier who stood next the corner, in a few seconds
after, another was fired, and so in succession till the whole was discharged,
to the number of 8 or thereabouts, while the muskets where discharging I walked
down the lane, and when the firing ceased I turned and went up to the head of
the lane when I saw the people carrying off one dead person, and two more
laying lifeless on the ground about two muskets length from the said soldiers,
inhumanly murdered by them, the blood then running from them in abundance; a
person asked the soldier who fired first, the reason for his so doing, the
soldier answered, damn your bloods you boogers, I would kill a thousand of you!
the soldiers were then charging their muskets again in order for a second
discharge in case any insult had been offered them.

SAMUEL CONDON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Samuel Condon abovenamed, after due
examination made oath to the truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 49)
EBENEZER Hinckley, of Boston, of lawful age, declares, that on Monday evening
the 5th of March current, that being at home in his house, he heard the bells
ring, and came out, and came through Cornhill-street, to the corner of
Kingstreet, near the main-guard house; immediately as he turned the corner, he
saw a party of soldiers come out of the main guard house, and he the deponent
then saw an officer, as he thought, look out of the chamber window, and call to
them, and said fire upon them, damn them, fire upon them. The deponent then
followed them, viz. the said party of soldiers, to the place where they were
posted, being before the centry box in a half circle, near the custom house;
they reaching forward pushing their bayonets, and endeavoring to stab people,
provoked a few boys to threw two or three snow-balls, and challenged them to
fire: In about a minute after, the deponent heard the word Fire, and then saw a
stick thrown which hit a soldier's gun, whereupon the corner soldier fired, and
the rest followed in the firing -- when the firing was, the deponent verily
believes there was not more than fifty or sixty persons in that part of the
street -- And it appeared to the deponent, that the soldiers going down to the
custom house in so hostile a manner, was the occasion of drawing the most of
those people there. -- And the deponenent further says, that through the whole,
he saw not one brick bat or stone thrown, and believes that it was naturally
impossible to come at any, as the snow was considerably deep.

Memorandum. After the party of soldiers were got to their place, he saw Capt.
Preston who commanded them, whom he knew very well -- And further says not.

EBENEZER HINCKLEY.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Ebenezer Hinckley abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above Affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 50)
FRANCIS Archbald, jun. of lawful age, testifies and says, that on Monday
evening the fifth of March instant at about ten minutes past nine of the clock
of said evening, as he was going through the alley that leads from Cornhill to
Brattlestreet (so called) with several others with him, he saw a soldier with a
cutlass flourishing it about in said alley, and a mean looking fellow with him,
with a club in his hand; then the deponent heard somebody outside of the alley
speak to the said soldier, and told him to put up his cutlass, for it was not
clever to carry such a weapon in the night without it was in a scabboard,
whereupon said soldier came up to him the deponent, with his cutlass pointing
toward his breast, and damned him, and asked him what he had to say against
it, whereupon the deponent told him to stand off. The said soldier then went up
to one of the lads that was with him and struck him, (as the deponent thought)
the deponent then went out of said alley and hallowed to some lads who were
standing near the townhouse, when they came to the deponent's assistance, they
made said soldiers retire through said alley to the barracks; in about five or
six minutes after, about twelve or fifteen soldiers came out of said barracks
(as I heard the next day they were encouraged and set on by Ensign Mall
belonging to the 29th regiment) with cutlasses, tongs and clubs, and came up to
them and damned them and said where is the yankey boogers? when they began to
strike the people in the street with said weapons. And as the deponent was
standing with Mr. John Hicks, one of the soldiers came up with a pair of tongs,
and just going to make a stroke at said deponent, said Hicks knocked him down,
whereupon the deponent when said soldier got up, knocked him down again and
broke his wrist (as he was informed afterward) then the deponent was going
home to the south-end. Just as he got to the townhouse he looked down
King Street and saw about fifty or sixty people standing in the middle of said
street, opposite the custom-house, then the deponent went down to see what was
the matter. When he got down said street he saw a party of soldiers coming from
the main-guard (amongst which was one Matthew Kilroy of the 29th regiment)
going to the sentinel that was standing at the custom-house: Then the deponent
went over to the side of the way and there stood about two minutes, when he saw
the flash, and heard the report of a gun that was fired from said centinel's
post, and six or seven fired directly afterward. Then the deponent saw three
men laying near said centinel's post dead. And the deponent further adds, that
at the time of his standing there as aforesaid, he saw no body molest or
trouble said sentinel or party of soldiers (as aforesaid) in any shape
whatever. And further the deponent says not.

FRANs. ARCHBALD, jun.
Boston, March 17th, 1770. Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17, 1770. Francis
Archbald, jun. abovenamed, after due examination, made oath to the Truth of
the above-written Affidavit. Taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing.
Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(51)
I Nathaniel Fosdick, of lawful age, testify and say, that on the night of the
fifth instant, betwixt the hours of nine and ten o'clock, being in my house
with my family, hearing the bells ring for fire ran out to assist the
inhabitants, ran toward the north; when I came to the townhouse I see the
people running down kingstreet, I followed, when I came by the guard-house I
see some soldiers come out and fix their bayonets, I ran to know where the fire
was, after I had got into kingstreet I made a halt, as I stopped I was pushed
behind, I turned round and saw some soldiers with their bayonets charged, which
came against me. I asked them if this was the fire that is cried; they made no
answer. I asked them what they meant by coming on me in that manner; their
answer was, Damn you, stand out of our way. I told them I would not move for no
man under the heavens. I offended no one. Therefore they passed me, some on my
right and some on my left. I followed behind them, they went to the centry-box
and faced round and formed in a half-circle. I saw a number of people near the
middle of kingstreet, about twenty yards from the centry-box. I spoke out and
desired that no disturbance might be betwixt the inhabitants and the soldiers,
for if the soldiers were in fault, there was their officer, which I looked upon
to be the officer of the day, and he could settle the affair in one minute;
then I spoke to two men to speak to the officer; then I see two or three
advance toward the officer. I heard some words pass, what they were I know
not, I turned round and spoke to the people to step off and let them that went
to the officer settle the dispute, the people standing still, I turned toward
the officer and see him fall into the regular circle, then I heard the word
FIRE, on my left one gun was fired off by a soldier on their right. Upon which
I rushed in, then seeing the first soldier that fired run at some persons and
fall upon the ground, I hallowed to take his gun from him, then I received
three pushes by their bayonets, two in my left arm and one in my breast, that
at my breast I struck off with a stick, and the gun went off instantly. Then I
drew back, and finding one dead, as I thought, on my left and one on my right,
I then run over to quaker-lane, where I saw a number of people, I desired them
to step out and keep the soldiers from getting off; from thence I went over to
the other side the street, to the lane near the town watch-house, where I
desired the people to step out, and not to let the soldiers get off, for I
would go home and get my gun and bring a party against them, which I did, but
meeting some of the inhabitants returning, they told me the soldiers were gone
off and affairs would be settled tomorrow, on that I went home.

NATH. FOSDICK.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Nath. Fosdick, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. SAM. PEMBERTON, Just. Peace.


(No. 52)
JOseph Hooton, jun* of lawful age testifies and says, that coming from the
south end of Boston, on Monday evening the 5th instant, against the old south
meeting house he heard a great noise and tumult, with the cry of murder often
repeated. Proceeding toward the townhouse the deponent passed by several
soldiers running that way with naked cutlasses and bayonets in their hands. The
deponent asked one of them what was the matter, and was answered by him, by God
you shall all know what is the matter soon! Between 9 and 10 o'clock the
deponent came into Kingstreet and stood about the middle of the street, or
nearer the custom-house, in the direction of Quaker and Royal Exchange lanes,
and saw about eight or ten soldiers drawn up near the custom-house, and an
officer which he since understands was Capt. Preston, between the soldiers and
the custom-house. There was much noise and huzzaing among the boys and people,
and some of the boys the deponent observed drew near to the soldiers. In this
hurry and confusion the deponent heard many ask each other whether they thought
they would fire? and it was generally concluded they would not. But in about
five minutes after the deponent first stood there, he heard the officer give
the word FIRE, they not then firing, he again said FIRE, which they still
disobeying, he said with a much higher voice, DAMN YOU FIRE BE THE CONSEQUENCE
WHAT IT WILL! Soon after this one of the guns went off -- in a few seconds
another, and so on, till six or seven were discharged. Near the deponents left
hand dropped a man, which he since learns was Mr. James Caldwell, on which he
left the place, and further says not.

JOSEPH HOOTON, jun.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 15. 1770. The said Joseph Hooton, jun. personally
appearing, makes solemn oath to the truth of the fore-written deposition, by
him subscribed. Before me, EDM. QUINCY, Just. Pacis.

(No. 53)
I Richard Palms of Boston, of lawful age, testify and say, that between the
hours of nine and ten o'clock of the 5th instant, I heard one of the bells
ring, which I supposed was occasioned by fire, and enquiring where the fire
was, was answered that the soldiers were abusing the inhabitants; I asked
where, was first answered at Murray's barracks, I went there and spoke to some
officers that were standing at the door, I told them I was surprised they
suffered the soldiers to go out of the barrack after eight o'clock; I was
answered by one of the officers pray do you mean to teach us our duty; I
answered I did not, only to remind them of it; one of them said you see that
the soldiers are all in their barracks, and why do not you go to your homes;
Mr. James Lamb and I said, Gentlemen let us go home, and were answered by some,
home, home; accordingly I asked Mr. William Hickling if he was going home, he
said he was, I walked with him as far as the post office, upon my stopping to
talk with two or three people, Mr. Hickling left me; I then saw Mr. Pool Spear
going toward the townhouse, he asked me if I was going home, I told him I
was; I asked him where he was going that way, he said he was going to his
brother David's. But when I got to the town-pump, we were told there was a
rumpus at the custom-house door; Mr. Spear said to me you had better not go, I
told him I would go and try to make peace; I immediately went there and saw
Capt. Preston at the head of six or eight soldiers in a circular form, with
guns breast high and bayonets fixed; the said Captain stood almost to the end
of their guns. I went immediately to Capt. Preston (as soon as Mr. Bliss had
left him) and asked him if their guns were loaded, his answer was they are
loaded with powder and ball; I then said to him I hope you do not intend they
shall fire upon the inhabitants; his reply was, by no means. When I was asking
him these questions my left hand was on his right shoulder; Mr. John Hickling
had that instant taken his hand off my shoulder, and stepped to my left, then
instantly I saw a piece of snow or ice fall among the soldiers, on which the
soldier at the officer's right hand stepped back and discharged his gun, at the
space of some seconds the soldier at his left fired next, and the others one
after the other. After the first gun was fired, I heard the word Fire, but who
said it I know not; after the first gun was fired the said officer had full
time to forbid the other soldiers not to fire, but I did not hear him speak to
them at all; then turning myself to the left I saw one man dead, distant about
six feet; I having a stick in my hand made a stroke at the soldier who fired,
and struck the gun out of his hand. I then made a stroke at the officer, my
right foot slipped, that brought me on my knee, the blow falling short, he says I
hit his arm; when I was recovering myself from the fall I saw the soldier that
fired the first gun endeavoring to push me through with his bayonet, on which I
threw my stick at his head, the soldier starting back, gave me opportunity to
jump from him into exchange-lane, or I must been inevitably run through my body.
I looked back and saw three persons laying on the ground, and perceiving a
soldier stepping round the corner as I thought to shoot me, I ran down Exchange
lane, and so up the next into Kingstreet, and followed Mr. Gridley with several
other persons with the body of Capt. Morton's apprentice up to the prison
house, and saw he had a ball shot through his breast; at my return I found that
the officer and soldiers were gone to the main guard. To my best observation
there were not seventy people in Kingstreet at the time of their firing, and
them very scattering, but in a few minutes after the firing there were upwards
of a thousand; finding the soldiers were gone I went up to the main-guard and
saw there the soldiers were formed into three divisions, the front division in
the posture of platoon firing, and I expected they would fire. Hearing that his
Honor the Lieutenant Governor was going to the Council Chamger, I went there,
his Honor looking out of the door desired the people to hear him speak; he
desired them to go home and he would enquire into the affair in the morning,
and that the law should take its course, and said, I will live and die by the
law. A gentleman desired his Honor to order the soldiers to their barracks, he
answered it was not in his power, and that he had no command over the troops
and that it lay with Col. Dalrymple and not with him, but that he would send
for him, which after some time he did; upon that a gentleman desired his Honor
to look out of the window facing the mainguard, to see the position the
soldiers were in, ready to fire on the inhabitants, which he did after a good
deal of persuasion, and called for Col. Carr and desired him to order the
troops to their barracks in the same order they were in; accordingly they were
ordered to shoulder their guns, and were marched off by some officers, and
further says not.

RICH. PALMS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Richard Palms, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL. Just. Peace.


(No. 54.)
I William Wyat of Salem, coaster, testify and say, that last Monday evening,
being the fifth day of March current, I was in Boston, down at Treat's wharf,
where my vessel was lying, and hearing the bells ring supposed there was a fire
in the town, whereupon I hastened up to the townhouse, on the south side of
it, where I saw an officer of the army lead out of the guard-house there seven
or eight soldiers of the army, and lead them down, in seeming haste, to the
custom-house on the north side of kingstreet, where I followed them, and when
the officer had got there with the men, he bid them face about. I stood just
below them on the left wing, and the said officer ordered his men to load,
which they did accordingly, with the utmost dispatch, then they remained about
six minutes, with their firelocks rested and bayonets fixed, but not standing
in exact order. I observed a considerable number of young lads, and here and
there a man amongst them, about the middle of the street, facing the soldiers,
but not within ten or twelve feet distance from them; I observed some of them,
viz. the lads, etc. had sticks in their hands, laughing, shouting, huzzaing,
and crying fire; but could not observe that any of them threw any thing at the
soldiers, or threatened any of them. Then the said officer retired from before
the soldiers and steping behind them, toward the right wing, bid the soldiers
fire; they not firing, he presently again bid' em fire; they not yet firing, he
stamped and said, damn your bloods, fire, be the consequence what it will; then
the second man on the left wing fired often his gun, then, after a very short
pause, they fired one after another as quick as possible, beginning on the
right wing; the last man's gun on the left wing flashed in the pan, then he
prim'd again, and the people being withdrawn from before the soldiers, most of
them further down the street, he turned his gun toward them and fired upon
them. Immediately after the principal firing, I saw three of the people fall
down in the street, presently after the last gun was fired off, the said
officer, who had commanded the soldiers (as above) to fire, sprung before them,
waving his sword or stick, said, Damn ye, rascals, what did ye fire for, and
struck up the gun of one of the soldiers who was loading again, whereupon they
seemed confounded and fired no more. I then went up behind them to the right
wing, where one of the people was lying, to see whether he was dead, where
there were four or five people about him, one of them saying he was dead;
whereupon one of the soldiers said damn his blood he is dead, if he ever sprawl
again I will be damned for him. -- And I remember as the said officer was going
down with the soldiers toward the Custom-House, a gentleman spoke to him and
said Capt. Preston, for God's sake keep your men in order and mind what you are
about. And further I say not.

March 7. 1770. WILLIAM WYAT.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 13. 1770. William Wyatt, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN TUDOR, Just. Peace.


(No. 55.)
I Henry Knox of lawful age testify and say, that between nine and ten o'clock
P. M. the fifth instant I saw the centry at the Custom-House charging his
musket and a number of young persons crossing from Royal Exchange to Quaker
lane, seeing him load, stopped and asked him what he meant? and told others, the
centry was going to fire. They then huzza'd and gathered round him at about ten
feet distant. I then advancing went up to him, and the centry snap'd his piece
upon them, Knox told him if he fired he died. The centry answered he did not
care, or words to that purpose, damning them and saying, if they touched him,
he would fire. The boys told him to fire and be damned: Immediately on this I
returned to the rest of the people and endeavored to keep every boy from going
up, but finding it ineffectual went off through the crowd and saw a detachment of
about eight or nine men and a corporal headed by Capt. Preston. I took Capt.
Preston by the coat and told him for God's sake to take his men back again, for
if they fired his life must answer for the consequence; he replied he was
sensible of it, or knew what he was about, or words to that purpose; and seemed
in great haste and much agitated. While I was talking with Capt. Preston the
soldiers of his detachment had attacked the people with their bayonets. There
was not the least provocation given to Capt. Preston or his party, the backs of
the people being toward them when they were attacked. During the time of the
attack I frequently heard the words damn your blood and such like expressions.
When Capt. Preston saw his party engaged he directly left me, and went into the
crowd and I departed: the deponent further says that there was not present in
Kingstreet above seventy or eighty people at the extent, according to his
opinion.

HENRY KNOX.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Henry Knox, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 56.)
EEward Pain of Boston, merchant, testifies and says, that on the evening of
the fifth instant, on hearing the bells ring, he supposed there was fire, but
on going out he was informed there was not any fire, but a riot of the
soldiers, and that the soldiers were cutting down Liberty-tree. -- That he went
into Kingstreet, where he met Mr. Walker the shipwright, who informed him, that
the soldiers at Smith's barracks had sallied out upon the inhabitants, and had
cut and beat a number of persons, but were drove back to their barracks. --
That he (the deponent) then went to the east end of the Townhouse, where he
heard the same report from diverse persons. -- That whilst he stood there, a
number of persons, not exceeding twenty, some of them with sticks in their
hands, came up the lane by Silsby's into Kingstreet, at which time there was,
as near as he can judge, about the same number in King Street, when a lad came
up from the custom-house, and informed the people, that the sentinel there had
knocked down a lad belonging to their shop, upon which the people moved that
way, and surrounded the sentinel, -- That this deponent then went home, and
stood upon the sell of his entry door, which is nearly opposite to the east end
of the custom-house, where he was soon joined by Mr. George Bethune and Mr.
Harrison Gray, that the people round the sentinel were then crying out Fire,
Fire, damn you why don't you Fire, soon after, he perceived a number of
soldiers coming down toward the sentinel, with their arms in a horizontal
posture, and their bayonets fixed, who turned the people from before the
custom-house, and drew up before the door, the people, who still remained in
the street and about the soldiers, continued calling out to them to fire. In
this situation they remained some minutes, when he heard a gun snap, and
presently a single gun fired, and soon after several others went off one after
another, to the number of three or four, and then heard the rammers go into the
guns as though they were loading; immediately after which three or four more went
off in the same manner; at which time a ball passed through the deponent's
right arm, upon which he immediately retired into the house. That at the time
of the centinel's being surrounded, and at the time of the firing, it appeared
to the deponent, that there were from fifty to an hundred persons in the
street, and not more. The deponent further says not.

EDWARD PAIN.
Test. Mr. Pain subscribed his name with his left hand. John Amory.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. Edward Pain, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 57.)
JOhn Gammell of lawful age testifies and says, that soon after the bells rang
on Monday evening the 5th instant, he stood by the Townhouse, and saw a party
consisting of about fifteen or sixteen soldiers, come out of the main guard,
and a sergeant or corporal ordered them to prime and load, which they did, and
a detachment of about six men with a corporal filed off to Williams's court, as
was said to call Captain Preston, and the rest to the Custom-House: A few
minutes after, they took their post by the custom-house, the deponent went down
and saw them pushing at the people with their bayonets and telling them to
stand off or they would fire upon them; the people laughed at them; and told
them they dared not to fire. Not long after the deponent heard the word FIRE,
and quickly the man on the right wing fired, and successively several more. --
On this the deponent walked off through Quaker lane: And further says not.

JOHN GAMMELL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. John Gammell, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 58.)
I Charlotte Bourgate, of lawful age, an indented servant to Edward Manwaring,
Esquire being at my master's lodgings at Mr. Hudson's at the north end, on the
night of the horrid massacre in Kingstreet, of the 5th instant, heard the bells
ring, which I took to be for fire, (about half an hour before the bells rung my
master, with one Mr. Munro, said they would go to the custom-house and drink a
glass of wine) then I went out, there being nobody in the house that I knew of,
but Mr. Hudson and wife; then I went up to the custom-house door and knocked,
when a young man, which I have since heard was named Hammond Green, let me in
and locked the door, when I saw my master and Mr. Munroe said they would go to
the Custom-House and drink a glass of wine. Then I went out, there being nobody
in the house that I knew of but Mr. Hudson and wife; then I went up to the
Custom house door and knocked, when a young man, which I have since heard was
named Hammond Green, let me in and locked the door, when I saw my Master and
Mr. Munroe come down stairs, and go into a room, when four or five men went up
stairs pulling and haleing me after them, and said, my good boy come; when I
was carried into the chamber, there was but one light in the room, and that in
the corner of the chamber, when I saw a tall man loading a gun (then I saw two
guns in the room) my master not being in the chamber, there was a number of
gentlemen in the room: After the gun was loaded, the tall man gave it to me and
told me to fire, and said he would kill me if I did not; I told him I would
not. He drawing a sword out of his cane, told me, if I did not fire it, he
would run it through my guts. The man putting the gun out of the window, it being
a little open, I fired it side way up the street; the tall man then loaded the
gun again. I heard the balls go down. The man then laid it on the window again,
and told me to fire it. I told him I would not fire again; he told me again, he
would run me through the guts if I did not. Upon which I fired the same way up
the street. After I fired the second gun, I saw my master in the room; he took
a gun and pointed it out of the window; I heard the gun go off: Then a tall man
came and clapped me on the shoulders above and below stairs, and said that is my
good boy, I Will give you some money to morrow. I said, I don't want any money.
There being a light in the lower room, and the door being upon the jarr, I saw
it was the tall man that clapped me on the shoulder; then the young man Hammond
Green let me out of the door, there being two or three people in the entry,
when I got out of the house, I saw a number of people in the streets. And I ran
home as fast as I could, and set up all night in my master's kitchen. And
further say, that my master licked me the next night for telling Mrs. Waldren
about his firing out of the Custom house. And for fear that I should be licked
again, I did deny all that I said before Justice Quincy, which I am very sorry
for. And further I say not.

Charlotte Bourgate his Mark. ^
Attest. Elisha Story, Edward Crafts.

Suffolk, sc. Boston, March 23, 1770. Charlotte Bourgate abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, Edward Manwaring
Esquire and John Munroe above named, (...) present; and interrogated the deponent
Taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus.
Peace and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 59.)
GILLAM Bass of lawful age testifies and says, that being in Kingstreet on
monday night the 5th instant, after nine of the clock, he saw about an hundred
people gathered about the custom-house, and presently came a party of armed
soldiers, with bayonets fixed from the main guard keeping on the south side of
kingstreet, 'till they came nearly opposite the custom-house, and then passed
over driving through the people in so rough a manner, that it appeared to the
deponent that they intended to create a disturbance. They posted themselves
between the custom-house door and the west corner of it; and in a few minutes
began to fire upon the people. Two or three of the flashes so high above the
rest, that the deponent verily believes they must have come from the
custom-house windows: And further says, that he observed no violence to the
soldiers at or before the firing, or to the custom-house, by the people.

GILLAM BASS.
Suffolk, sc. Boston, March 16, 1770. Gillam Bass abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit. Taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace, and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 60.)
BENJAMIN Alline, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on Monday evening the
5th current, hearing the bells ring after nine o'clock, he came into
Kingstreet, and saw the custom house centry standing quietly in his place.
About 4 or 5 minutes after, the boys in the street came up near to him, and
made a noise, on which the soldier returned to the custom house steps. The
deponent quickly after this saw the custom house door open, and the centry turn
that way, and soon shut again. The centry then faced the boys and waved his gun
about as if to keep them off, and in a few minutes 8 or 9 soldiers came down
with an officer at their head, and placed themselves round the centry, and in a
few minutes after, he heard the word Fire, and they fired in succession, one
after the other. The deponent further says, that when he first arrived at the
custom house, there did not seem to be more than 30 or 40 people round it,
mostly boys, and they offered no violence as he observed, only making a noise
and huzzaing. And further says not.

BENJAMIN ALLINE.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17, 1770. Benjamin Alline abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the Remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Jus. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No. 61.)
I Francis Read of lawful age testify, that on monday evening the 5th instant,
hearing the bells ringing in the center of the town, I came into kingstreet and
found near an hundred people mostly boys standing round at about 7 or 8 yards
distance from the custom-house, before which stood a soldier on centry. In a
few minutes I saw a little man in a gray surtout with his hair clubb'd open the
custom-house door and go in, and quickly after the centry went to said door
then a little open, and seemed to speak with somebody in the house, after which
the door was shut, and the centry loaded his piece. In about 3 or 4 minutes I
saw a party of soldiers come down from the main guard with an officer, which
were ported in a semicircle from the door round the centry box to the southwest
corner of the custom-house. About 5 or 6 minutes after they were posted, I
heard the word fire from among the soldiers, and in a little time after the
soldiers fired; first one gun, then another, sometimes two at once, 'till 8 or
10 were fired. Casting my eyes about after the firing was over, I saw the smoke
of two discharges high above the rest. On this I left the place, and further
say not.

FRANCIS READ.
Suffolk, sc: Boston, March 20, 1770. Francis Read abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit. Taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, BELCHER NOYES, Just. o'Peace.


(No. 62.)
I DIMOND Morton, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday night the 5th
instant, between the hours of nine and ten I heard the cry of Fire by my house.
Immediately I ran out toward the town house; when I got between the Old-South
Meeting and the Old-Brick Meeting, I met some people, they told me there was no
fire, but people gathered in Kingstreet; immediately I left them and came
toward the townhouse, when I saw a number of people go round the Brazen-head
corner, some crying they are this way, and I run in amongst them, and came down
before the custom house, and there I saw a sentinel walking backwards and
forwards before the door. Soon after I saw the sentinel retreat back upon the
stone of the custom house door, waving his bayonet breast high all the way.
When he got on the stone he drew his cartridge to load his gun; whilst he was
loading his gun, I saw Thomas Greenwood a waiter to the commissioners run out
from the people where I was, and run behind the sentinel, and knock at the door
of the customs, and was soon let in: By that time the sentinel had his gun
loaded. Then the people cried, you dare not fire; and others said, fire and be
damned; then the boys gave two or three cheers. Upon that I saw Capt. Preston
marching and leading down from the main guard eight or ten soldiers, with their
bayonets fixed, swinging their guns. When they passed me, I followed them down
to the custom house. In about two minutes, Capt. Preston or some other person
ordered them to load, which they did; then I went toward Quaker-lane, when I
saw the flash of a gun from the soldiers at the custom house, and a man fall
before me; the guns being repeatedly fired, I looked round and saw two or three
men lay down on the snow. When I found there were three dead, and a number of
others wounded, in about ten or fifteen minutes afterward, I saw the soldiers
march toward the main guard -- the snow being at that time near a foot deep --
And I further say, that I did not see any insult offered to the sentinel from
the inhabitants; and at the time the guns were fired, there were not above
sixty or seventy persons standing before the custom house door. -- And further
I say not.

DIMOND MORTON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17, 1770. Dimond Morton abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 63.)
BENJAMIN Frizel, of Pownalborough, in the County of Lincoln, mariner, of
lawful age, testifies and says, that in the evening of the 5th day of March
current, going to Capt. Joseph Henshaw's at the south part of Boston, in his
way thither, under Liberty-Tree, exactly at eight o'clock of said evening, he
saw there, eleven soldiers, and an officer met them, dressed in a blue surtout;
upon his speaking to them, they appeared very submissive, the officer ordering
them to appear at their respective places at the time, and if they should see
any of the inhabitants of the town, or any other people not belonging to them,
with arms, clubs or any other warlike weapons, more than two, being assembled
together, to order them to stop, and ask them their business, and where they
were going; if they refused to stop, or tell them their business or separate
themselves, to stop them with their firelocks, and all that shall take their
part: after giving these orders, the officer went off to the northward, and the
soldiers southward; upon which the deponent proceeded about his business as far
as Wheeler's point, and while there, the bell rang as usual for fire, and he
with others ran to the townhouse, two engines being there drawn, the men
attending, left them on the west end of the town house, and going with others
into kingstreet, were stopped by two sentinels of the main guard, and forbid to
pass on their peril, and said if they did, they would fire on them; but one man
somewhat bolder than the rest, said as the bells rang for fire, and all the
inhabitants of the town had good right to pass through any street or lane of the
town he should pass, and shouldering a stick he had in his hand, went forward
and was followed by the deponent and many others into kingstreet, the deponent
taking his station at the west corner of the house now called the custom-house,
and between the corner and the centry box, where standing about two or three
minutes, he saw six or seven soldiers come from the opposite side of the
street, near to the head or opening of royal exchange lane, where they halted,
and some of them spoke to the centry at the custom-house and faced about, in
which posture they stood about two minutes, and in that time he heard nothing
said to them, or of them, by any of the inhabitants; but heard two or three
cheers given by the people, and two or three boatswain's calls piped, upon the
last of which the soldiers began their fire, the deponent still standing at the
corner of the custom-house, the first discharge being only one gun, the next of
two guns, upon which the deponent thinks he saw a man stumble; the third
discharge was of three guns, upon which he thinks he saw two men fall, and
immediately after were discharged five guns, two of which were by soldiers on
his right hand, the other three, as appeared to the deponent, were discharged
from the balcony or the chamber window of the custom-house, the flashes
appearing on the left hand and higher than the right hand flashes appeared to
be, and of which the deponent was very sensible, although his eyes were much
turned to the soldiers who were all on his right hand; soon after this, the
deponent saw five men on the ground, three whereof appeared to be dead, and the
other two to be struggling; for the space of two minutes following all action
ceased; after which the general cry was, let us pick up the dead, and not let
the soldiers have (...), and thereupon the deponent assisted in supporting and
steadying one who was wounded 'till a chair was brought to carry him off.

BENJAMIN FRIZEL.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 22, 1770. Benjamin Frizel abovementioned, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 64.)
JEREMIAH Allen, of lawful age, testifies and says, that in the evening of the
fifth day of March current, being at about nine o'clock in the front chamber in
the house occupied by Col. Ingersol in Kingstreet, he heard some guns fired,
which occasioned his going into the balcony of the said house -- That when he
was in the said balcony, in company with Mr. William Molineux, jun. and John
Simpson, he heard the discharge of four or five guns, the flashes of which
appeared to be to the westward of the centry box; and immediately after, he the
deponent heard two or three more guns, and saw the flashes thereof from out of
the house now called the Custom-House, as they evidently appeared to him, and
which he the said deponent at the same time declared to the aforesaid Molineux
and Simpson, being then near him, saying to them, at the same time pointing his
hand toward the Custom-House, there they are out of the Custom-House. -- And
further the deponent says not,

JEREMIAH ALLEN.
Suffolk* ss. The abovenamed Jeremiah Allen personally appearing, and being
carefully examined, and duly cautioned to testify the whole truth, makes
solemn oath to the fore-written deposition by him subscribed, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Justice of Peace,
and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No. 65)
JOSIAH Simpson of lawful age, testifies and says, that on the evening of the
5th of March current, at about nine of the clock, he heard a bell ringing at
the south part of the town, which caused him to leave his shop to make enquiry.
-- Soon after, he heard that the soldiers had rose upon the inhabitants; that
when he had got as far as Faneuil Hall, seeing a number of gentlemen standing
together, the deponent made up to them, and asked them what the disturbance
was; they answered him that two young men had been abused by the soldiers --
but that the soldiers had now returned to their barracks -- he then proceeded
with a number of others up royal exchange lane: at the head of the lane some of
the persons with him cried out here is a soldier and huzza'd; immediately the
soldier who was centry near to the box before the custom house, repaired to the
custom house door; at which, with the knocker the soldier gave three very hard
strokes; upon which some person within side opened the door and spoke to him
remarkably short, and then shut it again. -- The soldier then directly loaded
his gun, knocking the breech twice hard upon the stone steps: at the same time
seven soldiers (as the deponent judges) with a commanding officer came and
cried clear the way as he came along: then forming them into a half circle,
ordered them to load: the deponent then made up as he could to the officer, and
said for God's sake don't fire upon the people, he made him no answer: then
turning to the inhabitants he the deponent expressed himself in the following
manner; for God's sake don't trouble these men for they are upon duty and will
fire: turning about to the soldiers he saw them making up to the inhabitants
with their bayonets fixed (aboat ten feet off) directing them to stand off,
attempting to drive them away with their bayonets: then he withdrew himself to
the other side of the way, where seeing a man attempt to throw a club, he begged
that he would not; adding that if he did the soldiers would fire, and he did
not: the deponent then standing by Warden and Vernon's shop on the south side
of King Street with his back to the soldiers; immediately after heard the word
present; at which word he stooped down. -- A little space of time ensued, and
then he heard the words, damn you, fire; the sound of which words seemed to
proceed from the lost of all the soldiers, and very near to the centry box;
upon this order he judged two guns were discharged, and immediately three more,
and then two more; one of the two last guns went about five or six inches over
the deponent's back: after which he stood up, and another gun was discharged
which wounded one Robert Patterson in the arm, and the blood was sprinkled upon
the deponent's hand and waistcoat: after the firing the deponent saw four
persons drop: then looking toward the soldiers the deponent saw them making
toward the inhabitants with their fixed bayonents; upon which he retired down
Quaker-lane, and went round into the main street homewards where he met a
number of people going up royal exchange lane -- from thence he retired home.

JOSIAH SIMPSON.
The deponent further says that he is satisfied there was not more than
seventy or eighty people in King street who offered no violence to the soldiers
or to any other persons nor threatened any.

JOSIAH SIMPSON.
Suffolk, sc. Boston, March 16, 1770. Josiah Simpson abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforewritten Affidavit. Taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of the Peace,
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.




(No. 66.)
I John Wilson of lawful age testify, that on monday evening the 5th current, I
was at Mr. Burdett's at the head of long-lane, and heard the bells ring and
fire cried, and thereupon went in company with others to king street, and saw
no disturbance there, hearing the bells still ringing, I asked what was the
matter? The people said the soldiers had insulted the inhabitants, on which I
went to Cornhill, where the bustle had been, and found no soldiers there. Then
I came down Kingstreet opposite the custom-house, and saw a man with a light
colored surtout coming from the main guard go up to the centry, and lay his
hand on his shoulder and speak some words to the centry, and then enter the
custom-house door. On this the centry grounded the breech of his gun, took out
a cartridge, primed and loaded, and shouldered his firelock. After this I drew
back opposite Mr. Stone's, and in a few minutes saw a party of soldiers headed
by an officer coming down from the main guard, crying to the inhabitants, Damn
you, make way you boogers! I not moving from my place was struck by one of them
on the hip with the butt of his musket, which bruised me so much that it was
next day very sore, and much discolored. The officer seeing the soldier strike
me said to the soldier in an angry manner why don't you prick the boogers? The
party drew up before the custom-house door, and ranged to the west corner in a
half circle, and charged their pieces breast high. Some small boys coming up
made a noise to the soldiers, on which the officer said to them why don't you
fire? Damn you fire! They hereupon fired and two men fell dead in my sight. I
then left the place, and went over the street and assisted Patterson the
wounded man in getting home. The deponent further says, that when he got into
kingstreet he saw nobody but the centry walking backwards and forwards by the
custom-house, and then went to Cornhill as above; and at the time of firing he
verily believes there were not above fifty persons in the street near the
custom-house, the snow being at that time near a foot deep, and further I say
not.

JOHN WILLSON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19, 1770. John Willson abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of the Peace
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 67.)
GEORGE Coster, of the Bay of Bulls, in the island of Newfoundland, Mariner, of
lawful age, testifies and says, that being in Boston, about nine of the
clock, in the evening of the 5th day of March current, he the deponent was
standing in Kingstreet, near the middle of said street, and while there
standing, among a large number of other people, in about 5 or 6 minutes after
he stopped, he heard the word of command given to the soldiers fire, upon which
one gun was fired, which did no execution, as the deponent observed. About half
a minute after two guns, one of which killed one Samuel Gray a ropemaker, the
other a molatto man, between which two men, the deponent stood, after this the
deponent heard the discharge of four or five guns more, by the soldiers;
immediately after which the deponent heard the discharge of two guns or pistols
from an open window of the middle story of the custom-house, near to the place
where the centry box was placed, and being but a small distance from the
window, he heard the people from within speak and laugh, and soon after he saw
the casement lowered down; after which the deponent, assisted others in
carrying off one of the corpse.

GEORGE V. COSTER his Mark. ^
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16, 1770. George Coster abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of Peace, and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice Peace.


(No. 68.)
SAMUEL Drown of Boston, of lawful age, testifies and says, that about nine
of the clock of the evening of the fifth day of March current, standing at his
own door in Cornhill, saw about 14 or 15 soldiers of the 29th regiment, who
came from Murray's barrack, some of whom were armed with naked cutlasses,
swords or bayonets, others with clubs, fire shovels or tongs, and came upon the
inhabitants of the town, then standing or walking in Cornhill, and abused some
and violently assaulted others as they met them, most of whom were without so
much as a stick in their hands to defend themselves, as the deponent very
clearly could discern, it being moonlight, and himself being one of the
assaulted persons -- All or most of the said soldiers he saw go by the way of
Cornhill, Crooked-lane and Royal-exchange-lane into Kingstreet, and there
followed them, and soon discovered them to be quarrelling and fighting with the
people whom they saw there, which the deponent thinks were not more than a
dozen, when the soldiers came there first, armed as aforesaid. Of those dozen
people, the most of them were gentlemen, standing together a little below the
townhouse upon the exchange. At the appearance of those soldiers so armed, the
most of the twelve persons went off, some of them being first assaulted --
After which the said soldiers were observed by the deponent, to go toward the
main-guard, from whence were at the same time issuing and coming into
kingstreet five soldiers of said guard and a corporal armed with firelocks, who
called out to the forementioned soldiers armed with cutlasses, etc. and said
to them go away, on which they dispersed and went out of kingstreet, some one
way and some another -- by this time were collected together in kingstreet
about two hundred people, and then the deponent stood upon the steps of the
exchange tavern, being the next house to the custom-house; and soon after saw
Capt. Preston, whom he well knew, with a number of soldiers armed with
firelocks drawn up near the west corner of the custom-house; and at that
instant the deponent thinks so great a part of the people were dispersed at the
sight of the armed soldiers, as that not more than twenty or thirty remained in
kingstreet; Mr. Drown says there were collected together in King Street about
two hundred persons, and that at the sight of the armed Soldiers, they so far
dispersed, as that not more than twenty or thirty remained in King street.

This Circumstance accounts for the diversity in some of the depositions, with
regard to the number of persons in King street about that time: such
Depositions probably referring to different moments. -- Moments, because the
whole disturbance in King Street, from its beginning to the firing, continued
but a short space of time.


those who did remain being mostly sailors and other persons meanly dressed,
called out to the armed soldiers and dared them to fire, upon which the
deponent heard Capt. Preston say to the soldiers, Damn your bloods! why don't
you fire? the soldiers not regarding those words of their captain, he
immediately said FIRE. Upon which they fired irregularly, pointing their guns
variously in a part of a circle as they stood: during the time of the soldiers
firing, the deponent saw the flashes of two guns fired from the custom-house,
one of which was out of a window of the chamber westward of the balcony, and
the other from the balcony, the gun which he clearly discerned being pointed
through the ballisters, and the person who held the gun in a stooping posture,
withdraw himself into the house, having a handkerchief or some kind of cloth
over his face. After this the deponent assisted in carrying off the dead and
wounded, as soon as the soldiers would permit the people so to do, for at first
they were cruel enough to obstruct the carrying them off.

SAMUEL DROWN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16, 1770. The abovenamed Samuel Drown personally
appearing, and being carefully examined and duly cautioned to testify the whole
truth, makes solemn oath to the fore-written deposition by him subscribed,
taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of
the Peace and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 69.)
I Robert Patterson, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday night the
5th current, being at Capt. McNeill's at the North End, heard the bells ring,
and fire cried. I immediately ran 'till I got into royal exchange lane, it
being about a quarter after 9 o'Clock. I saw a number of people in the lane. I
asked what was the matter; they told me that the soldiers were going to kill
all the inhabitants. I immediately went through the lane, and stood in the middle
of King Street about 10 or 11 minutes, (the sentinel then standing leaning
against his box) when I saw an officer with 7 or 8 soldiers coming from the
main guard, clearing the way with their guns and bayonets, go below the
sentinel box, and turn up and place themselves around it, facing the people
standing opposite royal exchange lane; when I saw a man with a light colored
surtout at the custom-house door, the door being wide open, there standing with
his shoulder against the side -- then I heard the officer order the soldiers to
load; which they did: After that I heard the people say, damn you, why don't
you fire. In about a minute after, I heard the word fire, (but from whom I
cannot say) which the soldiers did. Looking round I saw three men lay dead on
the snow; the snow being at that time near a foot deep. Immediately they loaded
again. The people then gave three cheers, and cried out, lets go in upon them,
and prevent their firing again: Upon which they put on their hats and advanced
toward them: My hand being raised to put on my hat, still advancing toward
the soldiers, the sentinel up with his gun and fired, the balls going through
my lower right arm, my hand immediately falling; and finding myself wounded,
made the best of my way home with help. And further I say not.

Robert Patterson, his Mark. ^
Attest. Elisha Story.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20, 1770. Robert Patterson abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 70.)
CATO, a Negro Man, servant to Tuthil Hubbart, Esquire being of lawful age,
testifies and says, that on monday evening the fifth of March current, on his
hearing the cry of fire, he ran into King Street, where he saw a number of
people assembled before the custom-house; that he stood near the centry box and
saw the soldiers fire on the people, who stood in the middle of said street,
directly after which he saw two flashes of guns, one quick upon the other from
the chamber window of the custom-house; and that after the firing was all over,
while the people were carrying away the dead and wounded, he saw the
custom-house door opened, and several soldiers (one of whom had a cutlass) go
into the custom-house and shut the door after them, that before the soldiers
fired he heard a voice saying, damn you, why don't you fire, but did not see
who it was.

Cato his Mark. ^
Test. John Edwards.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16, 1770. The above named Cato, after careful
examination, made oath to the Truth of the above-written Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. Peace and of
the Quorum. And JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No 71)
DANIEL Usher of lawful age, testifies and says, that coming into King Street
about half after nine o'clock on monday evening the fifth current, he saw
several persons mostly young folks gathered between the townhouse and
coffee-house, some of whom were talking to the sentinel at the commissioners or
custom-house; after some time the boys at a distance began to throw light snow
balls at him, which he seemed much enraged at, and went on to the custom-house
steps where he appeared to have charged his gun giving it a heavy stamp upon
the door step as if to force down the lead, and then swore to the boys if they
came near him he would blow their brains out. About ten minutes after this, the
deponent saw Capt. Preston leading seven or eight men from toward the
townhouse, and placed them between the custom-house door and the sentinel box.
About four or five minutes after they were posted, the snow balls now and then
coming toward the soldiers, the Capt. commanded them to fire. Upon this one
gun quickly went off, and afterward he said FIRE BY ALL MEANS! others
succeeding and the deponent being utterly unarmed, to avoid further danger went
up round the townhouse till the fray was over. And further says not.

DANIEL USHER.
Suffolk, ss. March 16, 1770. The abovenamed Daniel Usher personally appearing
and being carefully examined and duly cautioned to testify the whole Truth,
makes solemn oath to the fore-written deposition by him subscribed, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI: DANA, Just. of the Peace
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 72.)
I ROBERT Goddard, of lawful age, testify and declare, that on Monday evening
the 5th instant, between the hours of 9 and 10 o'clock, being at my house at
Wheeler's point, I heard the cry of Fire. I ran out and came through Long Lane
into Kingstreet, right up to the north-west side of the Townhouse; when I got
there, I saw a number of gentlemen standing and talking, and heard them say,
that there was a man stabbed through the arm, and that it was very hard that the
people could not pass the streets without being stabbed. Immediately after, I
heard some people cry out for assistance. I then went down into Kingstreet, and
in going down, overtook an officer (as I though it) with 8 or 9 soldiers with
bayonets charged breast-high, the officer holding a naked cutlass in his hand,
swinging and calling, stand out of the way, and the soldiers cursing and
damning, and pushing their bayonets to clear the way. They went down to the
Custom-house, and placed themselves just above the sentinel box, the officer
then ordered the soldiers to place themselves, which they did in a half circle;
with that the boys came up near to the soldiers (standing as before). The
officer then said, Boys go off, lest their be some murder done; with that the
boys removed back a little distance throwing snow-balls, the soldiers pushing
them with their bayonets, saying, damn you, stand off; with that the boys went
forward again, and a man with a naked cutlass in his hand, who appeared to be
the commanding officer (as before) gave the word Fire, immediately a gun going
off upon the left of me, I saw a man like a sailor go up to the commander and
strike him upon the left arm: Immediately he the said officer said, think I Will
be used in this manner, Damn you, Fire, which they did, one after another.
After they had all fired, he ordered them to prime and load again; after that
he ordered his men in the middle of the street, and told them to clear their
way with their bayonets breast high; with that looking round, I saw four men
lay dead on the snow, the snow being at that time near a foot deep. Then I went
and helped the molatto man who was shot, into Mr. Stone's house. After we got
him in there, I saw him give one gasp. I then opened his breast, and saw two
holes, one in each breast, where the Balls had entered. After that went to the
door, and looked, and saw the soldiers standing in the middle of the street,
and saw two gentlemen talking with the officers and soldiers. Presently after
went to see the molatto again; and returned back into the street, saw all the
soldiers at the main guard house out, with their bayonets charged breast high;
with that going home through quaker-lane into long-lane, about the middle of the
lane, saw two soldiers, who told me to stand out of the way or else they would
stabb me. I immediately got out of the way, and made the best of my way home.
And further say, that the grand jury desired me to go and see whether I should
know the officer again; one of them going with me, I went up, and when I came
to the goal I saw several people in the room with him. The gentleman of the
grand jury (who went up with me) asked me which was the man, I told him that
that gentleman (pointing to Capt. Preston) looked very much like the man, and I
verily believed he was the man that ordered the soldiers to Fire. Don't you say
so, says he; yes sir, said I, you look very much like the man. If you say so,
said he, clapping his hands, I am ruined and undone. And further say, that at
the time of firing, there was but about fifty or sixty persons, mostly boys, in
Kingstreet.

ROBERT GODDARD.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 22, 1770. Robert Goddard aforementioned, after due
examination, made oath to the Truth of the aforesaid Affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the Thing. Before, JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. of Peace
and of the Quorum. And, JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 73.)
I JOHN Hickling being of lawful age, testify and say, that on monday the 5th
day of March 1770, returning from New Boston in the evening between the hours
of nine and ten o'clock, I heard a noise and the cry of fire in King Street,
and inquiring the cause was informed the soldiers intended to fire on the
inhabitants, immediately proceeding to the place I saw eight or nine soldiers
with fixed bayonets charged breast high standing in a circular manner at the
corner of the custom house, and an officer standing before them at the end of
the bayonets between the soldiers and the inhabitants. I saw but a few
scattering people supposed to be about thirty in the street before them at that
time and therefore was at a loss for the reason of such an appearance; going up
to the officer I found a young man named Bliss talking with him, I inquired his
name of Bliss who informed me that it was Preston. At that instant Mr. Richard
Palms came up and asked the officer if he intended to fire upon the people? he
answered by no means; Palms asked if the guns were loaded? Preston answered in
the affirmative. Palms further asked, with powder and ball? Preston answered
they were. The soldiers during this conversation assumed different postures
shoving their bayonets frequently at the people, one in particular pushing
against my side swore he would run me through, I laid hold of his bayonet and
told him that no body was going to meddle with them. Not more than ten seconds
after this, I saw something white resembling a piece of snow or ice fall among
the soldiers, which knocked the end of a firelock to the ground. At that
instant the word fire was given, but by whom I know not; but concluded it did
not come from the officer aforesaid, as I was within a yard of him and must
have heard him had he spoke it, but am satisfied said Preston did not forbid
them to fire, I instantly leaped within the soldier's bayonet as I heard him
cock his gun, which that moment went off between Mr. Palms and myself, I
thinking there was nothing but powder fired stood still, till upon the other
side of Mr. Palms and close to him, I saw another gun fired, and the man since
called Attucks fall. I then withdrew about two or three yards, and turning saw
Mr. Palms upon his knee, and the soldiers pushing at him with their bayonets.
During this the rest of the guns were fired, one after another when I saw two
more fall, I ran to one and seeing the blood gush out of his head though just
expiring, I felt for the wound and found a hole as big as my hand. This I have
since learned was Mr. Gray. I then went to Attucks and found him gasping,
pulled his head out of the gutter and left him; I returning to the soldiers and
asked them what they thought of themselves and whether they did not deserve to
be cut to pieces, to lay men wallowing in their blood in such a manner, they
answered God damn them, they should have stood out of our way. The soldiers
were then loading their muskets and told me upon my peril not to come any
nearer to them. I further declare that I heard no other affront given them than
the huzzaing and whistling of boys in the street.

JOHN HICKLING.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16, 1770. The abovenamed John Hickling, personally
appearing and being carefully examined and duly cautioned to testify the whole
Truth, makes solemn oath to the fore-written deposition by him subscribed,
taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before, RI. DANA, Just. of
the Peace and of the Quorum. And JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 74.)
I Obadiah Whiston, of lawful age, testify and say, that on the evening of the
5th instant, being at a house in Pondlane, on hearing the bells ring, ran
toward Kingstreet, and in going I met a person who said there is no fire, but
the soldiers are fighting with the inhabitants. I went down the north side of
the Townhouse into Kingstreet and there was only a few scattering people in
said street; I came up to the Brazenhead in Cornhill, and saw a Barber's boy,
who told me he had been struck by the soldiers; then I went to the south side
of the Townhouse and stood near the main-guard, where a considerable number of
persons stood; Capt. Preston standing by the guard-house door, said damn you
turn out guard, which they obeyed, and then took off 7 or 8 soldiers from the
right, and went down Kingstreet, where I with the chief of the people followed,
and in going down the soldiers pushed me and said, stand out of the way; I
followed them (to see where they were going) as far as the Custom-house, where
said Preston drew them up, and some boys being in the street, huzza'd; a few
minutes after, as I stood there, I saw one gun go off, and several more were
fired directly after; the people near me said there were some persons killed,
after which I saw one man dead.

OBADIAH WHISTON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. Obadiah Whiston, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above affidavit, taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and of the
Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 75.)
GEorge Robert Twelves Hewes, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on the
last night, about one o'clock, as he was returning alone from his house to the
townhouse, he met sergeant Chambers of the 29th, with eight or nine soldiers,
all with very large clubs and cutlasses, when Dodson, a soldier, spoke to him
and asked him how he fared, he told him very badly, to see his townsmen shot in
such a manner, and asked him if he did not think it was a dreadful thing, said
Dodson swore by God it was a fine thing, and said you shall see more of it; and
on perceiving I had a cane, he informed sergeant Chambers of it, who seized and
forced it from me, saying I had no right to carry it; I told him I had as good
a right to carry a cane as they had to carry clubs, but they hurried off with
it into the main guard. GEORGE ROBERT TWELVES HEWES.

March 6. 1770. The deponent further adds, that just before the soldiers came
from the main-guard to the custom house there were about 15 or 16 little boys
near the centry, who was standing on the steps of the custom-house; and he saw
a young man of a middling stature, with a gray coat and short curled hair,
press by the sentinel toward the door of the Custom-House and knock at said
door, upon which some person came and opened the door and he went in and shut
the door immediately after him; and at the same time the snow was near a foot
deep in king street.

GEORGE ROBERT TWELVES HEWES.
Suffolk, ss. Boston March 17. 1770. George Robert Twelves Hewes, abovenamed,
after due examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken
to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 76.)
I Thomas Jackson jun'r. do testify and declare that on Monday the 5th instant
in the evening, being in company, I heard, (as near as I can recollect) between
nine and ten o'clock, a drum beat to arms, I immediately told the gentleman
(with whom I was then engaged) I imagined there was some disturbance between
the inhabitants and the soldiery, he replied, foh, I believe it is nothing but
boys, I told him I was afraid there was something more in it than that, and
desired him (as the drum approached us) to look out of the window to see
whether they were soldiers, or not. He immediately opened the window, and told
me they were soldiers. Upon this information, I immediately put on my hat and
went out. I had not gone many paces before I met a man, of whom I enquired the
reason of the drum beating. He told me there were six men killed in kingstreet
by the military: I immediately hastened on in my way to kingstreet, and met
another person by Concert-hall, of whom I likewise enquired as aforesaid; his
answer to me corresponded with the other. When I got into kingstreet, I found a
great number of people there assembled, and intended going into the
custom-house, to find out the particulars of the affair. Upon my knocking at
the custom-house door with the knocker, Mr. Hammond Green (who was then looking
out of the window) asked me Who was there? I called him by name, and told him I
wanted to come into the custom-house. He told me he would not let me, nor even
his father (and I think he said) nor one of the commissioners, into the house,
for he had orders for so doing, or to that effect. I immediately quitted the
door and stayed some time at the bottom, and then at the head of the
townhouse, where I met Capt. John Riordan. While we were conversing, a party
of the 29th regiment came down Queenstreet and joined the regiment then at the
townhouse. Soon after that, I asked Capt. Riordan if he would spend an hour at
the coffee-house, he complied and we immediately went, after spending some time
there, I went home, and in going home, I found the inhabitants were gone off
and the soldiers gone from the townhouse. It was some time before I came into
kingstreet, that the guns were fired, and when I knocked at the custom-house
door, all the persons I saw at the window over the centry box at the custom
house (which window was then opened) was Mr. Hammond Green and some women.

THO. JACKSON, jun'r.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Thomas Jackson, jun. abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken
to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 77.)
I John Riordan, of lawful age, testify, that on Monday evening the fifth
instant, between 10 and 11 o'clock, I was at the British coffee-house and heard
Mr. Wells, the master of the Rose man of war, say that he had done more than
ever he did in his life, pointing to his hat, out of which he had pulled the
cockade, and continued, that all the boats were hoisted out, the barge
particularly, which had not been before for four months. Said master had at the
same time something that appeared like arms under his coat, which he said were
good stuff -- that he knew of this before (meaning as I thought the massacre of
that evening) and had sent one boat after another on shore for orders, but
having no return, had come himself in the barge.

JOHN RIORDAN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. John Riordan abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 78.)
ABraham Tuckerman, of lawful age, testifies and says, that James Vibart,
quartermaster of the 29th regiment, about ten o'clock A. M. the eighth
instant, said, the troubles here were nothing to what they would be in six
months. Being asked why he thought so, replied, This affair will get home, and
the people here will be disarmed as they are in Ireland.

ABRAHAM TUCKERMAN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Abraham Tuckerman, above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the afore-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 79.)
SPencer Walker of Boston, tailor, of lawful age testifies and says, that on
the evening of the fifth instant, (being a bright moonlight evening)
immediately after the massacre in kingstreet, he was passing alone, by Murray's
barrack, and was attacked by a man of middle height and pretty lusty, a rough
countenance and hair curled round his head, whom he took to be an officer in
disguise; that the said officer rushed out of the gate from behind two soldiers
with a drawn sword in his hand, and seized the deponent first by the collar and
asked him why he carried a stick, to which the deponent answered it was all he
had to defend himself with; the officer then seized his stick and swore he
would take it from him, the deponent said he should not; the officer then
pulled the stick three times and drew back his sword as though he would make a
pass at him, upon which the deponent let go the stick and turned back and saw
at the front door of the house another officer talking with a woman; the
deponent asked the officer if he kept soldiers there to disarm people as they
went about their proper business, upon which the officer laughed at him; the
deponent then told the officer that he would think it very hard if any
inhabitant had taken a gun from a soldier as he was going to relieve a centry,
the officer again laughed at him; upon which a soldier came up and struck the
deponent on the hip with the breech end of his gun in the presence of the
officer at the door, and then the deponent retired. The deponent further says,
that the next day he saw the same person who took the stick from him (knowing
him to be the same) in the dress of a commission-officer of the 29 th regiment

SPENCER WALKER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Spencer Walker, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 80.)
JOnathan Mason, of lawful age, testifies and says, that on the evening of the
5th of March 1770, about 10 o'clock, being in kingstreet, Boston, standing near
his Honor the Lieut. Governor, he heard him say to an officer at the head of
the King's troops, who it was said was Captain Preston, Sir, you are sensible
you had no right to fire, unless you had orders from a magistrate. To which
Capt. Preston replied, Sir, we were insulted, or words to that purpose, upon
which Capt. Preston desired his Honor to go with him to the guard-house, which
his Honor declined, and repaired to the council chamber.

JONA. MASON.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. Jonathan Mason abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 81.)
I Isaac Pierce of Boston, of lawful age testify and say, that on Monday
evening the fifth instant, hearing the bells ring, and that the main guard had
fired on the inhabitants, repaired to Kingstreet and found the 29th regiment
drawn up between the State-house and main guard house and facing down said
street toward the inhabitants, and seeing his Honor the Commander in Chief
appear, I went with him toward the soldiers, the front rank having their
firelocks presented with bayonets sixth; when we came near, I spoke to Capt.
Preston, then on the right, telling him there was his Honor the Commander in
Chief; Capt. Preston said where, I said (pointing to his Honor) there, and you
are presenting your firelocks at him, on which his Honor went round on the
right flank, and coming to Capt. Preston, said Sir are you the commanding
officer, who answered, yes Sir; his Honor then said, do you know Sir, you have
no power to fire on any body of people collected together, except you have a
civil magistrate with you to give orders; Capt. Preston answered, I was obliged
to, to save my centry, on which I immediately said, then you have murdered
three or four men to save your centry.

ISAAC PIERCE.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. Isaac Pierce, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 82.)
I Ebenezer Dorr, of lawful age, testify and say, that on the evening of the
5th instant, hearing the bells ring in the center of the town, I came down to
the townhouse and saw the 29th regiment under arms, between the townhouse and
main-guard, their lines extending across the street and facing down kingstreet,
where the town's people were assembled, and that the first rank was kneeling
down, and the whole of the first platoon was presented, ready for firing on the
word being given, and continued a considerable time in that posture, but by the
providence of God they were restrained from firing.

EBENEZER DORR.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. Ebenezer Dorr, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 83.)
I Edward Crafts, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday evening the
fifth instant, between 11 and 12 o'clock, Mr. Joseph Ayers met me at my gate,
and I asked him where he was going. He answered to call Mr. Thomas Theodore
Bliss to attend at the council chamger, to give evidence of the captain's
giving the soldiers orders to fire on the inhabitants. On leaving Mr. Bliss's
door, there passed by us two corporals with about twenty soldiers with muskets
and fixed bayonets, and on their observing our moving toward the townhouse,
the soldiers halted, and surrounded us, saying we were a pack of damned
rascals, and for three coppers they would blow our brains out. One of the
corporals (viz. Eustice) gave orders for one half the soldiers to cock, and the
rest to make ready. On which we told them we had nothing to say to them, but
were on other business. The corporal, Eustice, struck Mr. Haldan, then in
company, and turning to me aimed a blow at my head with his firelock, which I
took upon my arm, and then with all his might he made a pass at me with his
fixed bayonet, with full intent to take my life, as I thought. This I also
parried with my naked hand. Then a soldier stepped out from among the rest and
presented his musket to my breast, and six or seven more at about 8 or 10 feet
distance also presented. Upon this I called corporal McCan, who came to me with
a drawn sword or cutlass in his hand and pushed the gun from my breast, saying,
this is Mr. Crafts, and if any of you offers to touch him again I will blow
your brains out. Corporal Eustice answered and said, he is as damned a rascal
as any of them. The next evening about dusk coming by Rowe's barrack I saw
corporal McCan who saved my life. He asked me if my arm was broke? I answered
no. He said the gun with which Eustice struck me was broke to pieces. And
continued, you would have been in heaven or hell in an instant if you had not
called me by name: One man in particular would have shot you, seven more
presented at you! He also said, his orders were, when the party came from the
guard-house by the fortification, if any person or persons assaulted them, to
fire upon them, every man being loaded with a brace of balls. And further I say
not.

EDW. CRAFTS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 17. 1770. Edward Crafts, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 84.)
JOseph Allen of lawful age testifies and says, that between the hours of nine
and ten on Monday evening the fifth instant, being at the dwelling house of Mr.
Winniet at New-Boston, was there informed that the town was alarmed by an
affray between the soldiers and inhabitants, he immediately left said house,
and after arming himself with a stout cudgel at Mr. Daniel Rea's, passed by
Murray's barrack near Doctor Cooper's meeting house, where were drawn up a
party of soldiers with a number of officers in front; and passing them quietly
in company with Edward Winslow, jun'r. was overtaken by a party of armed
soldiers, one of whom laid hold of the deponent's neck of his coat and shirt,
and tore the shirt, a second struck him over the shoulders, and either the
latter or a third forcibly wrested the stick from him: Lieut. Minchin
interposing prevented farther abuse, and entered into conversation with the
deponent, complaining of the inhabitants for wrangling with the soldiers on the
most trifling occasion. The deponent asked him if he thought a man could be
inactive, when his countrymen were butchered in the street? Lieut. Minchin
answered, that "Mr. Mollineux was the author of all this," after the
conversation ended, or was nigh ending, Lieut. Minchin returned the deponent
his stick, and further says not.

JOSEPH ALLEN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. Joseph Allen, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 85.)
I William Fallass of lawful age testify and say, that after the murder was
committed in Kingstreet, on the evening of the fifth instant, upon my return
home I had occasion to stop opposite to the lane leading to Green's barrack,
and while I stood there the soldiers rushed by me with their arms, toward
Kingstreet, saying, this is our time or chance; and that I never saw men or
dogs so greedy for their prey as these soldiers seemed to be, and the sergeants
could hardly keep them in their ranks.

WILLIAM FALLASS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. William Fallass, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Jus. Peace.


(No. 86.)
MAry Gardner, living in Atkinson-street, of lawful age, testifies and says,
that on Monday evening the fifth day of March current, and before the guns
fired in Kingstreet, there were a number of soldiers assembled from Green's
barrack toward the street and opposite her gate, that they stood very still
until the guns were fired in Kingstreet, then they clapped their hands and gave
a cheer, saying, this is all that we want, they then ran to their barrack and
came out again in a few minutes, all with their arms, and ran toward
King Street.

MARY GARDNER.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Mary Gardner, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI. DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 87.)
JOhn Allman, of lawful age, testifies and says, that after the party with the
drum came from the main guard to Murray's barrack, he saw the soldiers there
drawn up under arms, and heard the officers, as they walked backwards and
forwards, say Damn it, what a fine fire that was! how bravely it dispersed the
mob!

JOHN ALLMAN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March, 16. 1770. John Allman, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before RI, DANA, Just. of Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 88.)
I Benjamin Church, jun. of lawful age, testify and say, that being requested
by Mr. Robert Pierpont the Coroner, to assist in examining the body of Crispus
Attucks, who was supposed to be murdered by the soldiers on Monday evening the
5th instant, I found two wounds in the region of the Thorax, the one on the
right side which entered through the second true Rib within an inch and an half
of the Sternum, dividing the Rib and seperating the cartilaginous extremity
from the Sternum, the ball passed obliquely downward through the Diaphragm and
entering through the large Lobe of the Liver and the Gallbladder, still keeping
its oblique direction, divided the Aorta Descendens just above its division
into the Iliacs, from thence it made its exit on the left side of the Spine.
This wound I apprehended was the immediate cause of his death. The other ball
entered the fourth of the false Ribs, about five inches from the Linea Alba,
and descending obliquely passed through the second false Rib, at the distance
of about eight inches from the Linea Alba; from the oblique direction of the
wounds, I apprehend the gun must have been discharged from some elevation, and
further the deponent says not.

BENJ. CHURCH, Jun.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 22. 1770. Benjamin Church, jun. abovementioned,
after due examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken
to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace
and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 89.)
I William Rhodes, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Tuesday March 6,
1770. the morning after the affair in Kingstreet, some of the seamen belonging
to the Rose man of war, laying in the harbor of Boston, came to my shop, and
after my asking them if they had heard of the affair that happened, they
answered me yes, and that all their boats were sent on shore manned, and that
the master of the ship had kept them up all night, or the greatest part; I then
asked them whether they were kept to their quarters* they answed no; I then
asked whether they had loaded their guns, they likewise answered no, but that
they had been filling powder; some time after, I enquired of these same people
whether their people when they came on shore on Monday night 5th March, were
armed, they told me that the only person that had any arms was their master,
who came ashore in the barge, and that he had only a pair of pistols, and that
when they had got on the wharf that the said master gave the pistols to the
Coxswain of the barge, and further says not.

WILLIAM RHODES.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 21. 1770. William Rhodes, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 90.)
MAry Russell of lawful age declares that John Brailsford, a private soldier of
the 14th regiment, who had frequently been employed by her (when he was ordered
with his company to the castle, in consequence of the murders committed by the
soldiers on the evening of the 5th of March) coming to the deponent's house,
declared that their regiment was ordered to hold themselves in readiness and
accordingly was ready that evening upon the inhabitants firing on the soldiery
to come to the assistance of the soldiery: on which the deponent asked him if
he would have fired upon any of the inhabitants of this town, to which he
replied, yes, if I had orders, but that if he saw Mr. Russell he would have
fired wide of him -- he also said its well there was no gun fired by the
inhabitants, for had there been, we should have come to the soldiers
assistance. And further says not.

MARY RUSSELL.
Suffolk, ss.Boston, March 17. 1770. The abovenamed Mary Russell personally
appearing, and being carefully examined, and duly cautioned to testify the
whole truth made solemn oath to the forewritten deposition by her subscribed.
Taken to perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just.
Peace and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 91)
I Ephraim Fenno, of lawful age, testify, that on Friday the ninth instant, as
I was going home by the hospital in the common, I saw Doctor Hall, surgeon of
the 14th regiment, looking out of his window, who said to me, Dirty traveling,
neighbor! Yes Sir, returned I. He asked me what news in town? I told him I
heard nothing but what he knew already, that the talk was about the people that
were murdered. He then asked me if the people of the town were not easier? I
replied, I believed not, nor would be till all the soldiers had left the town.
He then asked me, if I heard whether the 14th regiment was going? I answered
yes -- for the people would not be quiet till they were all gone. He said, the
town's people had always used the soldiers ill, which occasioned this affair,
and said I wish that instead of killing five or six they had killed five
hundred, damn me if I don't. And further I say not.

EPHRAIM FENNO.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 19. 1770. Ephraim Fenno, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. and JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 92.)
DAvid Loring, who was much employed in making shoes for the 14th regiment,
declares, that being at the woodyard of the 14th regiment on the 9th or 10th of
March talking with sergeant Whittey, he mentioned the unhappy affair of the
murder committed by the soldiers on the evening of the 5th instant, and said
that he believed if the 14th regiment had been upon guard that day it would not
have happened, and told him that he never liked the 29th regiment since they
landed in Boston, the sergeant asked the reason why he did not like the 29th
regiment as well as the 14th; he answered that they seemed to be a set of blood
thirsty men, and therefore did not like them,) and believed the affair would
have never happened had it not been for the affray of the 29th regiment at the
rope walks, a soldier of the 29th regiment named John Dudley being by, said it
was a planned thing a month before.

DAVID LORING.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 16. 1770. David Loring, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. of Peace
and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


(No. 93.)
I The subscriber, being desired by the committee of enquiry to take ranges of
the holes made by musket balls in two houses near opposite to the
custom-house, find that the bullethole in the entry door post of Mr. Payne's
house, and which grazed the edge of the door before it entered the post where
it lodged, two and a half inches deep, ranges just under the stool of the
westernmost lower chamber window of the Custom-house.

And that the hole made by another musket ball through the window shutter of
the lower story of the same house, and lodged in the back wall of the shop,
ranges about breast-high from the ground and between the second and third
window from the west corner of the Custom-house.

And that the holes made in the shop of Warden and Vernon through the outer
shutter and back partition of the shop, ranged breast-high from the ground and
with the westernmost side of the first window west of the great door (...) the
Custom-house.

BENJ. ANDREWS.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 20. 1770. Benjamin Andrews, Esquire abovenamed, after
due examination, made oath to the truth of the aforesaid affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. BELCHER NOYES, Justice o'Peace.


(No. 94.)
I John Green, of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday evening the 5th
instant, just after nine o'clock, I went into the Custom-House and saw in the
kitchen of said house two boys belonging to Mr. Piemont the barber, and also my
brother Hammond Green; upon hearing an huzzaing and the bell ring, I went out,
and there were but 4 or 5 boys in kingstreet near the sentinel, who was
muttering and growling, and seemed very mad. I saw Edward Garrick who was
crying, and told his fellow apprentice that the sentinel had struck him. I then
went as far as the Brazen-Head, and heard the people huzzaing by Murray's
barrack, I went down kingstreet again as far as the corner of royal exchange
lane, by the centry, there being about 40 or 50 people, chiefly boys, near the
Custom-house, but saw no person insult, or say any thing to the centry, I then
said to Bartholomew Broaders these words, viz. the centry (then standing on the
steps and loading his gun) is going to fire; upon which I went to the
Custom-house gate and tried to get over the gate, but could not; whilst
standing there I saw Thomas Greenwood upon the fence, to whom I said, open the
gate; he said that he would not let his father in, and then jumped down into
the lane and said to the deponent follow me, upon which I went down the lane
with him, and round by the Post Office, to the main-guard; he went into the
guardhouse and said turn out the guard, but the guard was out before, and I
heard that a party was gone to the custom-house; I then heard the guns go off,
one after another, and saw three persons fall; immediately after a Negro
drummer beat to arms, upon that the soldiers drew up in a rank, (and I did not
see Greenwood again, until the next morning) after that I saw the 29 th
regiment drawn up in a square at the southwest corner of the townhouse; soon
after I went home, and further I say not.

JOHN GREEN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 24. 1770. John Green, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Jus. Peace and of
the Quorum. JOHN HILL. Just. Peace.


(No. 95.)
I Hammond Green, of lawful age, testify and say, that on the evening of the
5th day of March instant, between the hours of eight and nine o'clock, I went
to the Custom-house; when I came to the front door of the said house, there
were standing two young women belonging to said house, and two boys belonging
to Mr. Piemont the barber; I went into the house and they all followed me,
after that Mr. Sawny Irving came into the kitchen where we were, and afterward
I lighted him out at the front door, I then went back into the kitchen again,
and the boys abovementioned went out; after that two other boys belonging to
Mr. Piemont came into the kitchen, also my brother John, who had been in a
little while before, he went to the back door and opened it, saying that
something was the matter in the street, upon which, with the other three, I
went to the corner of royal exchange-lane in kingstreet, and heard an huzzaing,
as I thought, toward Dr. Cooper's meeting, and then saw one of the first
mentioned boys, who said the centry had struck him; at which time there were
not above eight or nine men and boys in king street, after that I went to the
steps of the Custom-house door, and Mary Rogers, Eliza. Avery, and Ann Green,
came to the door, at the same time heard a bell ring, upon the people's crying
fire, we all went into the house and I locked the door, saying, we shall know
if any body comes; after that, Thomas Greenwood came to the door and I let him
in, he said, that there was a number of people in the street, I told him if he
wanted to see any thing to go up stairs, but to take no candle with him; he
went up stairs, and the three women aforementioned went with him, and I went
and fastened the windows, doors and gate; I left the light in the kitchen, and
was going up stairs, but met Greenwood in the room next to the kitchen, and he
said, that he would not stay in the house, for he was afraid it would be pulled
down, but I was not afraid of any such thing; I then went up stairs into the
lower west chamber, next to royal exchange lane, and saw several guns fired in
king street, which killed three persons which I saw lay on the snow in the
street, supposing the snow to be near a foot deep; after that, I let Eliza.
Avery out of the front door, and shut it after her, and went up chamber again;
then my father, Mr. Bartholomew Green came and knocked at the door, and I let
him in; we both went into the kitchen and he asked me what was the matter, I
told him that there were three persons shot by the soldiers who stood at the
door of the Custom-house; he then asked me where the girls were, I told him
they were up stairs, and we went up together, and he opened the window and I
shut it again directly; he then opened it again and we both looked out; at
which time Mr. Thomas Jackson, jun. knocked at the door, I asked who was there?
Mr. Jackson said, it is I, Hammond let me in; I told him if my father was out,
or any of the commissioners came, I would not let them in. And further I say
not.

HAMMOND GREEN.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 24. 1770. Hammond Green, above named, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. of Peace.


(No. 96.)
I Thomas Greenwood of lawful age, testify and say, that on Monday the 5th
instant spending the evening at Mrs. Wheeler's, I was alarmed by the bells
ringing and people's crying fire, upon which I turned out with Mrs. Wheeler's
three sons and helped Mr. Wheeler's engine as far as the Old South meeting
house, we met several people who told us it was not fire, but it was the
soldiers and inhabitants, fighting in kingstreet and desired them to go back
and get their arms, upon hearing this, I hastened down to kingstreet and coming
near the west door of the town house, I fell in with a number of people, most
of them that I saw had sticks and clubs in their hands and huzza'd, after that
we went round the north side of the town house, and stood between the east
steps of the town house and whipping-post, I heard a number of people speaking,
and one person in particular spoke to the two sentinels, who were walking up
and down the street on the side of the town house, using these words, It may
not be improper to remark here, that the deponent, Thomas Greenwood, is a hired
servant to the Commissioners, on whom he is altogether dependent, and when
before the Justices, he was several times detected in plain falsehoods;
particularly in swearing first that the number of persons who called the
soldiers "bloody back rascals," etc. was nine, then seven, and finally but one,
as it now stands; and through the whole of his examination he was so
inconsistent and so frequently contradicted himself, that all present were
convinced no credit ought to be given to his deposition, for which reason it
would not have been inserted had it not been known that a deposition was taken
relating to this affair, from this Greenwood, by Justice Murray, and carried
home by Mr. Robinson.
come out and fight us if you dare, calling them Damned bloody back rascals and
scoundrels to come out and fight them, if they dared, We are enough for you
now, but I do not know whether the above person belonged to the town; I looked
round and saw about twenty people before the custom-house door, upon which I
went down to the custom house, I then heard two or three persons use these
words, one after another, As this deponent is the only person out of a great
number of witnesses examined, who heard any mention made of the Custom-house,
and as it is very uncommon for several people to repeat exactly the same words
upon such occasions (for the deponent insisted that the identical words were
used by each person) considering the character and connections of the deponent,
and his own express declaration in this affidavit, that he saw no person
attempt even to break a square of glass or to get into the Custom-house, it may
very justly be doubted whether such words were used by any one.
I wish I could get into the Custom House, I would make the money circulate
amongst us, after that I went up to the custom-house door and saw 2 or 3 snow
balls fall on the flat stones near the steps of the door; I knocked and Mr.
Hammond Green came to the door, while I was speaking to the centry, who stood
upon the steps, I told him not to let any body come into the door and no person
offered to come in; the said Green asked who was there, I answered it is Thomas,
let me in Hammond, when I got in, the said Green said to me if I wanted to see
any thing, go up stairs, I went into the back room and got the key of the
little drawing room, being the lower west corner chamber, and went up stairs,
and Elizabeth Avery, Mary Rogers and Ann Green followed me into the room; we
all looked through the glass, I saw some persons standing by the centry-box
striking with sticks, but did not see them hit any body, though a number of
persons were close by them; I told the women above mentioned that I would not
stay, for I was afraid that the house would be pulled down, there being about
forty or fifty persons consisting of men and boys; I saw no person throw any
stones or attempt to break even a square of glass, or get into the house (the
next morning I found there was not a pane of glass broke in the said house.)
Afterward, I went down stairs and met Hammond Green in the middle room; he
asked me where I was going, I told him, I was going out, upon which I went into
the kitchen and took my hat and went into the yard, got upon the wood pile and
went to the fence; John Green being by the gate asked me to open the gate and
let him in, I told him I would not open the gate for any body, one person
passing by, said to me, heave over some shalales, I jumped off the fence into
royal exchange lane, went down the lane with John Green, and went round by the
post office to the main-guard; I told one of the soldiers if they did not go
down to the centry at the Custom-house, It seems very difficult, according to
Greenwood's account, to form even a conjecture of the reason of his fears,
which he expressed for the centry, when in the same breath he declares that he
had not seen any person insult him. -- But probably the true motives of his
application to the main-guard were not of a nature to be made public.
I was afraid they would hurt him, though I had not seen any person insult him,
somebody said they were gone; I stood with John Green near the guard-house, saw
the guns go off and heard the report; afterward I heard a person say, which I
took to be a soldier, that is right, damn them, kill them all, they have no
business there, and from thence I went to the house of Mr. Burch, one of the
Commissioners, where I saw Mr. Burch and wife, Mr. Paxton another Commissioner,
and Mr. Reeves secretary to the Board; one of the Commissioners asked me what
was the matter, I told him the soldiers had fired upon the inhabitants and had
killed two or three, and wounded some more, upon which Mr. Reeves said, God
bless my soul, and then went into the other room. I left Mr. Burch's house and
went to the barracks at Wheelwright's Wharf, and staid there all night; I heard
several soldiers say they wished they were let out, for if they were, there
should not be many people alive in the morning; the whole of the 14th regiment
being under arms, and the piquet guard went to the main guard house about 12
o'clock that night.

THOMAS GREENWOOD.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 24. 1770. Thomas Greenwood, abovenamed, after due
examination, made oath to the truth of the above-written affidavit, taken to
perpetuate the remembrance of the thing. Before JOHN RUDDOCK, Just. Peace and
of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Just. Peace.


BOSTON, the 22. March, 1770.
WE the subscribers, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
of Suffolk (one being of the Quorum) hereby certify, that Col. William
Dalrymple, chief commander of the soldiers in Boston, William Sheaffe, Esquire
deputy collector of the customs, and Bartholomew Green, head of the family in
the Custom-House in Boston, were duly notified to attend the captions of the
affidavits in perpetuam, etc. touching the Massacre by the soldiers in Boston,
taken before us on the 16th, 17th and 19th days of March current; and that the
said William Sheaffe and Bartholomew Green attended accordingly, on the 16th of
March, and cross-examined as many of the deponents as they thought fit and as
long as they pleased, but declined giving any further attendance.

RI: DANA, JOHN HILL.


ERRATUM.
Dele the last five Lines and an half at the Bottom of P. 44. beginning a the
Words [ Mr. Munroe] which through Hurry were printed twice over.

Suffolk, ss. Boston, March 30, 1770
WE do hereby Certify, That the several Copies (...) in the annexed printed
Collection of Affidavits, (...) before us in perpetuam, etc. have been
carefully compa^^^ (...) us with the Originals, and agree therewith.

RI: DANA, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice of Peace.
WE do certify the like, respecting those Affidavits taken before us.

RI: DANA, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. SAM. PEMBERTON, Justice of
Peace.
WE do certify the like, respecting the Affidavit taken before us.

RI: DANA, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN RUDDOCK, Justice of Peace,
and of the Quorum.
WE do certify the like, respecting the Affidavit taken (...) us.

RI: DANA, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN TUDOR, Justice of the
Peace.
WE do certify the like, respecting those Affidavits (...) before us.

JOHN RUDDOCK, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN HILL, Justice of
Peace.
WE do certify the like, respecting those Affidavits (...) before us.

JOHN RUDDOCK, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. BELCHER NOYES, Justice
o'Peace.
WE do certify the like, respecting the Affidavit taken before us.

JOHN RUDDOCK, Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum. JOHN TUDOR, Justice of
Peace.
I do hereby certify, That the Copy of an Affidavit (^^^tained in the annexed
printed Collection of Affidavits.) (...) before me, has been carefully compared
by me with the original, and agrees therewith.

EDM. QUINCY, J. PACIS.

SEAL. T. HUTCHINSON.
By the Honorable THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief, in and over his Majesty's Province of Massachusetts Bay in New England.
I Do hereby Certify that Richard Dana and John Ruddock, Esquires, are two of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace and of the Quorum for the County of
Suffolk, within the aforesaid Province; and that John Hill, Edmund Quincy,
^^^cher N^yes, John Tudor and Samuel Pemberton, Esquires, are Justices of the
Peace for the same County, and that full Faith and Credit is and ought to be
given to their several Acts and Attestations (as on the annexed Paper) both in
Court and without.

In Testimony whereof I have caused the Public Seal of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay abovesaid to be hereunto affixed. Dated at Boston the
Thirtieth Day of March 1770. In the tenth Year of his Majesty's Reign.

By his Honor's Command, JOHN COTTON, D. Sec'ry.
THREE original Certificates of the foregoing Tenor, with the Province Seal
affixed to them, are signed by the Lieutenant Governor, and annexed to three
printed Copies of this Pamphlet.

Two of them will be sent to London for the Satisfaction of such Gentlemen in
England as incline to see the Originals: viz. One of them to WILLIAM BOLLAN,
Esquire and the other to DENNIS DEBERTDT, Esquire -- The third remains with the
Committee.



AN INDEX TO THE APPENDIX.
A
ADAMS Matthew, Page 10 Allen Jeremiah, Page 50 Allen Joseph, Page 67 Alline
Benjamin, Page 46 Allman John, Page 69 Andrews Benjamin, Esquire Page 72 Appleton
Nathaniel, Page 17 Archbald Francis, jun. Page 35 Atwood Samuel. Page 21
B
BASS Henry, Page 14 Bass Gillam, Page 46 Belknap Jeremiah, Page 18 Bostwick
Samuel, Page 13 Bourgate Charlotte, Page 44 Brailsford John, Page 9 Brailsford
Mary, Page 8 Broaders Bartholomew, Page 23 Brown John, Page 12 Burdick
Benjamin, jun. Page 28
C
CAIN Thomas Page 31 Calfe Daniel, Page 25 Cato, Page 56 Church Benjamin, jun.
Page 69 Coburn John, Page 19 Cochran David, Page 2 Condon Samuel, Page 33
Copeland Asa, Page 8 Coster George, Page 53 Crafts Edward, Page 66 Cunningham
Peter. Page 32
D
DORR Ebenezer, Page 65 Drown Samuel. Page 54
F
FALLASS William, Page 68 Fenno Ephraim, Page 71 Feriter Nicholas, Page 3
Fisher John, Page 4 Fosdick Nathaniel, Page 36 Frizel Benjamin. Page 48
G
GAMMEL John, Page 44 Gardner Mary, Page 68 Goddard John, Page 25 Goddard
Robert, Page 57 Gray John. Page 5 Green John, Page 72 Green Hammond, Page 73
Greenwood Thomas, Page 75
H
HEWES George Robert Twelves, Page 61 Hickling John, Page 59 Hill John, Esquire
Page 5 Hinckley Ebenezer, Page 34 Hobby Charles, Page 29 Hooton Joseph, Jun.
Page 37
J
JACKSON Thomas, Jun. Page 62
K
KING Matthias, Page 22 Kirkwood James, Capt. Page 21 Kneeland Bartholomew,
Page 17 Knox Henry. Page 42
L
LEACH John, Jun. Page 27 LeBaron William* Page 15 Lewis William. ^^ Loring
David. Page 71
M
McNeil Archibald, Page 6 Marshall Thomas, Esquire Page 26 Mason Jonathan, Page 64
Morton Dimond. Page 47
N
NEWHALL William, Page 3 Noyes Nathaniel. Page 9
P
PALMS Richard, Page 38 Parker Isaac, Page 16 Patterson Robert, Page 55 Pain
Edward, Page 43 Pierce Isaac, Page 65 Pierpont Robert, Page 12 Polley Robert.
Page 20
R
READ Francis, Page 47 Rhodes William, Page 70 Richardson Jeffrey, Page 4
Riordan John, Page 63 Russell Mary. Page 70
S
SIMPSON Josiah, Page 50 Swan Caleb, Page 11 Swansborough Margaret. Page 11
T
TANT William, Page 30 Thayer Nathaniel, Page 16 Thayer Mary, Page 7 Tuckerman
Abraham, Page 63 Tyler William. Page 13
U
USHER Daniel, Page 57 Usher Jane. Page 10
W
WALKER Spencer, Page 64 Ward Richard, Page 10 Whiston Obadiah, Page 60 Wilme
John, Page 1 Wilme Sarah, Page 2 Willson John, Page 52 Wyat William. Page 40

