DIRECTIONS FOR THE BREEDING AND MANAGEMENT OF SILKWORMS.

Extracted from the TREATISES of The Abbe Boissier de Sauvages, and Pullein.

WITH A PREFACE, GIVING SOME ACCOUNT Of the RISE and PROGRESS OF THE SCHEME For
encouraging the CULTURE OF SILK, In PENNSYLVANIA, and the adjacent COLONIES.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, and ISAAC COLLINS.

M,DCC,LXX.

THE PREFACE.
THOSE who have introduced useful arts into any country, and laid a foundation
for increasing its wealth and employing its industrious inhabitants, have ever
been esteemed benefactors to mankind. Whether the scheme, which is set on foot
for promoting the culture of silk in this part of America, may soon come to
that perfection which is hoped for, is a matter that must greatly depend on the
conduct and perseverance of those who may employ themselves in it. Some
account, however, of the rise of the design, and of the steps taken to carry it
into execution, is not only due in justice to those who have so liberally
promoted and encouraged it, but may likewise be a piece of acceptable history
to future times.

IT is often from small beginnings, that the most beneficial schemes, and
advantageous branches of commerce, have sprung; and the genius of a people,
however favorable to the best design, might long rest unexerted, were not a
few to take the lead and conduct, for the rest.

THE art of manufacturing silk from the bag or cocoon, in which the bombyx or
silkworm wraps itself up, is said to have been first invented in the island of
Cos, The Ser from which the Seres were said to have raised silk, before the art
was known in Cos, was not the same as the Italian silkworm, which dies
annually, but a sort of spider or beetle that lived five years.
in the Archipelago; and a woman, Pamphila, is honored as the inventress. Yet
the Romans, amid all their improvements, did not avail themselves of this
discovery, till the seat of their empire was changed, and two monks, in the
year 555, coming from the Indies to Constantinople, ""brought with them great
quantities of the silkworms eggs, with instructions for hatching them, rearing
and feeding the worms, drawing out the silk, and spinning and working it. Upon
this, the art was carried to Athens, Thebes and Corinth, then, by workmen from
thence, into Sicily, and gradually over all the rest of Italy and Spain, till
at length it was introduced into France Vid. CHAM. Dic. on the word Silk.
But none of these establishments were effected without difficulty at first,
nor carried into execution without public encouragement.

To any person who will cast an eye on a map of the world, it must be natural
to conclude, that this country is well adapted to the raising of silk, as lying
so nearly in the same climate and latitude not only with the parts
abovementioned, but likewise with several parts of Persia, and the great
empire of China, where this commodity is cultivated to great advantage; and we
have accordingly not been without many curious persons, who have, for several
years, made very successful essays in breeding worms, and raising silk. But, in
particular, some judicious and inquisitive members of the American
Philosophical Society have paid a close attention to this matter, and have
convinced themselves, by their own experience, that the silkworm thrives and
works as well here, and produces a silk of as good quality in all respects, as
in any part of the world. The promoting the culture of silk, therefore, had
often been mentioned in that society, within the last year, as one of those
public-spirited designs which it became them to promote. But it was not till
the 5th of January last that they entered into a final resolution on that
matter; upon a letter being laid before them from Dr. Franklin to one of the
members, in answer to a letter which he had written to the Doctor on the same
subject. A committee was then appointed by the society to frame a plan for
promoting the culture of silk, and to prepare an address to the Honorable
House of Assembly, praying some public encouragement of the design.

The letter and address are as follow, viz.

Extract of a Letter from BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, Esquire; to Doctor EVANS.
I SEND you a late French treatise on the management of silkworms; it is said
to be the best hitherto published, being written in the silk country by a
gentlemen well acquainted with the whole affair. Some extracts from it, of the
principal directions might be of use, if you would translate and publish them.
I think the bounty is offered for silk from all the colonies in general -- I
will send you the act -- But I believe it must be wound from the cocoons, and
sent over in skains. The cocoons would spoil in the passage, by the dead worm
corrupting and staining the silk. A public filature should be set up for
winding them there. In Italy they are all brought to market, from the
neighboring country, and bought up by those that keep the filature.

IF some provision were made by the Assembly for promoting the growth of It was
thought that the Intention would be more effectually answered by giving the
premiums and bounties on the silk raised, than on the trees planted; for the
experience of a neighboring government shows that a bounty on mulberry-trees,
though it may make people plant, yet it does not necessarily follow, that,
because they have trees, they will raise silkworms.
mulberry-trees in all parts of the province, the culture of silk might
afterward follow easily: for the great discouragement to the breeding worms at
first, is the difficulty of getting leaves, and the being obliged to go far for
them.

THERE is no doubt with me, but that it might succeed in our country. It is the
happiest of all inventions for clothing. Wool uses a good deal of land to
produce it, which is employed in raising corn, would afford much more
subsistence for man, than the mutton amounts to. Flax and hemp require good
land, impoverish it, and at the same time permit it to produce no food at all:
but mulberry-trees may be planted in hedge-rows, in walks or avenues, or for
shade near a house, where nothing else is wanted to grow. The food for the
worms, who produce the silk, is in the air; and the ground under the trees may
still produce grass, or some other vegetable, good for man or beast. -- Then
the wear of silken garments continues so much longer from the strength of the
materials, as to give it greatly the preference. Thence it is that the most
populous of all countries, China, clothes its inhabitants with silk, while it
seeds them plentifully; and has besides a vast quantity both raw and
manufactured to spare for exportation.

RAW silk here, in skains well wound, sells from twenty to twenty-five
shillings per 1b. But if badly wound is not worth five shillings. Well wound is
when the threads are made to cross each other every where in the skain, and
only touch where they cross. Badly wound, is where they are laid parrallel to
each other; for so they are glued together, break in rewinding here, and take a
vast deal of time more than the other, by losing the end every time the thread
breaks.


To the Honorable the Representatives of the Freemen of the Province of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met;
The REPRESENTATION and PETITION of the American Philosophical Society, held at
Philadelphia, for promoting useful Knowledge, SHOWS,
THAT on the 5th of January last, an extract of a letter from Dr. Franklin,
their President, to Dr. Evans, (it is inserted above) was laid before the said
society; recommending the culture of silk in this province, and setting forth
some of the many advantages that would attend the same.

THAT the society, being truly sensible that it behooves the people of this
province to forward every undertaking that will better employ its industrious
inhabitants, especially the poor and their children, did appoint their
committee for American improvements, to prepare and lay before them a scheme
for promoting the culture of silk, as what might be very beneficial to the
community, and employ many hands, whose industry could not be turned to any
account more profitable to ourselves, or more acceptable to our mother country.

THAT the said committee, in pursuance of their trust, met frequently, and have
taken due pains to inform themselves of the nature of the design, and the best
method of prosecuting it, for which purpose the following scheme has been
proposed by them, and approved by the society, viz.

THAT as this province, where the mulberry-tree is of spontaneous growth, is
well adapted for raising silkworms, and what seems chiefly wanting to promote
the culture of silk, is that cocoons or balls be made a ready merchantable
commodity to all who choose to sell them, and that there be a cheap and easy
method of winding them for those who choose to work up their silk for their own
use; it is therefore proposed,

1. THAT a public filature be established at Philadelphia, and afterward at
such other places in the province as may be thought necessary, for winding the
cocoons.

2. THAT proper managers of the filature be appointed, with power to employ a
sit person or persons to wind, at reasonable rates, the cocoons of all those
who may choose to work up their own silk, and to purchase and wind for the
public account, all cocoons that may be offered for sale at the filature.

3. THAT to encourage all persons to cultivate mulberrytrees, raise silkworms,
and bring their cocoons to the filature, the managers be empowered and enabled
to pay for cocoons, during five years, the current price which cocoons of the
like quality sell for in Georgia; and as a further encouragement to pay at the
rate of 25 per cent. on the value for all cocoons raised in this province, and
brought to the filature; and, besides the above encouragement, it is proposed,
as an inducement to raise large quantities of cocoons -- to bestow the
following yearly premiums, viz. for the year 1770, L15 to that person who shall
raise and bring to the filature the greatest quantity of cocoons not less than
30,000, and L10 to that person who shall raise and bring the next greatest
quantity not less than 20,000. In 1771, L15 for the greatest quantity not less
than 40,000, and L10 for the next greatest quantity not less than 30,000. In
1772, L15 for the greatest quantity not less than 50,000, and L10 for the next
greatest quantity not less than 40,000. In 1773, L15 for the greatest quantity
not less than 60,000, and L10 for the next greatest quantity not less than
50,000; and in 1774, L15 for the greatest quantity not less than 70,000, and
L10 for the next greatest quantity not less than 60,000. The above premiums are
likewise to be limited to cocoons raised in this province. It has been thought
proper, since drawing up this Address, to extend the premiums to the adjacent
provinces. See page xvi.




4. THAT to enable the managers to pay the aforesaid premiums, establish the
filature, purchase cocoons and employ their servants, it seems necessary that a
sum not less than L500 per annum should be appropriated during the aforesaid
term of five years.

The society therefore pray,

THAT the Honorable House of Assembly, as the natural patrons of every scheme
which requires the public countenance and assistance, would be pleased to
nominate and appoint proper Managers of this undertaking, with power to receive
out of the provincial treasury the aforesaid yearly sum in such proportions as
may be necessary; and that all silk purchased and wound at the filature, on the
account of this scheme together with the floss, be exposed to public sale from
time to time, and the produce thereof, together with the moneys received for
winding cocoons, be duly accounted for to such persons as may be appointed for
that purpose, and remain in the stock for carrying on this design.

IF the society have the pleasure to find that this scheme meets with such
encouragement from the House, that some progress is likely to be made therein,
the ensuing season, it is proposed to write immediately to Georgia and Carolina
for a quantity of the silk moths eggs, to distribute to such persons as may
undertake to propagate silkworms, all which is respectfully submitted.

Signed in behalf, and by unanimous desire, of the Society at their meeting,
February 2, 1770. THOMAS BOND, V. P. SAMUEL RHOADS, V. P.



FROM the just sense which the Members of Assembly appeared to have of the
utility of this scheme, there is reason to expect that they will soon find some
means of placing it on a permanent footing; and the concurrence and assent of
his Honor the GOVERNOR, in every proper way, cannot be doubted, from the
countenance he has already given toward it. And indeed this design is so far
a happy one, that while it promises to be so advantageous to ourselves, it
interferes with no commercial interest of the mother country, but on the
contrary co-operates with the intention of the Parliament, who have granted
large premiums on all silk, the produce of the colonies, that may be imported
into GreatBritain.

BUT as the Assembly, before their last adjournment, had not sufficient leisure
to fix a fund for this design, and it being apprehended that if the ensuing
season were suffered to pass, without doing something toward it, the present
favorable disposition of the people might be abated, it was therefore resolved
to make a beginning by subscription; and the liberal spirit shown on that
occasion does honor to the province, as will appear by the list of
subscriptions hereunto annexed; which were made in a few days, and the
following Managers, and Treasurer, chosen, pursuant to the terms of the
subscription, viz. -- Dr. CADWALADER EVANS, ISRAEL PEMBERTON, BENJAMIN MORGAN,
MOSES BARTRAM, Dr. FRANCIS ALISON, Dr. WILLIAM SMITH, JOHN RHEA, SAMUEL RHOADS,
THOMAS FISHER, OWEN BIDDLE, HENRY DRINKER, ROBERT STRETTELL JONES, Managers.
EDWARD PENNINGTON, Treasurer.

THE managers as soon as they were chosen applied themselves with diligence and
attention to the execution of their trust, keeping three objects principally in
view, viz.

1. To remove the difficulties that have formerly stood in the way of those who
have attempted the culture of silk in this province.

2. To cooperate with, and encourage the laudable spirit of those who may
employ themselves in this way. And,

3. To give plain and useful directions for prosecuting the plan to the best
advantage.

As to the first, it was considered that the principal discouragement had
hitherto been the difficulty of reeling off the cocoons or balls, after being
raised, so as to render the silk fit for private use, or for a market. Reeling
properly is an art, only to be acquired by practice; and were every family to
perform this part for themselves, it would be attended not only with much loss
of time, but likewise with great loss and spoiling of their silk before they
could become expert. A public filature, therefore, where this branch of the
business is committed to persons properly instructed in the art of reeling the
silk, and supplied with proper machines, has been adopted in silk countries as
the most advantageous method; and the managers have accordingly procured a
proper house for a filature, and hope, in a short time, to have it furnished
with the necessary machines and skilful persons to reel and wind cocoons, at
reasonable rates for such as may apply to them.

As to the second article, the making the culture of silk profitable to all who
may choose to turn it into merchandise, they will not only have the advantage
abovementioned, of having their cocoons well reeled; but, if they choose to
sell, the prices that will be given at the filature, and the premiums proposed
in the paper hereunto annexed, it is hoped, will be a sufficient inducement.

WITH respect to the last article, the giving such plain directions as might
enable all, who may be so disposed, to prosecute the business to the best
advantage, the managers had but little left for them to do. One Dr. Cadwalader
Evans.
of them had received from Dr. Franklin, with the letter above mentioned, some
French treatises on the culture of silk wrote by the Abbe Boissier, which he
immediately put into the hands of an ingenious member of the American
Philosophical Society residing at Burlington, requesting a translation of them.
This task was readily undertaken by that member, and executed in a very
judicious manner, though at the expense of considerable labor to himself, as
will appear from the following account which he gives of the method he pursued,
taken from his own letters of February 15th and March 2d, on that subject.

I am to beg your pardon for having so long delayed what, at your request, I
undertook -- the making a short collection of rules and observations from the
four pamphlets which our worthy friend Dr. Franklin transmitted to you for the
instruction of our countrymen in the European method of breeding and managing
silkworms; and, in the next place, to request that this collection may be
improved by such corrections and additions as you shall think requisite.

I found it would be an endless task to select passages to be translated. The
Abbe is tedious, minute and philosophical -- I therefore took this method --
First I read over, with attention, one pamphlet after another; and then, while
the subject was fresh in my memory, sat down and endeavored to give in my own
way, as briefly as possible, an account of the most necessary rules, as hints
for experience to improve and correct.

J. ODELL

THAT there might be nothing wanting in the way of directions, four of the
manager, collected from Pullein's treatise whatever might further elucidate the
French treatises, or which proposed any different methods of doing any part of
the work, in order that, on a comparison of both, experience might fix the best
method at last. The Extracts from Pullein are added as an appendix.

THE managers are afraid that they shall be disappointed in the eggs of the
silk-moth, which they expected from Georgia and Carolina. For though several
gentlemen wrote to those provinces in February last for a supply, yet as the
season is so far advanced they are apprehensive that the eggs may be hatched
before they arrive, as has been the case with some already sent from Carolina,
notwithstanding all the care taken in packing to keep them back. However a
sufficient supply will be procured the next fall; and it is hoped, in the mean
time, that there are eggs enough in this and the neighboring provinces, to
make full experiments during the ensuing summer, to convince every person that
the culture of silk here may be rendered a very valuable addition to our staple
commodities. -- It may-be nevertheless prudent for every person to preserve a
supply of their own eggs for the next year.

UPON the whole, the managers flatter themselves that the directions herewith
given, and encouragement proposed, will be a sufficient inducement, for all who
have the opportunities, to consult their own interest and that of their
country, in raising what silk they can, the ensuing season.

IT has been observed, in a former publication; that where the mulberry-trees
are convenient, two persons will attend and feed the worms produced from six
ounces of eggs, until within ten or twelve days of the time they begin to spin;
and that, during this last period, only four or five hands more (and those
chiefly children) will be necessary to complete the labor. That quantity of
eggs, in the silk countries commonly yields from 50 to 60 pounds of reeled
silk, and in a favorable season more; the value of which, including the
parliamentary premium (which will be allowed in the price at the filature) will
be upwards of One Hundred Pounds -- a sum which few of our farmers are able to
raise from a plantation of two or three hundred acres. And yet to produce this
in silk, as appears above, will only require the labor of two hands for the
first three weeks, and but the labor of about six or seven hands (children
included) for the last ten days; and all the food required for the worms
necessary to raise this, may be produced from about sixty well-grown
mulberry-trees, which may stand in hedge-rows, or any where near the
dwelling house, without much injury to the ground for other uses.

BUT suppo^ng 20,000 farmers in the province, and only one in ten should raise
as many worms as could be supported by six mulberry-trees, and the attendance
of one or two hands for about six weeks, Ten Pounds worth of silk for each
plantation might be hereby produced, which would amount to twenty thousand
pounds -- a valuable addition to the commodities of this province! And what
ought to be a further incitement is this, that whenever the balls or cocoons
are spun by the worm, those who choose to sell them will, by the present
scheme, find a ready market at the filature, and have the money in hand to
purchase necessaries for the harvest. From these considerations, and many more
that might be added, the managers hope that their countrymen will exert
themselves with their usual spirit, on the present occasion.

A LIST of the SUBSCRIBERS for promoting the CULTURE of SILK.
The Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire, Governor of Pennsylvania, L20.
A
William Allen, Esquire; L15 0 William Alison 3 0 Dr. Francis Alison 2 0 William
Ashbridge 2 0 Daniel Ashbridge 2 0 Thomas Asheton 2 0 William Allibone 2 0
Matthias Aspden 2 0 John Allen, Esquire; 2 0 Andrew Allen, Esquire; 2 0 B
Dr. Thomas Bond L3 0 James Biddle, Esquire; 2 0 Jonathan Brown 2 0 David Beveridge
2 0 Owen Biddle 2 0 John Brown 2 0 Jacob Barge 2 0 Isaac Bartram 2 0 Moses
Bartram 2 0 Philip Benezet L2 0 Barnaby Barnes 2 0 Samuel Burge 2 0 Clement
Biddle 2 0 Alexander Bartram 2 0 John Bringhurst 2 0 Andrew Bunner 2 0 Abraham
Bickley 2 0 Samuel Bryan 2 0 Thomas Bartow, jun. 2 0 John Benezet 2 0 Job Bacon
2 0 Joseph Bullock 2 0 Robert Bridges 2 0 William Bradford 2 0 John Bayard 2 0
William Bettle 2 0 Andrew Bankson 2 0 James Budden 2 0 George Bartram 2 0
Thomas Bradford L2 0 Daniel Byrne 2 0 C
John Cadwalader L6 0 Dr. Tho. Cadwalader 3 0 John Cox, jun. 3 0 Isaac Cox 3 0
George Clymer 2 10 Stephen Carmick 2 0 Samuel Carsan 2 0 W. Cliffton, Southwark
2 0 Thomas Clifford 2 0 Joseph Carsan 2 0 John Correy 2 0 Dr. Gerardus Clarkson
2 0 Samuel Caldwell 2 0 Andrew Caldwell 2 0 Stephen Collins 2 0 William Craig 2
0 Peter Chevalier 2 0 Thomas Coombe 2 0 Curtis Clay 2 0 Daniel Clymer, Esquire; 2 0
John Chevalier 2 0 James Craig 1 10 Thomas C^nby 1 0 D
Henry Drinker L5 0 Jacob Duche, jun. 3 0 Andrew Doz 3 0 John Drinker, jun. 3 0
William Drewry 2 0 David Deshler 2 0 Samuel Davis 2 0 Edward Duffield 2 0 Dr.
Samuel Duffield 2 0 Jacob Duche, Esquire; 2 0 Sharp Delaney 2 0 Joseph Dean 2 0
Peter Dehaven 2 0 Dr. John Day 1 15 James Davidson 1 0 Arthur Donaldson 1 0 E
Samuel Emlen, jun. L4 0 Dr. Cadwalader Evans 3 0 Joel Evans 2 0 Adam Ekart 2 0
George Emlen, sen. 2 0 Richard Edwards 2 0 George Emlen, jun. 2 0 Robert Erwin
2 0 Samuel Emlen 1 0 F
Joseph Fox, Esquire; L5 0 Soshua Fisher 5 0 David Franks 3 0 Caleb Foulke 2 0
Thomas Fisher 2 0 Samuel Fisher 2 0 Thomas Foxcrost 2 0 Benjamin Fuller 2 0
John Fullerton 2 0 George Fullerton 2 0 William Fishbourne 2 0 William Fisher 2
0 Plunket Fleeson 2 0 Turbut Francis, Esquire; 2 0 Moore Furman 2 0 G
Jos. Galloway, Esquire; L10 0 John Gibson, Esquire; 3 0 Isaac Greenlease 3 0 Benjamin
Gibbs 2 10 Walter Goodman 2 0 Isaac Gray 2 0 H
Ja. Hamilton, Esquire; L15 0 Henry Hill 5 0 William Hamilton, Esquire; 5 0 John Head 5
0 Richard Hockley, Esquire; 3 0 David Hall 3 0 Sam. Howell, Merchant 3 0 Joshua
Howell 3 0 Adam Hubley 2 0 Joseph Hilborne 2 0 William Henry 2 0 Jacob Harman 2
0 Benjamin Harbeson L2 0 Micheal Hillegas, Esquire; 2 0 Reuben Haines 2 0 Isaac
Hazelhurst 2 0 John W. Hoffman 2 0 John Hunter 2 0 Jacob Hiltzheimer 2 0 Josiah
Hewes 2 0 Francis Hammitt 2 0 Jonathan Humphreys 2 0 James Humphreys, Esquire; 1 0
Joseph Howell 1 0 William Henderson 1 0 I
R. Strettell Jones L3 0 Francis Johnson 2 10 William Jackson 2 0 Daniel Joy 2
0 Owen Jones, 2 0 James Irvine 2 0 Edward Jones 2 0 John Inglis 2 0 James
Johnston 2 0 Dominick Joyce 2 0 Levi Hollingsworth 2 0 William Jones 2 0 John
Johnston 1 10 K
Frederick Kuhl L3 0 Reynold Keen 3 0 Philip Kinsey 2 0 Abraham Kentzing 2 0
John Kaighn 2 0 Peter Knight 2 0 Benjamin Kendall 2 0 Henry Keppele 2 0 Dr.
John Kearsley, jun. 2 0 L
Lynford Lardner, Esquire; L6 0 william Logan, Esquire; 5 0 Benjamin Loxley 3 0
Alexander Lunan 2 0 Ellis Lewis 2 0 James Logan 2 0 Robert Lewis 2 0 Tho.
Livezey, Esquire; L2 0 Abraham Liddon 2 0 John Lukens, Esquire; 2 0 John Lownes 2 0
Samuel Lewis 2 0 Jacob Lewis 2 0 James Loughead 1 10 M
Anth. Morris, sen. L9 0 George Meade 5 0 Dr. Samuel P. Moore 5 0 Archobald
M'Call 5 0 Benjamin Morgan 5 0 Janathan Mifflin 5 0 Samuel Morton 4 0 Samuel
Miles 3 0 Robert Morris 3 0 William Moore 3 0 Stephen Moylan 3 0 Dr. Charles
Moore 3 0 John Mifflin 3 0 Cadwalader Morris 2 0 John Mitchell 2 0 Matthew
Mease 2 0 Anthony Morris, jun. 2 0 Edward Milnor 2 0 Joseph Mather 2 0
Christian Minnick 2 0 John Morris 2 0 Peter Miller 2 0 James Mease 2 0 Thomas
Murgatoryd 2 0 Samuel Mifflin, Esquire; 2 0 James Maccubbin 2 0 Jesse Maris 2 0
Thomas Mifflin 2 0 Levy Marks 2 0 John Morton 2 0 John Morris, Esquire; 2 0 Christ.
Marshall, jun. 2 0 Anthony C. Morris 2 0 Samuel Morris, jun. 2 0 Joseph Morris
2 0 Alexander Mackrabie 2 0 Blair M' Clenachan 2 0 M'Neil and Tolbert L2 0 Dr.
John Morgan 2 0 William Morrell 1 10 N
Samuel Neave L5 0 John Nixon 3 0 Richard Neave jun. 2 0 Samuel Noble 2 0
Conyngham and Nesbit 3 0 P
Israel Pemberton L10 0 Dr. Richard Peter's 6 0 James Pemberton, Esquire; 5 0 John
Pemberton 5 0 Joseph Pemberton 3 0 Charles Pemberton 3 0 Samuel Pleasants 3 0
Thomas Pryor 3 0 Edward Penington 3 0 James Penrose 2 0 William Pusey 2 0
Stephen Paschall 2 0 Richard Peter's, Esquire; 2 0 Isaac Parrish 2 0 Thomas Penrose
2 0 Samuel Purviance 2 0 William Parr, Esquire; 2 0 Thomas Paschall 2 0 Joseph Paul
2 0 Jonathan Paul 2 0 Jacob Paul 2 0 William Pollard 2 0 Dr. Frederick Phile 2
0 John Phillips 2 0 John Pringle 2 0 Samuel Powell 2 0 Edward Pole 2 0 James
Pearson 2 0 Isaac Paschall 2 0 Joseph Paschall 2 0 Joseph Penrose 2 0 John Paul
2 0 R
John Reynell L5 0 William Richards 5 0 John Rhea L3 0 Sam. Rhoads, Esquire; 3 0
Joseph Richardson, Esquire; 3 0 Hugh Roberts 3 0 John Ross, Esquire; 3 0 William Rush 3
0 George Roberts 2 0 Dr. Benjamin Rush 2 0 James Reynolds 2 0 Abraham Robinson
2 0 Robert Ri^chie 2 0 Joseph Russell 2 0 James Rose 2 0 Peter Reeve 2 0
Francis Richardson 2 0 John Ross, Merchant 2 0 John Roberts, miller 2 0
Benjamin Rawle 2 0 James Read 2 0 Samuel Rhoads, jun. 2 0 S
Sa. Shoemaker, Esquire; L3 0 Dr. William Smith 3 0 Stephen Shewell 3 0 John Swift,
Esquire; 3 0 Philip Sing 3 0 William Standley 2 10 Joanthan Smith 2 0 William
Smith, broker 2 0 Joseph Sermon 2 0 John Stamper, Esquire; 2 0 Joseph Stamper 2 0
Joseph Sims 2 0 Samuel Sansom, jun. 2 0 Samuel Smith, jun. 2 0 George Schlosser
2 0 John Shoemaker 2 0 William Sitgreaves 2 0 John She 2 0 Buckridge Sims 2 0
Joseph Swift 2 0 Capt. Thomas Smith 2 0 Walter She 2 0 Bertles She 2 0 Joseph
Saunders 2 0 Thomas Say L2 0 Charles Starten 2 0 Jacob Shoemaker, jun. 2 0 Dr.
Wm. Shippen, jun. 2 0 Peter Stretch 2 0 Edw. Shippen, jun. Esquire; 2 0 William
Shute 1 10 T
Godfrey Twells L2 0 Tench Tilghman 2 0 Robert Towers 2 0 Charles Thompson 2 0
Andrew Tybout 2 0 Robert Taggatt 2 0 V
John Vanderen L2 0 Abraham Usher 2 0 W
Jos. Wharton, sen. L10 0 Jacob Winey 5 0 Thomas Willing, Esquire; 3 0 Jeremiah
Warder 3 0 William West 3 0 Nicholas Waln, Esquire; 3 0 Robert Waln 3 0 Charles
West 3 0 Benjamin Wynkoop L2 10 Tho. Wharton, jun. 2 0 William Wishart 2 0
Isaac Wharton 2 0 Bryan Wilkinson 2 0 Thomas West 2 0 Philip Wilson 2 0 John
Wharton 2 0 James Wharton 2 0 John White 2 0 James Worrall 2 0 Alex. Wilcocks,
Esquire; 2 0 William Wister 2 0 John Wood 2 0 Isa. Whitelock, Lancaster 2 0 William
White 2 0 Joseph Watkins, jun. 2 0 Richard Waln 2 0 Joseph Wharton, jun. 2 0
Uriah Woolman 2 0 Richard Wister 2 0 John Wilday 2 0 John Wilcocks 2 0 Lewis
Weiss 2 0 Daniel Williams 1 19 Charles Wharton 1 0

TO the PUBLIC.
THE rates will be speedily published in the New-papers, at which cocoons or
balls will be reeled at the filature in Philadelphia, and also the price which
the managers will give for all cocoons brought to them for sale, whether
produced in this Province or the adjacent ones, or whether from the American or
Italian silkworm.

OVER and above the price, which will be the full amount of what such cocoons
could be sold for in any part of America, the managers are empowered, as a
further encouragment to the inhabitants of this Province, to pay them L25 per
cent on the value of all cocoons that may be purchased from them.

The following PREMIUMS will likewise be given.

I. TO that person in Pennsylvania, or in the three lower counties on Delaware,
or in the Jersies or Maryland, who shall, on or before the first day of
September next, raise within his or her family, and sell at the filature, the
greatest quantity of sound cocoons, not less than thirty thousand, the premium
of FIFTEEN POUNDS.

II. TO that person, in either of the said provinces, or counties, who shall
raise and sell as aforesaid, the next greatest quantity, not less than twenty
thousand, the premium of TEN POUNDS. Both these premiums exclusive of the price
as aforesaid.

THE managers will notify in the Newspapers, in due time, the manner in which
persons, claiming the premiums, must bring their proofs that the cocoons were
raised in their own family.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE BREEDING AND MANAGEMENT OF SILKWORMS, etc.
SECTION I.
Of the Silkworms Eggs.
1. AT first their color is a pale yellow. Within five or six days after they
are laid, this color changes by degrees to a darker; and then those eggs are
said to be of the best sort, which are of a gray ash color, inclining to a
tarnished purple. If the first color continues unchanged, it is a certain mark
that the eggs are unimpregnated and barren.

2. THE best eggs may be spoiled, by a stifled heat, by a moist air, by being
pent up in tight vessels, or by being amassed together in any considerable
quantities. The eggs, which are spoiled by any of these means, turn either to a
whitish or a brown color; and, either they do not crack under the nail, and
are so light as to swim in water; or else, when they are cracked, their liquor
is fluid and watery, which ought to be slimy and thick.

3. To prevent these evils, keep your eggs (as they are first laid) upon
separate pieces of rag or paper, and in a dry fresh air. In this manner they
may be sent to any distance, with a cover, in form of a letter; only taking
care, that, if several pieces are put into one packet, they be kept from
rubbing together by slips of rag or paper laid between them.

4. FROM the time that your eggs are laid, till you set them to hatch, they
should be kept from the two extremes of heat and cold. As soon, therefore, as
they are laid, put them away in the coolest place you can find about the house,
or in the cellar; only taking care that they be not stifled by a damp or a
confined air, nor exposed to be devoured by mice or other vermin: if your
cellar therefore be damp or close, you must choose some other place. And, to
secure them from vermin, you may put them in a large basket, covered at the top
with a thin linen cloth, and suspended by a string from the cieling. When the
cold weather sets in and threatens frost, you may move them into a room where
you keep a constant fire, and hang them up, as before, but at a good distance
from the fire. The room should be large, and the cieling pretty high; for they
do not require a greater warmth than about ten degrees above freezing. And,
indeed, a very strong frost would not kill the worm in the egg; but the
inconveniences, arising from the eggs having been so chilled, are, that such
eggs can not easily be made to hatch together, nor at the proper season; unless
you force them by such a degree of heat as, by the sudden perspiration it
occasions in the egg, enfeebles or perhaps destroys the worm. As the spring
approaches, if the weather should turn unseasonably warm, remove your eggs
again to a cool place.

5. LASTLY, Keep your eggs always clean, and free from every kind of fat or
oily substances.

SECTION II.
Of hatching the Silkworms Eggs.
AS I must all along endeavor to adapt the directions and observations of my
author to our own climate, the reader will please to consider what I say to be
often no more than hints and conjectures, which can only be tried by
experience. And yet I hope those hints may be of use in directing us to the
knowledge of such experiments as are necessary to be made, and in what manner
to make them.

THE eggs, if properly preserved, according to the directions given in the
first Section, would, without more ado, as the spring advances, be hatched by
the natural warmth of the season. But, in every country where the breeding of
silkworms is well understood, the people have been taught, by long experience,
that in this affair nature requires the assistance of art. Accordingly, in
China, in Persia, in Italy, France and Spain, they avail themselves of
artificial means in the hatching of these beneficial insects, and indeed in the
breeding and management of them through every stage of their existence. At
first, we may be apt to imagine that here, as in most other instances, art is
not so good a nurse as nature; and that, in their own country and climate at
least, silkworms would do best if left to shift for themselves in the open air.
But the fact is far otherwise. There is no country where they can be rendered
profitable to man, but by the means of artificial management. If they were to
be left abroad upon the trees, they would become the pray of birds, flies and
other insects.

BUT, to return from this digression, the two principal things to be regarded
in the hatching of silkworms, are the time when, and the manner how.

I. WITH respect to the time, if the season were uniform, an infalliable rule
might be given, which would be, that the worms ought to come out with the first
appearance of the mulberry leaf, which is to be their only food. If they come
out sooner, they must starve. If a scarcity of food should be apprehended.
(...) easily guarded (...) by cutting some suckers o^ small branches of the
$spane^ them in bottles of water. in a warm room. By $spane^ to vegetate as
early in the season as you please, and $spane^ food for your young worms, till
it will be produced by the $spane^ your mulberry-trees.


It has been thought, indeed, that ^ettice, and perhaps some other leaves might
in cases of necessity be used as a substitute for the mulberry leaves; ^^
experience has decided against this opinion. For though you may, by such means,
save the lives of the worms for a while, yet, unless they are fed with that
food which nature has destined for their use, and which therefore is alone
proper to furnish that gum from which the silk is made, it were better to spare
yourself the fruitless pains. and to let them die at once. If their hatching,
on the other hand, be delayed till the leaves upon which they are to feed have
got considerably forward in their growth, then the worms lose one great
advantage, which is the feeding at first upon young and tender leaves, which
are fittest for their infant state, and contribute greatly to their future
health and vigor. And, besides, by the time that they have got through their
last moulting, they will be much injured by a food that is grown too dry and of
too hard a texture, and still more by the close air and stifling heat of
summer. It is therefore of importance to have the worms come out as early in
the spring as may be, without exposing them to the danger of wanting food. But
it frequently happens, especially in this country, that a too forward spring
brings out young leaves which are soon after suddenly killed by a nipping
frost; and, in that case, it will be often fifteen, and sometimes twenty days,
before a second crop of leaves are put out.

THERE is an Indian proverb which says, that "the winter seldom rots in the
sky:" the meaning of which is obvious, that sooner or later we must expect to
feel our share of cold.

And the converse of this observation is also true, that if, in the winter
months, the cold has been pretty constant and uniform, the winter then will
seldom usurp the place of spring. When the season, therefore, has been thus
regular, there will be little or no danger in setting your eggs to hatch as
soon as the mulberry buds begin to swell. But if the spring appears to be too
forward, you run a risk either way: if you hatch your eggs, and a frost should
happen to nip the tender leaves in the bud, you lose your worms; and if you
keep back your eggs for fear of the frost, and no frost should happen, then
your worms will come too late for their food, and will have to struggle with
the sultry suffocating heats of the advancing season. Now, if the buds, by
putting out too early, should happen to be nipped by the frost, the second crop
will come so much later that there will then be no reason to fear the like
accident again for that season. Upon the whole, therefore, it will be safest to
keep such a quantity of eggs as that you may divide them into two parcels, and
let the season be as it may, have one of the parcels ready to hatch with the
first appearance of the leaf; then, if their food should be killed, you may
have the second parcel ready against the leaves put out anew. It may be, all
thing considered, a good ^^conomy to submit to the loss of half the eggs that
you keep, or which is the same thing, to be at the expense of keeping double
the quantity of eggs that will be wanted, rather than run the risque of losing
the labor and expectation of a whole season.

THESE hints may serve to direct the attentive observer in ascertaining the
proper time for hatching the silkworms eggs. It remains to show.

2. THE manner of bringing them to hatch at the time required. It is needless
to say, that this cannot be done, with any degree of certainty, by trusting
them to the natural warmth of the season, which would often bring out the worms
too soon, and as often, perhaps, keep them back too long. For this reason,
therefore, (and, indeed, for several others with which I need not detain the
reader) it is necessary to follow the directions given in the first Section,
keeping your eggs in a moderately cool air, till the time indicated in the
foregoing article; and then to hatch them by means of such a heat as it is, at
all times, in your power to regulate at pleasure.

IN Europe it has been a very general practice to do this by means of the
natural warmth of the human body. They put a quantity of eggs into a line ^rag
tied up with a string; and begin by putting this little bundle into some clean
dry straw at the foot of the bed at night, and by wearing it pinned under their
outward garments in the daytime. Then by degrees they give the eggs a greater
heat, by putting the bundles first into bed at their feet, and so gradually
bringing them to lie on their breast at night, and to be worn next to the skin
by day. But I shall not give a minute detail of this method, because it is
liable to many objections. The two grand requisites in the management of
silkworms from first to last are, to keep them, both while they are in the
eggs and afterward, in a dry air, and free from a close stifled heat. In the
method just now mentioned, therefore, a constant attention and a painful
vigilance are absolutely necessary, in order to guard against the dangers
arising from the insensible perspiration of the body, and from the eggs being
too closely pent up in a suffocating kind of warmth. They are obliged every now
and then, both by day and by night, to open the bundle of eggs, spread them
about for a while, and then tie them up again and return them into their place.
When the worms are on the eve of coming out, they dare not trust themselves to
sleep, left their nap should be too long; for one hour's neglect might hazard
the loss of more than half their labor. It might be productive of such a
sickly brood as would hardly be worth the pains of nursing.

ANOTHER, and a far preferable method, has therefore been attempted with
success, which is to hatch the eggs by the heat of common fire. The manner of
putting this method in practice may be varied according as fancy or convenience
shall direct, and experience shall approve. The Abbe Boissier, whose book has
been my chief instructor, directs a stove, or rather a small hot-house, to be
built for this purpose. It is about six feet wide, and fifteen feet long, built
of brick and covered with tile, and has a fireplace in each end, a door in one
side, and a small window, which is closed by a sliding shutter, to be opened
occasionally. In order to keep up, as near as may be, a steady equal heat, he
puts every morning a quantity of tanner's bark, well dried in the sun, into
each fireplace; this bark he disposes in an even heap from jamb to jamb, and
kindles it at one end with a shoveful of burning coals. It burns slowly and
constantly, and you may put on enough at one time to serve for twenty-four
hours. If tanner's bark cannot be had, you may use cowdung, turf, sea-coal,
etc. instead of it.

THE stove being ready, the next thing to be done is, to provide a small table
or table, upon which you may spread your eggs. This may be a thin piece of
well-seasoned board, planed smooth, with a ^^dge on the edges about half an
inch higher than the surface of the board, which is to be covered with a lining
of clean brown paper; or, instead of a board, it might be made with splinters
or smooth twigs, like the cover of a square basket. Strew this smoothly over
with a layer of clean cut straw, and upon that lay the brown paper as before.
The size of this tablet should at least be such as that a layer of eggs, when
spread upon the paper, may not be more than one quarter of an inch thick. At
each corner of the tablet fasten a string, and make the strings meet in a knot
at a convenient height above the tablet. When your eggs are properly spread,
suspend the tablet on a hook at the end of a string which slides above, by a
loop, upon a smooth rod that runs overhead lengthways of the stove. By this
means you can move the tablet from the middle toward either fireplace, as
occasion may require. Let the tablet hang at the distance of three or four feet
from the ground. To secure your eggs from the dust and other nuisances, make a
small hole in the middle of a square piece of thin linen cloth; slip it up a
few inches above the hook upon the sliding string, and let the edges of the
cloth fall down round the edges of the tablet; by which means your eggs will be
covered without being stifled; for the cloth, hanging loosely round, will leave
a free communication for the air to circulate, and for the imperceptible steam,
that rises by perspiration from the eggs, to escape.

IN order to proceed with certainty, it will be advisable to furnish yourself
with a thermometer, which may be fixed fast in the middle of the tablet, and
the eggs spread round it. As it is not necessary to be very nice in marking the
degrees of heat, the Abbe advises the use of a thermometer which is very
readily adjusted, and may be understood with equal ease by every one. And, for
the sake of those who are not fond of hard words, he calls it a regulator. It
is adjusted in the following manner. Take any low-priced thermometer, and cover
the bulb with snow or broken ice, so as to bring the mercury (or the liquor)
down to the point of freezing; at this point tie a thread round the tube for a
mark, then put the bulb into your mouth, or in your bosom, so as to raise the
mercury to the degree of a blood-heat; mark this point with another thread tied
round the tube. Call this last point 32 degrees. The middle point between this
and the point of freezing will be 16. Divide the space between 16 and 32 into
four equal parts, mark them, and they will be as many divisions as are
necessary. Thus you will have marks for the following degrees, 16. 20. 24. 28.
and 32. Instead of a graduated scale with figures, make a mark against each of
the points thus ascertained, on the slip of board that your thermometer is
fixed to. Let the marks be coarse lines drawn across, and in different colors,
as black, red, yellow, green and blue. And then you have only to direct, that
in such and such circumstances, the mercury (or which amounts to the same
thing, the heat) must be kept at such or such a mark black or red, etc. or
between the two. For a greater precision is not necessary, nor will you need
any graduation lower than 16 nor higher than 32 degrees above the point of
freezing.

WITH this apparatus once completed, the rest is easy. For the first two or
three days you have only to keep the heat at about 16 or 18 degrees; it will
gradually rise to 24 and 28 as the walls get heated, without increasing the
fire. And at this point you may let it remain, till nearly two thirds of your
eggs are hatched; when it will be advisable to give the remainder a heat of
about 32 degrees, at least for a few hours, in order to hasten the hatching,
and to bring out your whole brood as nearly together as may be. This regulator
may be dispensed with, and instead thereof, a little vessel of water placed
near the eggs in the stove, where it will receive an equal heat with the eggs.
You may know at any time whether the heat is properly regulated, by putting
your finger into the water, for if the water should feel rather a little warmer
than milk newly from the cow, you may conclude it is of a proper heat, but if
the water should feel disagreeably warm, the heat will be too great, and should
be lessened accordingly.


THREE or four times a day will be sufficient to turn your eggs, which is done
by raking them up into heaps, and then immediately spreading them again, and at
night there will be no inconvenience in letting the fire go down a little, as
you will thus be less apprehensive of accidents.

EGGS that have been well wintered will hatch by this process, in about nine or
ten days. You may know when they are near hatching by their turning of a paler
color, which usually happens on the seventh or eighth day.

3. As soon as you perceive your eggs beginning to hatch, and that some of the
worms are already come out, it is time to brush the whole from the tablet into
a box, which you must have ready made, of thin light boards (or into a flat
square basket) about three inches deep, and lined with soft paper. In this box
or basket (which may be in size about half that of the tablet) you spread the
eggs in an even layer not more than half an inch thick. Then you cover the eggs
all over with a thin light mat of tow loosely pressed flat, and over this mat
you lay a leaf of gauze, or rather paper pierced through with a number of small
holes, to give a passage for the worms, who always climb through to the top of
whatever covers them. When this paper is pretty well covered with worms, you
take it up from the mat, brush off the worms with a feather, deposit them apart
to be taken care of as shall be hereafter directed, and then return the paper
to ^^ place till it is covered again, repeating these removes till all the
worms are come out.

THE reason of this apparatus is, that the worms, as soon as they are hatched,
begin to spin a very fine thread of silk, which they fasten to any thing that
happens to be next to them. Thus a number of eggs are tied together, and the
thread of one worms gets entangled with that of another. When the worms have
passed through the mat, and are crawling upon the paper which lies upon it,
removing the paper without moving the mat, breaks all those threads, and makes
it easy, without danger or embarrassment, to separate the worms, as they come
out, from the bottom, without moving the eggs that are behind. If you have
managed with care and address, your worms will all be out in two, or at most,
in three days from the time of their beginning to hatch.

4. THIS process may, perhaps, appear tedious in description; but in practice
it will be sound easy. And I doubt not but some particulars, which have been
here described, might be dispensed with; especially when the quantity of eggs
to be hatched is small. For instance, instead of a stove built on purpose, any
small room might be made to answer the end. Was it not so absolutely necessary
to guard against a close suffocating air, a room with a Dutch stove would
serve, beyond any other contrivance, for keeping up an equable degree of
warmth; but then you could not have any change of circulating air. Perhaps a
room with a small cannot stove in each end might answer every purpose; for, by
that means, you might have a steady warmth, and yet the air in the room would
be gradually changed. And as to a thermometer, though it would certainly be
very useful, yet I fancy one might venture to do without it. A little
experience would give one a habit of judging pretty nearly of those degrees of
warmth which are requisite; and it is certain that, when the eggs have the
benefit of a free circulating dry air, they will, without hazard, endure a
degree of heat which in other circumstances would be pernicious.

5. WITH regard to the quantity of eggs to be set, it may be worth observing
that the smaller your brood is, the greater, in proportion, is your harvest of
cocoons or silk balls. An ounce of eggs is called a very small quantity; this
yield with good management, one hundred weight of cocoons; and from ten or
fifteen ounces, you seldom reap more than fifty pounds of cocoons for every
ounce of eggs. The reason of this difference is doubtless this, that a small
brood is more easily tended, and enjoys a sweeter air, than a large one; and is
therefore less liable to be hurt by sickness and other disasters.

6. I OBSERVE, that, in a late article in the Pennsylvania Gazette, we are
encouraged to expect from our climate the advantage of raising two broods of
worms in one season. But I find this matter, upon repeated trials, given up in
the south of France, and in most parts of Italy, where the climate is at least
as favorable to such an attempt as it can be imagined to be in our country.

IF the season when the eggs are laid happens to be pretty warm, it is, indeed,
common enough to observe a small number of worms come out in eight or ten days
after. But, even supposing the whole quantity could be brought to hatch (which
would be very difficult, if not impossible) yet as great a difficulty would
remain in the procuring them food; for the leaves which would have put out a
second, or perhaps a third time in the same season, would be mostly too much
grown for the young insects to begin to feed on them; and, besides, such a
frequent stripping of the trees would greatly damage their future growth and
fertility. I speak not this with a design to damp the ardour of any one in the
prosecuting so valuable an article among those which this country is fitted to
produce; but to guard against the misleading of the reader into a too sanguine
expectation, which would in the end only serve to vex and discourage him by a
disagreeable expense of fruitless labor.

I WOULD, therefore, still recommend it as the safest way, to follow the method
pointed out in the first Section, as soon as the eggs are laid, to put them
away in the coolest place you can find about the house; and then, if any worms
should happen to come out, it may not be amiss to amuse yourself with taking
them up, and trying to make the most of their premature and unpromising labors.

7. THE reader will observe, that many of the directions that have already been
given, and of those which are to follow, may be partly dispensed with, when the
brood is very small: but when it is proposed to raise a brood of any
consequence, it will not only be more necessary, but it will also be very well
worth while, to spare no pains, nor any moderate expense, in order to secure
success. It cannot surely be necessary to use arguments with my countrymen, to
prevail on them to endeavor in earnest to reap so great an advantage, as the
produce of silk, from the climate in which we live. It is presumed, and that
upon very good grounds, that nothing is at present wanted, but a sufficient
stock of mulberry berry-trees (which may soon be propagated) to secure to us a
plenty of this most valuable and useful commodity.

SECTION III.
Of the several ages of the Silkworms.
THE life of this precious insect, while it continues in the form of a worm or
caterpillar, is divided into five periods or ages; the first age is the time
included between the hatching of the egg and the first moulting or casting of
the skin; the second age is terminated by a second moulting; the third and
fourth ages by a third and fourth moulting; and the fifth age by the worm's
beginning to spin that web in which it wraps itself as in a second egg. There
it undergoes a kind of temporary death, from which it soon revives in its sixth
age with a new form, and comes out a moth-fly. To this last stage of its
existence nature puts a final period, as soon as the necessary provision is
made for the propagation of the species.

SECTION IV.
Directions how to manage during the first, second, and third ages.
1. AT each remove that you make of the new-hatched worms, according to the
directions given in the second Section, you deposite them apart to be taken
care of. For this end you must have in readiness a sufficient number of
tablets, like that already described, with ledges of two inches height, and the
bottom covered with brown paper. They may be about three feet long and eighteen
inches wide. Upon these tablets the young insects are to be deposited,
beginning at one end, and spreading them thin upon the bottom from side to
side, and giving them immediately a mess of young and tender leaves shreded
small and strewed over them. Thus you proceed till one tablet is full, and
covered with leaves, strewed over the worms, from end to end; and then go on ^n
like manner to a second (if need be) and a third tablet, until all your eggs
are hatched, and the worms properly disposed of.

2. THE reason of directing them to be fed at this time is, not only to satisfy
their present appetite, but chiefly to prevent their crawling over the ledges
of their tablet, and so losing themselves. The small fibers of the leaves
remain, and make a litter, which the worms will never desert, unless attracted
by fresh leaves, and in one or two other circumstances which will be noted
hereafter.

3. IT is of great importance to have the worms conducted so as that they may
grow equally, and go through each moulting nearly at the same time. With a
small quantity this may easily be done; but if your brood be very numerous, it
will not be so easy to keep them equal. In this case, therefore, it is best to
divide your stock into classes, making the first class to consist of those
worms which come out on the first day of hatching; the second class to be
levied the second day; and so on. The classes, thus made, will never be more
than three; because, if you have managed with care and discretion, your worms
will be all out on the second or, at farthest, on the third day; and indeed, if
it should happen that any remain to be hatched after that time, it will never
be worth while to raise them; they would only prove a useless embarrassment,
and therefore it were best to throw them away.

4. THEN, in order to make those of a class to thrive equally, you bring
forward the less thrifty, by giving them one or two degrees of warmth more than
you give the rest. This will increase their appetite, which must be supplied
accordingly; and thus, in two or three days, with skill and attention, the
worms of a class may be brought to such an equality as will make all the future
management regular and easy. They will go through their several ages without
confusion, will moult all on the same days, and be ready to spin all together;
and the several classes will keep a regular distance one from another.

5. TO render this management easily practicable, each class should be
subdivided upon different tablets, which may be exposed to greater or less
degrees of heat as occasion shall require.

6. A GREAT deal depends upon the choice of a proper room for the nursery of
silkworms. The chief requisites in such a room are these -- 1st, It should be
dry and sheltered from easterly winds; 2d, it should be so situated as to
admit, occasionally, a draught of cool fresh air, which is best when it comes
through a long entry that is kept clean and dry; 3d, it should have at least
one fireplace; 4th, the cieling should be high, and either not so tight as to
confine the air, or else there should be an opening in it like a trap-door, to
let the air circulate freely, and prevent a stifling kind of warmth; it is best
when this trap-door opens into a garret or another chamber overhead; 5th, the
sides of the room should be tight; and, lastly, it should be kept dark, except
when you have occasion to visit and examine the nursery.

7. In such a room, the warmer your brood is kept, the better it will thrive.
The life of a silkworm may be abridged or prolonged, within a certain compass,
almost at pleasure. The faster they eat, the faster they live; and their
appetite is always in proportion to the degree of warmth in which they live,
provided it be not a stifled warmth; and they should always be fed in
proportion to their appetite. Thus, by duly regulating the heat, you may either
bring these insects to the end of their fifth age in less than five and twenty
days, or you may make them live fourscore. A middle way is the least liable to
accidents; it is therefore advisable, during the first three days, to give
them a warmth of about 30 or 32 degrees; and for the rest of their life, about
24 or 26 degrees. These are the degrees of the regulator described in page 6.
And in this way, they will take about thirty or thirty five days to go through
their five ages.


8. DURING the three first ages, they should be fed six or eight times a day,
shreding the leaves small at first, and cutting them into larger pieces in
proportion as the worms grow bigger. Each mess of food is to be strewed equally
over them, and a new mess should not be given till the last is devoured.

9. CARE should be taken not to let the litter grow too thick, and once in two
or three days to remove it, and keep the worms, by this means, upon clean
tablets; with this additional caution, that if they are crowded, they should be
allowed more room, by making two tablets contain those who at first were spread
upon one, -- To enter into a minute detail of the methods commonly used in
these cases would be tedious: I shall therefore leave them to the fancy and
fagacity of the reader to choose for himself.

10. WHEN the worms are near moulting, their appetite always increases, and
therefore, the quantity of food in each mess should be proportionably
augmented. This ravenous appetite returns in every age, some time before the
moulting in the four first ages, and before the spinning in the last age. On
the decline of this voracity, the worms begin to acquire a degree of
transparency; they are turgid, and ready to cast their skin. And then you stop
feeding them, and take care immediately to give them a clean tablet. If you
delay to do this, you must not move them at all; for no sooner do they cease
eating than they begin to prepare for moulting. This they do by fastening
themselves to the bottom of their tablet by fine threads of silk, that so,
their old skin being tied down, they may with the more ease crawl out of it.
And, therefore, to move them after this is begun would hazard their suffocation.

11. THE moulting of a whole class should be finished in thirty hours, or less;
and if any remain that have not moulted in that time, it is best, either to
throw them away, or else to make a small class of them apart from the rest. By
thirty hours, I mean from the time of their beginning to moult, which, with the
degree of warmth mentioned in the seventh article of this Section, will be
about the ninth day from the worms coming out of the eggs. On this occasion, if
there be room at the sides of the tablet, they are apt to quit the litter, and
betake themselves to the first clear spot that offers for fastening themselves
down, against the crisis comes on in which they are to languish a while, and
then to renew their vigor by crawling out of their old skin.

12. ONE caution more, with regard to seeding the worms, should be remembered;
and that is, for a day or two after each moulting, to give them young and
tender leaves; and, at all times, to be careful that the leaves on which they
feed the dry; that is, free from the moisture that arises either from the dew
or from showers of rain.

SECTION V.
Direction how to manage during the fourth and fifth ages.
1. THE hints, given in the last Section, may serve to direct the attentive
reader in the most material things necessary to be observed during the three
first ages; and several rules already laid down must be attended to in every
age. In this Section, therefore, I shall only mention a few things which are
requisite in the two last ages, but were unnecessary in the proeceding ones.

2. HITHERTO the worms have been kept upon tablets, which were handy and easily
moved, into a cooler or a warmer birth, as occasion might require. But now the
worms are so much grown, that you must place them upon larger tables, which
need not be moveable. In the construction of these tables, it may be worth
while to have an eye to those accommodations which will be useful when the
worms are to be ser a spinning. The apparatus, which I am going to describe,
may perhaps be more complex than is always necessary; but it will be found very
convenient where you can afford it, and especially when your brood is numerous;
besides, in the execution of it, the construction will be found easier than it
may appear in the description.

3. WITH pieces of joice three inches square, make a standing frame, which may
be put together, like a bedstead, with cross and side pieces, of the same
thickness, running level from post to post all round, at about three feet from
the floor. If your frame is twelve feet long, you must have one middlepost in
each side, and more, in proportion, if it be longer. Each pair of these middle
posts must be connected, like the corner ones, by a cross-piece, or inter-tie,
running from one to the other. Thus the inter-ties will divide your frame
lengthways into equal spaces of six feet each, the thickness of the inter-ties
included. The inter-ties, at each end of the frame, and from one middle-post to
another, must be let into the posts one inch higher than the side-pieces.
Between every two of these inter-ties let in three more, to rest, at equal
distances, upon the side-pieces, by a shoulder of one inch thick. Thus there
will be laid, the whole length of your frame, an even floor of joice, running
from side to side, and leaving an interval of fifteen inches between every two.
Let this floor be now completed by slipping in (between each pair of joice) a
board, one inch thick, fifteen inches wide, and in leng^^ual to the width of
the frame from out to out, so as to fi^^ (...) every interval; this floor will
be about three feet from the ground, Eighteen or twenty inches higher, frame in
a second, in all respects like the former; at a like distance above the second,
put a third, and so on to the top of your frame.

THESE floors, or stages, one above another, are to serve as tablets, upon
which, after the third moulting, you are to spread your worms, taking care to
leave a clear margin, fifteen inches wide, all along each side; for, as the
worms grow bigger, they will want more room. If you had nothing farther in view
than the present use of such of frame of tables, it might have been much more
simply constructed, and, in particular, without such a number of inter-ties;
but the farther utility of the construction here described will appear in the
next Section. It now only remains to fix the dimensions of this frame. This
must be done by considering the quantity of worms that you breed, and the size
of the room which you select for a nursery. Let the frame, then, be always
about six feet wide; as long as the room will admit, leaving a free passage
round, at each end as well as at the sides; and high enough (if your brood be
numerous) to reach from the floor to within one foot or two of the cieling.

OBSERVE, That the joice are to be laid in every stage alike; but, in the
uppermost, the intervals are to be left open; no worms are to be spread upon
this stage, but the inter-ties are to serve a purpose which will be explained
hereafter.

4. HITHERTO you have been directed, in feeding the worms, to cut or shred the
leaves into pieces, in proportion to the size of the worms; but now, they are
so grown, and they eat so much, that this caution is no longer necessary, and
would be fatiguing. Give them the leaves whole as they are plucked from the
trees, only remembering, as directed in the 12th article of the former Section,
to serve them, at first after moulting, with the youngest and tenderest leaves
you have, and take care that their food be not wet. The quantity given them
should always be gradually increased from day to day, after each moulting, as
has been already observed, till their appetite is come to its height: during
this voracious period, in the fifth age, they devour twice as much food as in
all the other ages put together. At this time their food should consist of
leaves that have got their full growth, but are not yet begun to turn hard and
husky.

5. SILKWORMS are liable to be sickly, and it may be thought of importance to
give a description of their diseases; but they are much more easily prevented
than cured; and to describe a distemper, without pointing out a method of cure,
would be to little purpose. If the worms are kept clean, are not crowded too
much together, are properly fed, and secured against the pernicious effects of
a close damp air, and a stifled heat; there is no great danger of their being
visited with any kind of sickness: during the fourth and fifth ages,
especially, it is of importance to guard against this last inconvenience, a
stifled heat, which has been already so frequently mentioned. These last ages
usually fall in with the beginning heats of summer, when sudden changes are to
be expected in the state of the air and in the weather, which therefore should
now be narrowly watched. If the air be damp, it is easily discovered; but that
state which I have so often called a stifled heat, can only be perceived by
your own feeling. In either of these cases, the unfriendly disposition of the
air is easily corrected, and, in both cases, by the same means. A few dry
faggots, or a wisp of straw, kindled into a blaze in every corner of the room
will, in a few minutes, restore to your brood a dry and a freely circulating
fresh air. And this is all that is necessary; for as to the actual degrees of
heat, which are indicated by the thermometer, they may at all times and without
danger be disregarded; except when the weather is too cool: in which case your
must keep up a due warmth of the air in your nursery, by means of a steady
fire. And, in general, it is advisable to keep a constant fire in rainy
weather. But here it is necessary to remind the reader, that I take it for
granted his nursery has every requisite mentioned above, in the sixth article
of the fourth Section; particularly, a high cieling with a trap door, or some
other equivalent opening overhead, to keep up a free circulation of air:
without this precaution, a fire would do more harm than good.

6. IF it should happen, notwithstanding all your care, that your brood
continues to languish in a state of relaxation, which tarnishes their color,
makes their skin unelastic, and destroys their appetite; there is one remedy
left which has sometimes been found to do wonders. This remedy is the cold
bath. Take your worms by handfuls and throw them into keelers or other vessels
of cold water; let them lie a minute or two, and then, after sweeping their
tables clean, replace them in their births as before. In Georgia, when the
worms appear to be ^^kly, they close the room, and burn some brown (...) on
clear live (...) in several parts of the room. This is said to be a good remedy.
This process is not attended with the danger which is always to be feared from
a moist air. That creates a relaxation at the same time that it checks the
perspiration; but the cold bath gives a new tone to the fibers, and then it
will be easy, by means of a small brisk fire, to excite in your worms a fresh
appetite, and thus restore them to life and vigor.

7. IF you have not a sufficient provision of food for the whole brood which
you propose to raise, your labor will be thrown away. The necessary proportion
should therefore be known beforehand. It has been already observed that, with
good management, the worms that are bred from one ounce of eggs will yield one
hundred weight of cocoons; and it is found, in general, that, to raise one
pound of cocoons, it will require twenty pounds of leaves. It is not easy to
give any very exact rules for the estimating the quantity of leaves upon a tree
as it stands; and yet this is the only way in which you can, beforehand,
ascertain the question, whether or no you have, in prospect, a sufficient
provision. The skill of making this estimate can only be acquired by habit and
experience.

8. YOU must be careful, at all times, to gua^^ your brood against the ravages
of rats and mice. Cats and traps will hardly be a sufficient security. A wisp
of cotton or two, bound round every post a little below the under tier of
tables, and paid over now and then with pitch and tar, may prove a barrier
which those vermin will not be able to pass.

SECTION VI.
Directions how to manage when the worms are ready for spinning.
1. THE voracity of the silkworm, in the fifth age, continues three or four
days; in which time the worm arrives at his utmost growth, being in length
above three inches. His skin can be distended no farther, his appetite
declines, he acquires, toward the head, a degree of transparency; he once more
quits his food and the litter, and runs about with his head erect, seeking a
proper place to begin his task of spinning.

2. As soon as you, discover this behavior in any considerable number, stop
feeding, and prepare to furnish your brood with convenient lodgements for the
work which they are about to undertake. Begin at one end of the lower tier of
tables; clear away the litter, from side to side, as far as to the middle of
the second board, first moving the worms, that were spread upon this space,
either to the right or left, upon those that lie on the next adjoining space of
the table. Then plant a little hedge-row of small bushes, from side to side
across the table; fixing the foot of each bush upon the lower inter-tie, and
the top against the under side of the next inter-tie above. These bushes, or
branches, you must have in readiness beforehand. The foot should be stripped or
pared smooth, to the height of four or five inches; and the main stalk should
be left a little longer than the twigs that shoot out from it, in order that,
in fixing the bush, the top may be a little bent, and so, pressing against the
upper inter-tie, may stand firm and steady. When you have completed one row of
these bushes quite across the table, bring back the worms, and place them along
in a range on each side of your little hedgerow, in order that they may climb
up and set to spinning. Then clear away another space; plant another hedge,
etc. proceeding thus till you have gone over all the tables. All this must be
done with as much dispatch as possible; for if your brood is not accommodated
with a proper retreat, as soon as they are ready to go to work, the fibers of
the skin, which is now extremely distended, lose their tone, the worms languish
without spinning at all, or at least what they do spin is wasted here and
there, and you lose your labor. In planting these little hedge-rows, the
bushes should be fixed as close together as they conveniently can be, that the
worms may not lose their time in seeking where to climb; and on the upper
tables, the rows should not come quite to the edge on either side, but a space
of a hand's breadth at least should be left, if the worms should any of them
happen to fall from the branches, they would come from such a height down upon
the floor as would kill them. In Georgia, they provide broad hanging shelves,
to lay the worms on for to spin; these shelves should be rubled all over with
fennel, some little time before the worms are ready to spin; and a quantity of
small white oak bows with their leaves on, should be cut about one week before
they will be wanted; the reason of which is, that the leaves may be dried and
shrivelled a little against that time; these bows or branches must be laid
steadily on those shelves for the worms to spin amongst; the persume of the
fennel being very grateful to the worms; will allure them to begin their work,
and the leaves being shrivelled, will accommodate them with a suitable nest to
spin their silk-balls in.


3. IF your brood be numerous, you will now find the advantage of having it
divided into classes, which come to maturity one after another, at the distance
of two or three days; because this will lessen the hurry and fatigue of making
these necessary accommodations at the time when they are ready to go to work.
But you cannot expect that even one class should be all ready at once; there
will be a small part at least more tardy, and who therefore will want to be fed
a little longer. It would be embarrassing to feed these among those that are
better employed; and therefore, as soon as the majority have begun to spin, it
is better to move the lingerers apart, and feed them by themselves till they
are disposed to labor, and then either to replace them on the tables already
prepared, or, if their number is small, accommodate them with clean crisp
shavings, strewed or suspended round them, into which they may creep and go to
work.

4. IT is a very great advantage to let the spinners have a freely circulating
air; and therefore, as soon as all the worms are mounted and have fairly begun
their cocoons, draw out all the boards from every table, and leave the frame
standing with all the intervals between the cross-pieces open, as so many
passages for the air. This explains the use of the construction described
above, in the third article of the fifth Section, and the reason why the upper
tier is directed to be furnished with inter-ties like the rest, though that
tier is not to be made use of as a table. The inter-ties there serve only now
to keep the hedge rows of the next inferior table firm and steady. This frame
of tables, when the boards are all removed and the cocoons ^nished, will form a
very pretty spectacle; it will be like so many rows of small trees, planted one
on the top of another, and their little branches loaded with golden and silver
fruit -- A spectacle which nothing hinders us to exhibit, but the want of a
sufficient number of mulberrytrees.

SECTION VII.
Of the Cocoons to be set apart for seed.
1. BEFORE you begin to wind off the silk, it will be necessary to select a
sufficient number of cocoons, which may furnish you with a provision of eggs
for a future brood. With regard to the quantity to be set apart for this
purpose, observe the following proportion; it is found by experience that, one
time with another, a pound of cocoons will yield one ounce of eggs. It has been
recommended to choose out, for this use, the largest and finest of your stock.

2. As soon as the moth-flies begin to come out, you should have a clean table
in readiness, on which you are to place and couple the flies. Let them continue
coupled for about twelve hours, and then with care separate the male from the
female, who will immediately begin to lay her eggs. If these should be laid
upon the naked table, it would be impossible to get them off without breaking
the shells; it is therefore recommended to cover the table with a piece of fine
half-worn sagathy, or some such thin kind of woollen stuff, from which the eggs
are more easily separated than from paper or any other substance. But, as the
table is chiefly destined to another purpose, it is also advisable to suspend
a strip of the same stuff upon a rod, all along one side, and so as to hang
down nearly upon the edge of the table; and as fast as you perceive any moth
beginning to lay her eggs, take her up gently and put her upon this strip of
hanging stuff, where she will lay her eggs without disturbance, and they will
not be soiled with any excrement.

3. THE cocoons, from which the moth-flies have come out, though they are not
fit for winding, yet are not to be thrown away, they may be carded and spun
into a very serviceable coarse kind of silk; they should therefore be kept as
clean as may be -- and it should be noted, that the moths do not pierce through
the double balls of themselves, but would lay their eggs within, and die; such
double balls as will not wind readily are, therefore, laid aside for seed; but
as the flies or moths cannot get through of themselves, the cocoons should be
cut at the blunt or thick end, to open a passage for them, and to prevent more
waste of the silk than is needful.

AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING
Some EXTRACTS from PULLIEN, on the Culture of Silk, etc. intended for a
further Explanation of the foregoing Treatise, and to render the Management of
Silkworms more simple and easy.

SECTION I.
A brief View of the Silk-worm's Life.
THE silkworm proceeds from an egg laid in summer; it is yellow when first
laid, but in three or four days turns of a bluish ash color; its size is about
that of a grain of mustard seed; it is preserved till the following spring, and
is then hatched either by the natural warmth of the weather, or by artificial
heat.

THE worm, that proceeds from this egg, is about one tenth of an inch long, as
thick as a small pin, and of a black color; three or four days warmth
generally hatches it: this worm, from so small a size, in the space of six
weeks, grows to be about three inches long, and an inch and half round, after
which is desists from feeding, and begins to form its silk-ball.

IF begins the outside of its work first, and keeping within it, forms a hollow
ball of silk round itself, which it generally finishes in four or five days
from the time of its beginning to spin.

IT lies enclosed in this ball a certain space of time, in hot climate fifteen
days, in cold ones a month, and so proportionably; at the end of which it is
transformed into a large moth, and works its way out by an hole, which it makes
through the ball.

THE male and female moths then couple, and when they are separated, the female
lays her eggs, to the number of three or four hundred; and, in a few days
after, both male and female die.

THERE eggs are kept safe till the ensuing spring, at which season, they are
again hatched into worms: -- this is the general hatch of a silk-worm's life,
when it is preserved to breed; but many millions of silk-balls, are wound off
to manufacture before the moths spoil them, by boring their way out.

SECTION II.
Of hatching the Silkworms eggs.
THE eggs will, as the weather grows warm, hatch of themselves; but in this
way, there would be a great distance of time between those that hatched first,
and those that hatched last, which is found to be very inconvenient; therefore
it is necessary to make use of an artificial heat, in order that great numbers
may be hatched at one time, and that the whole quantity may be hatched in two
or three days.

THE degrees of heat which promotes the hatching of the egg, is that of the
natural warmth of the human body, or any other heat equal to it; and, the
method for hatching them by this heat, is as follows --

PUT your eggs into a cotton of silken bag, which should not contain above one
ounce; this bag must be kept for two or three days in the bosom next the skin,
by a person who does not use violent exercise, until they suspect the eggs are
near hatching. At night the bags are to be laid under the bolster, which should
be made as warm as the skin.

WHEN they are ready to hatch, which will be about the end of the third day,
each parcel of eggs, should be gently poured out of the bags into a clean
shallow box, so as not to lay above one fourth of an inch thick, left the worms
might be hindered from coming out. This box, containing the eggs, should be
kept warm under the bed-cloaths, while they continue warm after you have left
your bed; after which, it must be placed between two pillows, heated
moderately; for a small degree of heat, more than is necessary, would injure
the worms when near hatching; and you must have other pillows ready warmed, as
these cool, and so continue them all day between pillows, and at night in your
bed, till they begin to hatch.

MANY authors direct the eggs to be steeped in weak or thin wine, made as warm
as the skin, for half a quarter of an hour, just before they are put to hatch,
and then drying them in a moderate warmth, by gently rubbing them in a dry warm
napkin -- this makes them come out more equally; and those eggs which swim are
separated and thrown away, being either of a weaker constitution or rotten --
this will improve the breed of your worms.

N. B. IT has been thought by some persons, that if the eggs were steeped in
wine, agreeable to these directions, and then set to hatch in the way which has
been practiced by such persons who have raised silkworms in this Province, the
worms would be hatched regularly enough, be more healthy, and better able to
endure any sudden changes of the weather; but as many people may engage in this
business, who have not had an opportunity of being informed of that method,
therefore it was thought advisable to be inserted, and is as follows -- About
the middle of the month of April, steep your eggs in wine, as is directed
above, and when they have been sufficiently steeped, they will be thoroughly
and equally warmed, and be all disposed alike to a state of hatching, which the
natural heat of the weather will afterward sufficiently promote and continue;
but, to effect this, in the most equable way, it will be necessary, after
having dried your eggs, to lay them thinly in shallow paper trays, and set them
on a shelf in a chamber on which the sun does not shine, out of the way of
being injured by any of those things, which have been noticed heretofore; and
let them be covered lightly to keep the dust from lodging on them.

BY keeping the windows of your room open, you may delay the hatching of your
eggs sufficiently to guard against a scarcity of food; and also, inure your
worms, while in embryo, to bear every change of our climate without injury --
this would be to imitate nature; for the eggs, originally, must have been
deposited by their parent moth on the branches or leaves of some trees, where
they were exposed to the alternate change of night and day, shade and
sunshine, damp and dry, and all the inclemencies of their native climate:
there, no doubt, they were healthy and did well; and was it not for the
multitude of enemies which annoy them, when exposed on trees, we have reason to
believe they might be reared in that way in this Province.

TOWARD the latter end of April you should inspect your eggs daily, and so
soon as you discover any of them to be hatched, remove your trays with the eggs
into the warmest room you have, taking care to keep them out of the sunshine,
which would kill the worms, while very young, if exposed to it too long. In the
future management of the worms, observe the directions did down in this book.

SECTION III.
Of treating the Worms during the Time they are hatching.
WHEN the worms begin to hatch, you should have in readiness two pieces of
paper, fitted to the inside of each hatching box, and pricked full of holes as
big as a large pin would make; lay these two papers over one another in each
box, and strew some mulberry leaves sliced, so as to cover the whole surface;
the worms, as they hatch, will come through the holes of the paper and fix upon
the leaves; and when you perceive them quite black with worms, take off the
upper paper and gently slide the leaves with the worms which adhere to them,
upon the place where you intend to keep them. In this manner you must continue
to manage your worms till they are all hatched, being careful not to mix those
together which are hatched at different times: wherefore you should have
several papers or drawers to put them on, according to the time of their
hatching. In two or three days, if you have managed right, your eggs will be
all hatched.

SECTION IV.
Of the Stands or Shelves on which the Worms are to be kept.
FOR three weeks after the worms are hatched, they may be kept on sheets of
brown paper, having their edges turned up a little, and placed on tables, or
any more convenient place, where neither ants, mice, nor any other vermin will
annoy them.

AFTER that period they occupy a greater space, and a stand formed agreeable to
the following directions, will be very commodious.

ERECT four upright poles, about two inches thick, and six or seven feet long,
according to the height of your cieling, or the number of your worms; these
uprights, by means, of cross bars one and a half inch thick, must be connected
together, so as to form a square frame about four feet broad; something in the
manner of the lower part of the frame of a rush bottom chair; in this frame,
shelves or hurdles should be fixed one above another, on pins that are fastened
into the upright poles, at the distance of fourteen or fifteen inches apart. If
your number of worms should require, and your room admit of it, the frame may
be made three or four times as long as it is broad, by adding a greater number
of upright pieces, which are necessary both for strength and the convenience of
having your shelves or hurdles small and light; for the length or these should
only be sufficient to extend between the two nearest upright pieces, and if
they were made exactly square it would be as convenient as any other form; --
the breadth of your frame, or of your shelves, which is the same thing, should
never be too great for you to reach conveniently half way over, that the worms
which lay on the middle may be easily managed.

THE shelves or hurdle should be made of small reeds, willows and such like;
these are preferable to boards, on account of their cheapness, lightness, and
dryness; these kind of hurdles are easily taken out of the frame, shaken and
swept, yet this need not be done so frequently as when they are kept on boards;
for the air will have admission through the vacancies of the reeds, etc. and
will keep them sweeter, by drying the litter.

SEVERAL rows of these frames with hurdles may be placed in a room, leaving
alleys between each row of them, wide enough for two persons to pass each other
when they are attending the worms.

THOSE who have no great nurseries of worms, content themselves with nursing
them on any kind of boards, shelves, tables, wicker hurdles, etc. fixed in
whatever manner is most convenient; and the worms do well, provided rats and
other vermin do not disturb them -- but though this ordinary way may do, yet it
will be best to keep them in the most convenient manner, as it will abridge and
methodise the trouble of feeding and cleansing them.

SECTION V.
Of the Bedding for the Worms.
IF the vacancies between the reeds of your hurdle should be so large as to let
the worms, or their litter and dung, drop through, you may put brown paper on
the hurdles for the worms to lay on; but when the worms are grown so large that
they will not fall through the hurdles, which will be when they are about three
weeks old, the sheets of paper may be drawn from under them, leaving the litter
of the leaves, which need not heretofore have been cleaned: if by this time
your worms require to be spread on other hurdles, you may take up some of the
litter, with the worms on it, and remove them to the other hurdles; and, if the
litter does not afford sufficient bedding, a little dry hay may be added -- If
at any time you find this bedding moist, moldy, or offensive, your worms should
all be removed, and furnished with a new bedding of light hay, so as to admit a
draught of air, and to let the dung fall through it upon the hurdle; this will
keep the worms sweeter and cleaner -- but care should be taken to prevent the
dung and litter from falling through the hurdle above, upon those worms which
are on the hurdle beneath.

SECTION VI.
Of cleaning the Hurdles and Bedding.
TILL the worms have passed their third moult or sickness, the trouble of
cleaning them is very small; for till they have passed the first moult, which
is in six or eight days time from their being hatched, they need not be cleaned
at all, but may lie upon the fibers of the leaf which they have fed on: these
form a soft warm bed for them; and the dung which then comes from the worms,
being fine, soon dries, and sinking among the fibers does not incommode them:
this is the case, provided a superfluity of food is not given to the worms; for
if more leaves are given than they can well consume, the remaining litter would
bury the little creatures.

IF you find the bedding any ways moist, after the first moulting, you may thin
it as much as will needful, to let the remainder dry; after this it will hardly
require any thing further to be done, until the second moulting is passed,
unless it be to open the fibers of the bedding a little, now and then, with a
hook.

YOU may readily take the worms off their old bedding, when it requires
cleaning, by rolling a wisp of hay between your hands, till its fibers become
entangled in one another; then spreading it out and flattening it, it will
become a sort of network; lay this over your young worms, and strew fresh
mulberry leaves over the hay: the worms will come through the hay, and get upon
the fresh leaves; and when they have all come through, you may, by means of a
thin wooden or paste-board shovel or peel, remove the bed of fresh hay, with
the leaves and worms all on it, upon a clean hurdle, leaving the old bed with
all the litter behind, which may now easily be brushed off, and the hurdle
cleaned -- and, that you may lose as little time as possible, when you have
spread the hay and leaves over one parcel of worms, you may proceed, and do the
same to another; and so on to all the different parcels which you have: by
which means the first parcel will be getting through the hay to their leaves,
while you are managing the others.

BEFORE their third moulting, the litter they make is small, and mostly runs
down among the withered fibers, therefore, till their third moulting it may
suffice, as I have said, to clean away the litter and fibers once after each
moulting, especially if the weather is moderately dry.

BUT the great business of cleaning is from their fourth and last moulting, to
their time of spinning, which is about ten days; they will then require to be
cleaned every two days, or oftener.

WHATEVER contrivance can now be found to lighten the toil of cleaning them,
would be of great use; their bodies at this age are heavy, which presses upon
and flattens the leaves, and after having lain thereon they seldom care to eat
them; this occasions a waste of food and increase of litter; therefore, if any
light dry materials, such as the withered fibers of rape or mustard, were
spread on the hurdle, so as to form a contexture very loose and open, about an
inch or more in thickness, it will keep the leaves in such a situation as to be
easily and wholly eaten: if you dress their hurdles in this manner, their
litter will fall down through the bedding, and be received by the hurdle; which
should be made so close as not to let it now pass through the vacancies.

THIS bedding may be much improved in convenience, by fixing it in a slight
square frame, so that it may be all at once taken off the hurdle when you
intend to clean it. -- Thus, four reeds, about the thickness of your finger,
being notched and tied together, so as to form a square frame about the size of
the hurdle, and having some pieces of small cord wove across it, to divide the
space into small squares of about four inches; it will make a sufficient
support for the bedding, on which it must be laid; and when you want to clean
your hurdle, you may list this frame with the bedding and worms on it all away
at once, and then you may clean away the filth, and replace them. -- Another
method which appears useful is mentioned thus -- to a thin light piece of lath,
the length of your shelves or hurdles, fix several pieces of twine at equal
distances, of about four inches apart, from end to end of the lath; this may be
done by boring small holes through the lath, and drawing a piece of twine
through each hole; these pieces of twine should each of them be knotted at the
end, and be of sufficient length to extend across the hurdles; you must also
have another lath of the same size as the former, and having nicks on one edge
to correspond with the holes which the twine passes through in the other lath,
the ends of each piece of twine being laid into its corresponding notch, the
knots at their ends should prevent the twine from slipping through when the
laths are extended apart.

This frame, if laid over the worms, and a suitable bedding laid upon it, with
a fresh parcel of leaves thereon, the worms will crawl through the bedding and
get upon the leaves; then they may be removed, the hurdle cleaned, and the
worms, with their bedding, replaced upon it. The advantage of this last
described frame is, that by slipping the end of each piece of twine out of the
notch in the edge of the lath, you may gently draw the cords from under the
bedding, so that this may serve to clean several shelves or hurdles, which the
former would not.

SECTION VII.
Of the Choice of Cocoons for breeding.
IN three or four days, after they begin to spin, you may gather the
silk-balls, and may know when the worms have done spinning by shaking the ball;
if they are done, the chrysalis or worms will be loose and rattle in it. Those
which began to spin the earl est, should be reserved for breed; and let them be
the largest, firmest, and deepest colored balls. The orange colored balls are
reputed to produce the strongest silk, but the white balls, of the best sort,
are preferred for the fineness of the silk; and the manufacturers of silk in
England recommend to the colonies to endeavor to have all their cocoons of the
white color.
In choosing these balls you must, as well as you can judge, take an equal
number of males and females; those which contain the males are generally more
taper and sharp at the ends, than those which hold the females, which are more
blunt and round at the ends, and somewhat more swelled in the middle. -- You
might mistake those which are spun double for females; but besides that these
are of an extraordinary size, you may distinguish them by their clumsey shape,
which is rather round than oval.

Two hundred males, and as many females, will produce about one ounce of eggs;
and one ounce of eggs are in number from forty-five to fifty thousand; from
which computation you may determine what number of balls you will want to
reserve for your breed. -- The balls which you choose for breed being fixed
upon, take a pretty strong thread, and with a needle pass it through the outer
silk of all the male balls on one side; and then with another thread, in like
manner, string all the female balls; taking care not to hurt the animal which
is enclosed; and having strung all your balls, tie the two ends of your thread
together, and hang them up in the shade, out of the reach of rats and mice,
which otherwise would infallibly destroy them. The rest of your silk-balls
should either be reeled of before the moths within pierce them through, to make
their escape out, or else the moth should be killed within the ball, as will be
directed hereafter.

SECTION VIII.
The Management of those Silk-pods which are chosen for Seed -- the coming out
of the Moths -- the Method of coupling them, etc.
THERE is nothing of greater importance in the management of silkworms, than
that of obtaining a strong healthy breed; every; method therefore which
improves it, ought carefully to be attended to; for when you have once got a
good kind, you can easily keep it up; but if you let your worms degenerate, and
breed promiscuously, the weak with the strong, in a short time you will have
none fit to raise a good breed from.

I HAVE already given directions how to make choice of the most proper
silk-balls to breed from -- The next thing you may expect to see is -- the
coming forth of the moth, which will be in about eighteen or twenty days, from
the time of the worm's beginning to spin. They will pierce the balls sometimes
in ten days, and you will have moths among the branches or boughs where the
worms are spinning, before you can move the cocoons that are first spun; and
these moths deserve great care; for those which pierce through the cocoons
first are the strongest and best, and their eggs will greatly improve your
breed of worms.


THE moths generally come out in the morning, and cling with their feet to the
outside of the balls; some odd ones may chance to fall, which may expose them
to the rats, mice, cats, etc. to prevent which, something should be placed
under each string of balls, to receive such moths.

WHEN you choose your balls for breed, you have been directed to put the males
and females on separate threads, because, if they were on the same, they would
begin to couple as soon as they came out. Now they are come out, you may easily
distinguish the male and female apart -- the former, by his being much brisker,
always fluttering about, and has black or dark colored horns or feelers; the
latter, by her having a large round belly: but if you, by mistake, have mixed
them together on the same threads, you may now separate them.

BY the time the moth begins to come out, you should have nailed, against one
side of your room, a piece of smooth woollen stuff, no matter how old or
ordinary, of a sufficient size for the number of your moths; then, by means of
two or more short threads fastened to its lower edge, you may turn it up about
three or four inches; and fastening the other end of the threads a little
higher into the stuff, fix two short sticks, sharpened at the end, to make the
lower edge of the stuff stand out from the wall, like a kind of a shelf about
three or four inches broad; which will prevent any of the moths, when coupling
on the stuff, from falling to the ground. After this, take the moths gently
from off the silk-balls, and place them by pairs, a male and famale together,
on the abovementioned piece of stuff, to which they will cling; and, having
purged themselves of a reddish liquor, they will then couple.

YOU should have another piece of stuff, of the same kind, and fixed in the
same manner with that already described, to which you should remove those moths
that are coupled; by which means you will be able to distinguish those that
have not coupled, and those which have.

WHEN they have been coupled about eight or nine hours, they should be
separated, Great care must be taken in parting them, lest you pull them to
pieces; and for this reason they may sometimes be allowed to continue twelve
hours before they are separated, if they cannot be easily parted on the first
trial.
and the male ones thrown away. Having already prepared a quantity of the
leaves of the walnut-tree, Any soft brown paper will answer every purpose as
well as the walnut leaves, whereon to lay their eggs, and any number of she^ts
may be doubled, and put into a bag of brown paper, and laid in a drawer among
clothes, or hanged up on a beam in a cellar till the next spring; so the worms
can more easily extricate themselves from the eggs, and slick to the paper
where they were laid, than they can from the loose eggs that are scraped off
the paper or walnut leaves; but if the hatching the worms require that you
should scrape them off, perhaps it may be done with ease, and they may be put
up in boxes, as is here directed.
spread them on the bottom of a large drawer; and then take those female moths
which are separated from the male, and place them on these leaves, within the
drawer, where they will lay their eggs, and soon afterward die.

SECTION IX.
Of preserving the Eggs.
WHEN the moths have done laying, and the eggs attained their tarnished bluish
ash color, you must scrape them off the leaves into little pine or cedar
boxes, such as wafer or pill boxes; which should be placed, during the heat of
summer, in the coolest apartment in your house, provided it be not damp, and
also out of the reach of rats and mice, which are enemies to the silkworm in
every state. -- When the weather grows cool, the box with the eggs may be
placed amongst your clothes in your chest of drawers, and be kept until the
ensuing spring.

SECTION X.
Of killing the Worm or Grub, in the Cocoon or Silk-ball.
IF you have a great many balls, it cannot be expected that you should be able
to wind the whol^ off before the time that the moth will pierce them; therefore
you should be careful to prevent this irreparable loss -- T^^ worms should be
killed in the silk-ball soon after it has done spinning. -- There are three
different methods in practice; but the most simple and easy is -- by the heat
of the sun, which will do very well in these colonies if the weather should be
favorable. -- You should expose your silk-balls to the strongest heat of the
sun on pewter dishes, or on boards covered with dark colored cloths, (taking
care at the same time not to lay them too thick) for two or three days, which
generally kills all the worms.

THE second method is -- by putting them into an oven in baskets, after the
bread is drawn, leaving them in about one quarter of an hour; but this method
is dangerous; for too great an heat would injure your balls, and too small a
degree would not effectually kill the worms; however, to an experienced hand,
this method might be both the most convenient and expeditious; and is the way
made use of in Georgia.

THE third method is -- by the steam of boiling water, and is said to be
preferable to either of the other methods, as it does not injure the silk, and
may be done with certainty.

TAKE a large wooden tub, fill it nearly with boiling water; upon the top which
put a wicker basket, on that lay some loose kind of woollen cloth, which will
let the steam pass through; on this cloth lay your silk-balls about four or
five inches thick, then cover them close with a blanket; and when they have
been there long enough for the steam to get through, you may know whether the
heat is sufficient to kill them; for if the heat is uneasy to the hand, an hour
or two continuance, in such heat, will kill the worms; but if the water cools
so as not to be uneasy, it must be changed for fresh boiling water; therefore
you should have a kettle of water constantly on the fire for the purpose. --
When they are sufficiently steamed, they should be dried in the sun.

HAVING thus secured your silk-balls, ready to be wound off at your leisure,
you will not be hurried in that business; for the balls might now be kept for
some weeks; they will, however, wind the easier by not being kept too long,
which is apt to harden the gum, and bind the threads together.

N. B. Those persons who shall raise any silkworms, are requested to
communicate such observations, on the management of the worm, as may occur, if
better adapted to this climate and country than what are delivered in this
Treatise, to any of the Managers of the institution for promoting the culture
of silk, or heir Treasurer; which will be thankfully received, and published
for the benefit of the inhabitants of these Colonies.

PHILADELPHIA, April 6, 1770.
THE END

