A SOLILOQUY.

NULLI SINCERA VOLUPTAS.
SOLLICITIQUE ALIQUID LAETIS INTERVENIT. OVID.
HIS FRIENDS ETERNAL -- DURING INTEREST,
HIS FOES IMPLACABLE, WHEN WORTH THEIR WHILE.
LOUD CROAKS THE RAVEN OF THE LAW AND SMILES. YOUNG.
PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1770.

A SOLILOQUY.
IN Troth this Demand alarms me. I have endeavored to put a good Face on the
Matter; but I really dread the Consequence. A full Moiety of Fourteen Thousand
Cocks of Hay, with Boot and Emblements and all! I cannot think of it with
Patience. But I am told that I must think of it. My late Chums and Cronies!
where are you all now? Such a Moiety to refund, and left in the Lurch! Hah
Friendship! where art thou? But it was my own darling Doctrine, (and hang me
for having ever preached it) not to value any man longer than he is able to
serve you. My Disciples, like apt Scholars, have imbibed the Maxim, and will
now play off the Argumentum ad Hominem against their poor old Democritus,
without Mercy. But People so obliged, and so virtually vested with all my
Influence and Authority throughout the whole Hamlet! For them, to desert me in
my sorest Extremity! But Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur cum illis. Come,
then, Fate, my old Divinity, stand by me! Come Fortune, hitherto propitious,
and succor thy constant Favorite! But what are Fate and Fortune to a Chancery
Suit for Seven Thousand Cocks of Hay? Like a huge Cake of Ice at the opening of
Hudson's River, it advances with a slow but resistless Motion, sweeping away in
its Progress, the strongest opposing House or Barn, even as the weakest --
Drumstick. One half of all my Harvest! A full and complete Moiety! An equal
Division of Fourteen Thousand Cocks of Hay! It Is unconscionable. O how I mowed
with all my might and Main against the Expiration of the Lease! And how my
Friends labored like Emmets, to get it housed before that fatal Period! A
goodly Crop it was; and never before did the same Farm produce the like. But no
sooner has my Landlord's Agent entered the Close to make his Demand, but away
fly my Workmen, pell mell and helter skelter, with Carts, and Wagons, and
Teams, and Forks, and Rakes; leaving me, like the D -- of C --, with Nobody by
me but myself. -- One half of the whole Crop with the Emblements and
Appurtenances, and Hay-Boot, and Estovers and all! Not I, indeed. I will hold
fast as long as I can. The Habendum and Tenendum, are worth all the rest of the
longest Deed in the World. Possession is eleven Points of the Law. But where is
the Title to be tried? Aye, that is the Devil. What a Fool was I to kick up a
Dust against Juries? It Is the best Trial in the World; and the grand Bulwark of
English Liberty. But can it be just? Can it be right, that my Landlord should
have half of all my Earnings? A full and equal, and (oh the frightful Thought!)
to-be-divided Moiety? Is it by Virtue of a Condition precedent, or subsequent?
I remember no such Clause in the Lease. Refund! Refund! and that, an equal
Moiety? I think I can prove the contrary by express Law. I raised the Crop
myself. That was my own Act. If I am compelled to refund half, that will not be
my own Act, but the Act of another, and consequently tortious. This Authority
may be found in Judge Hale, in his Chapter of Juries. I have often thought of
Action and Re-action, in a philosophical Sense; but Perdition, I say, to this
Re-action, in the Law Sense. But it seems I must think of it: And truly it is
not now a Time to strut and swagger. My Landlord is powerful: My Sons are his
Tenants at Will: His Agent is inflexible: My Friends are shrunk into
Nonentity: And I may be called to an Account pour autros Chooses. Besides, if
the Moon will get in Opposition to the Sun, she may depend upon being eclipsed:
And this Contest of mine will probably be considered as our Meeting in the
Nodes of the Ecliptic, upon which such Obscuration always ensues. It Is truly an
intricate Point. Would to my Stars that I could prevent this Eclipse, by
driving away the Sun as the Chinese formerly attempted to do on the like
Occasion, by Beat of Kettle Drum! I Am weary of Conjectures. I think I will
either challenge the Array, or plead the Benefit of the Clergy. But hold --
that is not the Case in Chancery. Pox on it, then I will convey the Whole in
Trust. Aye, but the Interrogatories upon Oath! In what an inextricable Quondary
am I plunged! I really think a Trial by Juries the wisest Contrivance in the
World. But this swearing -- swearing -- swearing! Oh for a Draught of the River
Lethe, to deface the Memory of all my Receptions! Then I could answer plump, I
know nothing about it. But am I obliged to discover all my Profits? Suppose I
have sold my Hay for more than the Market Price. Suppose I had found the
Philosopher's Stone upon the demised Premises, -- What is all that to the
usual, customary and annual Profits of the Farm? Is a Man to get nothing by his
own Genius and Invention? Suppose again, that Neighbor Hobson, reduced to
great Extremity, and obliged to move the Day before his Spouse expected to lay
in, has paid me (I, do you see me? improving that Occurrence according to
Custom) Twenty Shillings a Day for the Hire of my Team, when the stated Price
is only Ten. Can my Landlord, upon his own Principles of a Moiety of my stated
Earnings, demand more than Five? Surely he does not desire to participate in my
Extortions? He cannot expect more by Reason of Goody Hobson's being within a
Day of her Reckoning. 'Twas my own personal Dexterity that mounted that Day's
Hire from Ten to Twenty. And if this will do, I shall secure Three-fourths of
the greatest Part of the Matter in Controversy. For that in Fact is the Case
with above Nine-tenths, of all the Profits I ever received. But one full Moiety
of all! I cannot part with it. Such Re-action would be the most unprofitable
Action of my Life; and such Refund, the worst of all Funds. The full Half of
all my Profits! What! of every Hen, and Duck, and Chick, and Egg, and Calf, and
Colt, and Pig, with a thousand Etcaeteras, which are no more appurtenant to the
genuine natural Issues of the Premises, than if I had received them upon the
High Way? I cannot. Positively I cannot bear the Thought. My Landlord will not
insist upon it. I once had Merit; and it is not long since that I flattered
myself to have been made Tenant for Life. Certain it is, that I have greatly
improved the Freehold; and every Body knows that the Farm, while in my Tenure,
has yielded, by the bare Dint of my Husbandry, ten fold more than ever it did
before. Who then could have put him upon this newfangled pernicious Scheme of
one half of all the Profits? Surely he has heard some strange Tales to my
Prejudice. Can he have learnt that I suffered one of his Servants, and merely
because he was his Servant, to be turned out of Doors, when I could have
prevented it by a single Word? In this I own, I did not consult his Interest,
agreeable to my constant Professions. But then it was only the Sin of
Friendship, to gratify those who would not be my Friends, but upon the Terms of
that violent Measure. Or can he have heard that I have been bribed, to permit
the Neighbors to encroach upon several of his Franchises, when it redounded to
my own Emolument, though greatly to his Disadvantage? Why, it was only to oblige
the very same Set of Friends; and I flattered myself that I had so glossed the
Matter, with his Honor and Interest, and Power, and Dignity, and all that,
(which I have constantly at my Fingers Ends) that he would never have detected
me. But had I foreseen this Consequence, I can assure them, I had preferred
their former Curses to their late Cringings; and followed my old Practice of
making Money, Money, my sole and only Friend. But then what Reason had I to
believe any Man sincere? O dear-bought Experience, of what I could so easily
have read in my own Breast! O that I could once more get Possession of my sweet
delightful old Tenement! A beautiful Spot it was; and many, many a golden
Harvest has it produced me.

O mihi proeter itos referet si Jupiter Annos! But something, they say, must be
done; and speedily done. For the Agent is in full Chase; and after a few
Doublings more, the old Fox will certainly be out of Wind. Why, and something I
should be willing to do. But the Half of all my Profits! Skin for Skin, what
will not a Man do to save his Money? An equal Division! There is not a more
nauseous Bolus in the whole Dispensatory. I have read, when I lately commenced
common Pleader, of the Moiety of an Advowson, and of the Advowson of a Moiety,
and of fifty other Moieties; but never a Syllable of the Moiety of my Profits,
nor of the Profits of my Moiety. Melchizedek, I have heard my Father say, was
satisfied with a Tenth of the Spoil; and Decimation would make no great Hole in
the Reckoning, But a full, equal, perfect, absolute, entire, complete, whole
and total Moiety! There is no such Thing in all Hobb's Leviathan. But then in
Case of Refusal, who will stand by me? Aye, that is the Question. My greatest
Beneficiaries have abandoned me. Most of the Tenants remember my old Pranks, as
how I have told his Honor a thousand Fibs about them, and endeavored to spirit
him up to raise his Rent-roll. The Lawyers, whom I have so scurrilously
treated, cannot in Honor be for me: And against me are the Powers, the Powers,
the Powers. O the Vicissitude of human Affairs! Surely mortal Man is a
Drumstick! Sic transit Gloria Mundi.

I who just now was like Julius Caesar,
Am now reduced to Nebuchadnezzar,
From the Zenith of Favor, to the Nadir of Neglect. -- I shall even be forced
to make a Leg to the Profession, though I have so often represented the whole
Body as a Pack of Villains. But hold. -- There is one whom I never abused; and
who in Token of his Honesty, has got Squire Fielding's Certificate of his good
Behavior. He served me once in a favorite Point. But this Moiety is a knotty
Business. O that I could leave the Controversy to twelve Men! It Is the best
Trial in the World. It Is the Bulwark of English Liberty. For defend I must at
all Events. For who can voluntarily part with seven thousand Cocks of Hay? But
defend against whom? Aye, that is the Rub. Why, then I must not defend. But
that is a Rub without any Chance. Where now are the Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness? Alas they dare not receive me into their Houses! And Nullus ad
amissus ibit Amicus opes.
I Am puzzled in Mazes, and perplexed with Errors.


Like King Lear in the Play, the very Elements war against me, Nay, My
Familiars from my buried Fortunes
Slink all away; leave their false Vows with me,
Like empty Purses picked; and my poor self,
A dedicated Beggar to the Air,
Walk, like Contempt, alone.


But cannot I keep the Matter pending, as the Lawyers call it Why should a Thing
that crawls like a Snail with respect to others, fly like a Whirligig, or
pounce like an Eagle, with respect to me? Faggs! I will instruct my Counsel to
plead, answer, and demur. They shall put in Replications, and Rejoinders, and
Rebutters, and -- Sur -- Sur -- Re -- Ri -- but -- Sur -- Surrebutters, and
all, and all Manner of Butter, and Butters, whatsoever and wheresoever. I will
instruct them to frame, form devise, advise, conceit, conceive, construct,
fabricate, make, do, execute, and suffer; and cause and procure to be made,
done, executed, and suffered, all and singular, and each and every, and all
Sorts, Species and Kinds of dilatory, cunctatory, postponitory,
procrastinatory, and circumlocutory Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Machination
and Machinations, past, present, and to come, and World without End. Thus
before the Complainant can have a Decree, the Defendant will be, non inventus.
Zuks, this is a bright Thought! It Is the very Primrose of all Invention. No,
No, it is not worth a Farthing. They would call upon Posterity. Yes, upon
Posterity. But what of all that? Pray, what has Posterity ever done for me? But
then I don't choose that the Money should go from me, even after I am gone from
the Money. There is a certain Connection that subsists, and will subsist, even
post mortem. Why now again, I am as far from the Mark as ever. I shall as soon
discover the Longitude, as an Extrication out of my Difficulties! Indeed a
Trial by Juries, is the best Trial in the World. It Is the grand Bulwark and
Paladium of our Liberties. -- But after all, why cannot I, for the first Time in
my Life, do that which is right, and pay the Gentleman his Money without any
Litigation? I know very well that there is such a Clause in the Lease; and that
I took the Farm upon that express Condition. But then as it would be the first,
so it would also be the last Time in my Life, that I gave up a Point,
especially concerning the ready Rhino, before I had wrangled it out to the End.
For it would instantly kill me as dead as a Herring.

But stay, stay, I think I have it. Yes, positively I have it. -- Strike up the
Drums! Huzza! Long live the King! I have it, I have it. -- I will even take
Refuge in a Petition of Dolence; for in a most daleful Condition I am. I will
blazon my old Services, and conceal my recent Iniquities. My Landlord is
bountiful; and at Representation, aye and at Misrepresentation too, who a
greater Adept than myself? Let us try what they will amount to.

I. In the Year 1747, I stood by a favorite Tenant of my Landlord's, who had
got the ill will of the whole Hamlet; and took the sole Management of his
Business upon myself. In this I certainly have Merit. Unless his Honor should
have heard that I received Ten Shillings a Day for the Service.

II. I once took it into my Head from a Hint in a Letter of one of my
Landlord's Attorneys (which by the Way I knew meant no such Thing) to embark in
a very troublesome Affair, which I was certain would greatly aggrandize his
Power; and indeed render him the Sovereign Arbiter of all the Property of his
Tenants. It was this. I pretended that it was his positive Order, in mere
Affection to them, and for the greater Security of their Estates, that he
should re-examine all their Quarrels and Disputes, after having before been
settled by their Neighbors. To induce their Compliance, which I knew in point
of Time and Expense, would reduce them to Beggary, I vilified all the usual
Arbitrators in that Part of the Country, and insisted that no Person in the
World except my Landlord alone, could possibly give a right Judgment in any
Case. I was upon the very Verge of carrying the Point, when the Lawyers set
themselves in Array against me; and compelled me to drop the Project, after the
generality of the Tenants appeared to acquiesce in it. I did not however tamely
yield the Dispute. No, No, that was never any failing of mine, when I intended
to ingratiate myself with his Honor. I determined to see it out to the Butt's
End. I borrowed Law Books. I studied Law. I wrested Authorities. I pleaded. I
twisted and turned. I fretted and foamed. In short I toiled and moil'd, and
tore and swore, and thundered and blunder'd, and discharged my Law as a
Conjuror spits Fire. But all to no Manner of Purpose. That detestable Nest of
Hornets, (whom I have hated ever since) persuaded the whole Village, (which by
the bye, was the real Truth of the Matter) that my Measure, if carried into
Execution, would not leave a single Tenant so much as Salt to his Porridge.
This was surely Merit, unless my Landlord knows that my secret View was only to
please him, in Expectation of securing a Lease for Life.

III. I have great Merit in the many Letters I have wrote to his Attorneys,
containing Schemes for increasing his Emoluments; and more than doubling his
Rental. I remember I once projected to him how his Tenants might be made to
burn Brick without Fuel; and that I could extract Gold-dust from their Urine.
Nay, at a particular Time I went so far as to assure him, that if he would
furnish me with sufficient Force to protect the Workmen, against those who I
feared, might dispute the Title, I would undertake to open a Mine in his Manor,
that should nett him above ten thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum. At other
Times I endeavored to conciliate his Favor, by traducing the most faithful of
his Tenants: As that they were debauched and disaffected. -- That they would
often make free with his Name over their Liquor; and drink the Health of his
greatest Enemy, Le Chevalier Would be. Surely all this must be real substantial
Merit: and I well remember that Neighbor Frank for less than half of the
Rodomontades I have transmitted, was lately made a Justice of the Quorun; and
now struts with his new Cockade so as scarcely to know his old Acquaintance.
And though in these Measures Self-interest was my only Motive, I think it
impossible he should have seen through my Design.

Lastly, and Finis coronat opus. My Landlord once took a Notion of having all
the Horses and Cattle of his Tenants marked and branded, they paying so much a
Head to the Agents whom he appointed for that Purpose. But on sending the
Marking-irons, the Tenants rose in a Body; and attempted to seize and destroy
the notarial Instruments, stock and block. Upon this, in sheer Fidelity to his
Interest (expecting however a small Gratuity in the End, if his Honor should be
so minded) I took all the Irons into my own Tenement. To rescue them out of my
Possession, they attacked the Message. Determined to repel the Assault, I
threw up Trenches, fortified the Passes, covered the Fences with Brush, and
furnished up every Sword, Pistol, Bayonet, and Fowling-piece in the House. I
pierced the Garret for threescore Muskets. I ordered a Chauldron of boiling
Water into the third Story; and disposed of my Dung-cart, ready loaded, to
defend the Postern. I cast four pewter Urinals into Bullets; and converted an
old Drying Pan into a Breast Plate. I turned two Spits into Spiers, and six
Brass Kettles into as many Drums. Of my Mustard-grinder I made an excellent
Bomb; and a very comfortable Helmet of an half worn Iron Chafing Dish. Thus
fortified and accoutred, and looking like Mars, as one Egg is like another. I
called to my Assistance a trusty Band of his Dependents; and threatened to
return the Attack, by setting Fire to every Hut, Cottage, Barn, Hovel, Cow-pen,
Dove-house, Hen-roost, Barrack, and Stable, on the whole Estate. In short, I
displayed the most heroic Conduct; and though I never had any Connection with
military Affairs, save in a certain Capacity that requires neither Powder nor
Ball, I exhibited both the Skill and Bravery of the most experienced General;
and finally preserved all the Irons from the meditated Destruction. To revenge
their Disappointment, the Insurgents carried off, and burnt my Wheel-barrow;
and consigned to the same Fate two of my Family Pictures, the Devil's and my
own. But effectually to prevent their renewing the Siege, I ordered a
Detachment in the dead of Night, to take off the Locks, and p -- s in the
Barrels of every Musket in the Vicinity.

Now all these sundry and diverse and supernumery meritorious Services and
Sufferings, Losses and Crosses, Writings and Fightings, well-dressed and
colored, (as I very well know how) and humbly presented in a most humble
Petition of Dolence, will undoubtedly so mollify a good-natured Landlord, as to
quit all farther Claim upon the Moiety of my Crop. It Is however the only Chance
left. Fortune, I once more invoke thee! If thou desertest me now, thou art a
Vixen. For it must not go. I can never -- never -- never part with it.


