Mr. Maccarty's SERMON ON THE Day of the Execution of William Linsey.

The most heinous Sinners capable of the saving Blessings of the Gospel. A
SERMON Preached at Worcester, October 25th. 1770. On Occasion of the Execution
of William Linsey, for Burglary.

By THADDEUS MACCARTY, A. M Pastor of the Church in Worcester.

"What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the
end of those things is Death". Apostle PAUL. "Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool". Prophet ISAIAH.
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to the Treasurer's Office,
in Milk-Street. MDCCLXX.

Is It. Epistle C O R. 6th Chap. 9, 10, 11, verses. Know ye not that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. -- And such were
some of you: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
THE Apostle Paul was, through the blessing of God, instrumental of doing great
things at Corinth. It abounded in wealth, and this furnished the means for all
kinds of luxury; and most heinous and detestable vices were very prevalent
among them. The Apostle, who was zealously set for the promoting the cause of
his beloved Lord and Master, came to this city, being encouraged by a vision he
had, assuring him that God had much people in that city, Acts 18. 9, 10. When
he came, as infamous as they were for vice, yet it is likely, that he met with
good acceptance among them, and accordingly he made a considerable tarry a year
and six months teaching the word of God among them, as in the verse following.

By his great pains and labors, he was instrumental of founding a church of
Christ in that wicked place, and bringing about a great reformation in it.
Indeed, notwithstanding all he did, there were yet many things amiss among
them, for which he takes occasion in the run of this epistle to reprove them.

In the chapter in which is our text, as well as the preceding, he warns them
against diverse heinous sins -- hypocrisy, fornication, idolatry, covetousness,
railery, drunkenness, extortion, prosecuting others needlessly and vexatiously
in the law.. With respect to some among them, these vices were still indulged,
notwithstanding they were directly opposite to the spirit of christianity,
which he had been preaching among them, and inculcating upon them. To enforce
the warning he had given against these vices, he adds as in the words I at
first read. -- Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of God? And then he immediately enumerates diverse great and most heinous
iniquities, the indulgence of which would effectually exclude them the kingdom
of God. -- The heavenly kingdom, or the kingdom of glory, which God has
prepared for the righteous, and into which their gracious spirits ascend in the
day of death, and into which Jesus Christ will publicly invite them in their
whole man, at the last day, saying unto them -- Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matt.
25. 34 -- This is the kingdom that the apostle intends, when he tells the
Corinthians, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. By the
caveat, the apostle enters here, it looks as though there were some among them,
at least, who imagined, that notwithstanding their indulging to such
iniquities, yet that on the whole they should inherit that kingdom. But, says
he, be not deceived, do not flatter yourselves in this matter, do not entertain
a thought of going to the kingdom of heaven, if you live in unrighteousness, or
in any of these instances of unrighteousness, fornication, idolatry, adultery,
etc. It is the grandest delusion and self-deception that can be, to entertain
the least thought or expectation of being admitted to so glorious a happiness,
at the close of an unrighteous, ungodly life. Before I proceed any further, I
would remark here -- That it is no uncommon thing, for unrighteous persons to
deceive themselves, that they shall on the whole inherit the kingdom of God;
though they indulge themselves in the most heinous and detestable abominations,
such as are enumerated in our text, they flatter themselves, that they shall be
happy at last. With respect to some indeed, God is not in all their tho'ts; and
the same may be said, with respect to a state of future rewards and
punishments. These great realities are banished far away from their minds.

But others may at times have some thoughts of God, and of heaven and hell. And
yet notwithstanding by their heinous vices, they are treasuring up wrath
against the day of wrath, posting headlong to destruction. Yet such is their
amazing stupidity, that they entertain a hope, that it shall be well with them
upon the whole, that they shall go to that heavenly kingdom which God has
prepared and promised to the righteous. And wherefore is it, that they
entertain such a hope? Why, it is partly owing to this, that they imagine that
God takes no notice of their conduct and behavior, or that he connives at it,
so making him altogether such an one as themselves. And partly, because they
imagine that God is made up wholly of mercy, and that therefore, he will not at
last find it in his heart to punish them; that he will set aside his justice,
and dispense with the threatenings which he has denounced against the wicked,
especially as there is an alsufficient Savior of his own providing, and a
sufficiency of merit in his blood to pardon and save them; and considering
also, that he is ready to pardon sinners, and that many great and high-handed
sinners have been the subjects of his pardoning mercy. The self-deception of
sinners, chargeable oftentimes with most heinous and atrocious crimes, is no
doubt, in a great many instances, grounded upon such imaginations as these.

But that these are vain imaginations, is obvious at the very first glance. --
I might show at large, would the time admit of it, that God is absolutely and
necessarily omniscient, and consequently that every being and every thing,
throughout the whole universe, is naked and open to his view; and particularly,
that he has a most exact and critical knowledge, without the least mistake, or
indeed possibility of it, of men and all their thoughts, words and actions. You
may, at your leisure, see in confirmation of what I have now said, the 139th
Psalm, at the beginning. -- I might show also that God being infinitely and
immutably holy, cannot possibly connive at sin, the least sin, for this would
be to connive at that which directly strikes at his glorious crown and dignity,
that pours contempt upon his authority and law, and upon all his adorable
attributes. Sin is directly opposite to his nature, law and government. And
what sort of idea must we entertain of God, if we should suppose that he in the
least connived at it, or was indifferent about it? Verily that is a clear
dictate of reason as well as of the Bible that he is of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity. -- And further, although it is true, that God is infinite in
mercy, and has given the most glorious proofs and evidences hereof to mankind,
yet it is true also, that he is infinite in his justice, and that this stands
upon the rights of his throne, and for the maintenance of his righteous
authority and his holy law, inviolate. This is abundantly evident, in the whole
of that great affair (...) the redemption of the world by Jesus Christ.

In the death and sacrifice of that glorious person, we have a most striking
proof of the strict regard God had for the honor of his justice, and this at
the same time that his mercy had the most shining, illustrious display; mercy
for ever to be admired and adored by saints and angels. Mercy rejoiced against
judgment in providing such a glorious Savior, as the Lord Jesus Christ is, and
so putting sinners in a capacity of being saved; yet it is a vain imagination
for any sinners to think, that God will set aside his justice, and suffer the
glory of this perfection to be eclipsed, so as that they shall be the subjects
of his mercy either here or hereafter, they continuing in their
unrighteousness, counteracting his law and government, by their vicious
practices. And so I may say further, that Christ is a mighty redeemer, able to
save to the uttermost, yet he gave himself, or offered himself in sacrifice,
that he might redeem sinners from their sins, from the power, pollution and
guilt of sin, as well as from the penal effects of it. Consequently then, they
can have no benefit by his death and sacrifice, if they are not redeemed from
iniquity, in the manner now said. And certainly, they are not thus redeemed, if
they live in the practice of iniquity. Nothing can be more plain than this. --
And I will only add in a word here -- That sinners that have obtained mercy
from God, and looked for his mercy unto eternal life, have obtained it, not as
hardened sinners, bent upon their ungodly practices, but as qualified subjects
of it, receiving the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, and the sanctification
of the holy Spirit. So that without further enlarging here -- It is with good
reason, that the apostle declares in our text, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, and accordingly enters a caution to all unrighteous
ones, and especially those he here enumerates, against self-deception: Be not
deceived, for no unrighteous person shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Now here let me ask, what it is that gives a title to the kingdom of God?
Verily, not any thing in the creature; for in himself he is utterly unworthy.
The most improved christian, has no title to heaven, and the blessedness of it,
upon the foundation of his own personal righteousness. If he attains to ever so
high degrees in holiness and righteousness, yet after all he is an unprofitable
servant. Let him be as eminent a christian as was the apostle Paul, yet he has
no claim upon God, and may not pretend to any title to heavenly happiness.
Considering the imperfection of personal righteousness in the very best, it is
impossible, according to the constitution of God's moral government, that such
a righteousness can give a title to the heavenly kingdom. The truth is, that
nothing short of the perfect righteousness of our blessed Savior, which is
imputed to the real christian, can give a title to the heavenly kingdom and
glory.

The proof of this, I might go on abundantly to confirm, were it necessary at
present. Now then, what shall we say of the unrighteous? What title can they
pretend to the heavenly kingdom, when they are, not only without the imputed
righteousness of Christ, but have not so much as a personal righteousness to
produce and plead in the case? They are without God and without Christ in the
world. What title then can they have to the kingdom of heaven? And what an
absurd thing must it be in such, to entertain the least expectation of finally
being admitted thereinto? The impossibility of their being so, at once appears
from the bare mentioning of the case. I would ask further -- What it is that
gives a meetness for that kingdom? God that dwells there is holy; angels are
holy; all the inhabitants of it are holy; the exercises and employments thereof
are all holy; and, as it is written, Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Unholy ones are utterly unlike the holy God: There is as
much contrariety in their natures, to the nature of God, as there is between
light and darkness: And what communion has light with darkness? An unholy
person, could we suppose that such an one could be admitted to heaven at last,
could have no true enjoyment of the holy God. For likeness to God is
essentially necessary, in order to the enjoyment of God. Being unholy, a
creature could have no taste or relish for the fellowship and society of holy
angels, or for their exercises and employments. Heaven, t o unholy ones, would
be a confinement to them, and they would even wish they were out of it, there
being such an utter unlikeness to every thing there, such an utter disrelish to
every object and every exercise there. If now upon the whole here, unrighteous,
unholy ones, have no meetness or fitness for the heavenly kingdom, what
wretched self-deception is it in such, to entertain the least thought or
expectation of at last being received thereinto? And were they to consider what
heaven is, the objects, the society, the employments and enjoyments of it, it
seems as though none of this character, and while continuing in this state,
could entertain the least thought of going there at last. But they have, it is
likely in many instances, carnal notions of it, as though it was nothing more
than a fine splendid city, furnished with objects adapted to gratify the animal
senses, having no higher ideas of it, than of a mohammedan paradise. But let
their imaginations be what they will* let their expectations of attaining to it
be ever so sanguine, yet it may be depended upon, if any dependence may be
placed upon what the apostle declares in our text, that such shall not inherit
the kingdom of God.

Now something more is intended by the apostle in this declaration, than is
expressed. He intends not only that they shall be excluded the kingdom of
glory, but that they shall be doomed to the kingdom of darkness. This will
unavoidably be their case. Abundance of passages in the book of God might be
produced were there need of it, which fully declare that the unrighteous shall
at last be shut up in the prison of hell. And there they will endure the wrath
of God, yea, the exceeding fierceness of the wrath of almighty God, through a
long eternity. There they will be companions with devils, who now entice them
and hurry them on in wickedness, with the malicious view of bringing them to
their place of torments. There they will, as do the devils, blaspheme the God
of heaven, and gnaw their tongues for pain, without the least respite, the
least gleam of hope, or ray of light. When millions of millions of ages are
rolled away, in which they have been grapling and conflicting with the
exceeding fierceness of the wrath of omnipotent God, still there is a long,
boundless eternity before them, and they are no nearer to an end of their
torments, than the very moment they entered upon them. This will be the
miserable condition at last of the unrighteous. It is impossible to describe,
or even to conceive a ten thousandth part of their future miserableness and
wretchedness in the bottomless pit; and this, notwithstanding all the solemn
and striking representations we have of it in the word of God. -- Who knows
the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. It
exceeds all the most fearful apprehensions, that may at any time be entertained
of it. This wrath is most assuredly coming upon all the children of
disobedience. God will come at last to show his wrath and make his power known,
in the sight of all intelligencies, upon such vessels of wrath, as have fitted
themselves for destruction. All those heinous sinners the apostle mentions in
our text, fornicators, adulterers, thieves, drunkards, etc. shall have their
portion at last in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Not a single one shall escape, however any may flatter themselves
now that they shall do so.

I would just observe here -- That there are many, who, though they may not
stand chargeable with such gross open iniquities as the text leads us to
consider, yet, properly come under the character of the unrighteous. Although
their outward conduct may be decent before men, yea although in many instances,
they may practice the forms of godliness, yet they are without the power of it;
they have a name to live, but are dead, under the power of carnal minds that
are enmity against God, false and hypocritical in all their transactions with
him, have never had any real, thorough sense of sin, nor godly mourning for it.
In short, their hearts are estranged from God, they are earthly and sensual in
their dispositions and affections. Such as these, though they may make a goodly
appearance before the world, are yet in the sight of the holy and
heart-searching God, unrighteous. And with respect to these also it may be
said, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God. No unclean, unholy thing
shall enter there. All unrighteousness is sin, says the apostle, 1 John 5. 17.
This takes in those, that I have now mentioned. And as it is elsewhere said,
Sin is the transgression of the law, eternal death is the penalty annexed to
this law. And this penalty will be inflicted upon all the unrighteous at last.
All these things stand in close connection with each other. And accordingly,
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. Against all unrighteousness, whether secret
or open. And far be it from any to fix the charge of cruelty upon God, in
inflicting his everlasting wrath upon unrighteous, ungodly ones. For it will
not be a mere act of power* but he will proceed upon the rules of strict
justice. Unrighteous ones are enemies against his great and sacred majesty,
they do the abominable thing which his soul hates; they counteract his
authority and holy law, and virtually bid him defiance. They break through the
most sacred ties of gratitude, for his abundant goodness and grace toward
them, especially in that mavelous instance of it, his sending his
only-begotten son to redeem them by the blood of his cross. They rebel both
against the light of nature and the light of divine revelation, and take part
with the grand enemy of God, and of all righteousness.

What monstrous vileness now is it, to act such a part toward the adorable
majesty of heaven and earth, who is so infinitely excellent, and so infinitely
worthy of the highest regards of all intelligent creatures, who are under the
strongest obligations to live entirely devoted to his service and glory! Can it
then be otherwise, but that he must behold the unrighteous, wicked conduct of
his creatures, with the highest anger and resentment? And must he not in honor
to his great name, for the establishment of his throne, the magnifying his law,
and for the asserting and vindicating his holiness, justice and truth, manifest
his anger and resentment toward them? Must he not on the whole, punish them
according to their deserts? And considering his infinite majesty and dignity,
must he not everlastingly punish them? It is certain that sin is an infinite
evil, if we consider the object against whom it is committed, the infinite God,
and it deserves an infinite punishment. And although according to the different
aggravations of men's wickedness, there will be different degrees of punishment
in hell, [ with some, we read it will be more tolerable than with others, Matt.
11. 24.] yet as to the duration of it, it will be alike as to all; an
everlasting destruction from God's presence, and the glory of his power. This
will be inflicted at last upon all that know not God, and who have not obeyed
the gospel of his son. And there will be no unrighteousness in God, but he and
his throne will be pure and guiltless. And poor, miserable sinners, in the
place of torment will be constrained to own the equity and righteousness of
God, in inflicting his insupportable and everlasting wrath upon them.

I will only say in a word here, when the apostle declares in our text, that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, he is to be understood,
as intending those that continue in their unrighteousness to the last. Not but
that there have been many unrighteous ones, who have indulged themselves in the
most heinous vices, such as the apostle makes mention of, who have experienced
a blessed change both of state and nature, and so from being children of wrath
and heirs of hell, have become the children of God, and heirs to the heavenly
kingdom, and in their spirits have been put into possession of their
inheritance, when they have been dismissed hence by death.

And this leads me now to discourse upon the latter part of our text. -- And
such were some of you. Such heinous transgressors as I have mentioned, some of
you have been. The word in the original, is emphatical -- such things were some
of you, such wretched, monstrous creatures, who by the indulgence of such
detestable abominations, degraded yourselves below the beasts that perish.
Notwithstanding which ye shall inherit the kingdom of God. And why? Because ye
are washed, sanctified, justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God.

I might now enter into a large field, in treating upon those great and
inestimable blessings here spoken of. But the time will only allow me to
discourse upon them in a summary way.

When the apostle tells the Corinthians, who had been abominably vile and
ungodly, -- ye are washed, he intends something more than their having been
baptized into the christian name by the washing of water. He intends their
having been regenerated. This, viz. regeneration, is spoken of as a washing. So
we read Titus 3. 4. of the washing of regeneration. And being regenerated, they
were accordingly, as he goes on to speak, sanctified and justified. "Here" (as
one observes) "is a rhetorical change of the natural order: Sanctification is
mentioned before justification." They are in their nature different; but
considering their close connection, we need not be critical here.

Justification is a forensic term, or a term borrowed from courts of justice.
When the apostle tells the Corinthians, they were justified, he intends in
general, that they were acquitted from guilt, pardoned by God, the father of
mercies, the lawgiver and judge of mankind, even as criminals and malefactors
sometimes have been, by their gracious sovereign's reversing the sentence of
condemnation they were under for the violation of the laws, the guilt thereby
contracted, and the penalty incurred. Justified persons are discharged from
their guilt, the justice of God has no demands upon them. Their sins are
blotted out. God hides his face from them, and remembers them not against them,
however numerous they have been, and though of a scarlet and crimson color. He
receives them to favor, and looks upon them as righteous; for so they are in a
legal sense. "Gospel-justification", (as one observes) does not barely take off
the guilt of sin and reverse the sentence of condemnation by a pardon, and so
restore us to a state of probation which might issue in a state of condemnation
again; it likewise pronounces us righteous, and brings us into a state of
present and personal acceptance with God to eternal life, whereby, according to
the constitution of the gospel, we have a sure, an actual and abiding claim to
it. It brings us into a new and complete title to life, beyond what man ever
had before, and into greater nearness to God, and higher dignities and
blessings in his favor and love, than belonged to the first covenant. The free
gift comes upon us to justification of life, Romans 5. 18. And whom God
justifies, them he also glorifies, chap. 8. 30.

Such a blessed alteration as this was made in the state of some of the
Corinthians, who had been abandoned to the most flagitious practices; acquitted
from guilt, delivered from condemnation, made righteous, restored to favor and
entitled to life. And wherefore was it so? Why, as in the text, it was in the
name of the Lord Jesus, or for his sake, in virtue of his atonement by the
blood of the cross, by which he made peace, put away sin, and brought in an
everlasting righteousness. The righteousness of Christ is every way adequate to
the demands of the law and justice of God. Faith lays hold of this
righteousness and it is imputed to the guilty sinner for the justification of
life. This is the language of the gospel. And consequently now, I would just
observe -- It is not owing nor can it be owing, either in whole or in part, to
any works of righteousness of the sinner's own, that he is justified before
God; but solely to the righteousness of our great Redeemer, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

But now, besides such a happy change of state in the Corinthians, as their
being justified, they experienced also a happy change of nature: Ye are
sanctified. This, as was hinted before, though different from their
justification, was and always is in near connection with it. Being sanctified
they were brought into a conformity to the holy God, made partakers of a divine
nature, all the powers of their souls renewed, and a holy, heavenly turn given
to them. In the comprehensive representation of the apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Being in Christ, they were new creatures, old things were passed away, and all
things became new. Now they were brought to love the blessed God, to love the
Lord Jesus Christ, to love the divine law, to hate sin, to mourn for it, to
forsake it, and to consecrate themselves to God, to glorify him in their bodies
and spirits which are his. Now they were possessed of the spirit of Christ,
molded into the genius of his gospel, and had a prevailing disposition and
bent of heart to live soberly, righteously and godly in the world, as the grace
of God which brings salvation teaches. This in brief we are to understand by
their being sanctified. And what a happy and most desirable change was this!
They were now conformed to the holy God, and the holy Jesus, and brought into a
meetness for the high and holy heavens, for the enjoyment of the holy God, for
the society of holy angels, and for their holy and sublime exercises and
employments.

But now they themselves were not the authors of this sanctification: No, ye
are sanctified by the Spirit of our God. So we elsewhere read of the
sanctification of the Spirit -- of the renewing of the holy Ghost. The blessed
Spirit of God, who is the spirit of grace and holiness, he is the author or
efficient cause of the sanctification of souls. This is abundantly the language
of the inspired oracles. And all christian graces and virtues, are spoken of as
fruits of the spirit: Forasmuch as he by his gracious influences implants the
seeds of them in the heart, causes them to take root there, to spring up and
bring forth fruit to the praise and glory of God.

I shall only just add here, that we may with propriety speak of being
sanctified, not only by the influence and agency of the Spirit of our God, but
of being sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, or in virtue of his
atonement. For it is to be considered, that the Spirit in his sanctifying
influences is the purchase of the death of Christ. Had he not offered himself a
sacrifice to God, it would have been impossible that sinners should ever be
recovered to the image of God, or become holy, as well as brought into a state
of pardon and justification. Accordingly we read of being sanctified in Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 2. And in the 30th ver. the apostle gives us a comprehensive
view of the whole of man's redemption, present and future, the whole of it,
taking its rise from the mediation of Christ. But of him, are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.

And thus I have in some measure gone through with the whole of the inspired
passage I at first read to discourse upon, upon this sorrowful occasion.

And now from the things that have been spoken, I may take occasion to observe,
with what a conspicuous and admirable light the wisdom and the grace of God,
shines forth in the work of man's redemption. A better righteousness than his
own is provided, in which he may with safety appear before the holy and
righteous God, both here and hereafter: And effectual provision made for his
recovery from his pollution and degeneracy and restoration to a state of true
rectitude and moral purity. So that notwithstanding his guilt and vileness, he
may not only escape future wrath and perdition, but have a sure title to and
meetness for celestial glory and happiness. (...) is all of God, of his
contriving and effecting, and how gloriously is his wisdom and his grace
displayed and illustrated herein!

Again, -- What obligations are we under to Jesus Christ, for undertaking this
work, and carrying it into effect! Glorified saints will through eternal ages
adore and praise him for his loving them and washing them from their sins in
his own blood, and in raising them to sit together with him in heavenly places.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power and riches and wisdom and
strength and honor and glory and blessing, Rev. 5. 12.

Again, -- What praises are due to God, from those who have been made partakers
of the great redemption by Jesus Christ; who have obtained the justification of
life, and the sanctification of the Spirit, and so have a sure title to and a
proper meetness for the happiness and glory of heaven! Well may the high
praises of God be in their mouths for his rich grace and mercy toward them.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be all the glory.

Nextly, -- We may hence see, that redeemed ones are the most happy and blessed
ones upon the earth. For their sins are blotted out, their guilt pardoned and
done away. Being in Christ, no condemnation belongs to them. They have on them
the image of God. And God is a Father to them, and loves them as dear children,
has provided a glorious inheritance for them in the highest heavens, and will
by and by put them into the full and everlasting possession of it. What are all
the pomps and splenders of the world, all its wealth, honors and pleasures, in
compare with all this? Verily no more than the common pebbles to the most
brilliant diamonds, or the lonely cottage of the beggar, to the magnificent
palaces of princes and nobles.

Lastly, -- We may hence see, that the vilest sinners, may obtain the richest
spiritual blessings, such as we have been speaking of, the justification of
life, and the sanctification of the Spirit, and as the issue of all, eternal
glorification in heaven. --

We have an example of this in some among the Corinthians. Notwithstanding
their monstrous and most detestable vices, which exposed them to the damnation
of hell, and which would have irrecoverably sunk them down into it, had a
provoked God wholly departed from them and given them up, yet they were
justified and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
our God, and so brought to share in the glorious redemption by Christ both
present and future. So that we may never despair of the most heinous sinners,
if they are as infamous, as some of the Corinthians were that are spoken of in
our text, of their being brought home to God and obtaining salvation. Nor may
sinners themselves, let them have ever so afflicting, pungent a sense of their
guilt, their misery and ill-deserts, despair hereof, since thus it has been
with others. The merits of Christ's precious blood, and the vital influences of
the blessed Spirit can as effectually reach them, as the abominable Corinthians
or any other the most atrocious sinners. And in this case they will be
delivered from the lowest hell, and be among the number of the redeemed of the
Lord in the kingdom of glory.

I have chosen the subject I have been discoursing upon, mainly with a view to
your instruction and benefit, poor man! who art under a sentence of
condemnation, this day to be executed upon you. We have called this solemn
assembly, that you might once more before you die, have the opportunity of
having public, fervent prayers offered up to God on your behalf; and receiving
instruction and counsel in those things which concern your everlasting
well-being. While you have attended the public worship of God, since your
condemnation, very solemn and weighty have been the instructions and counsels
you have received, and so they have been in a more private manner: And frequent
and fervent supplications have been offered up to the God of heaven for mercy
to your precious and immortal soul. You have had a considerable space since
your condemnation to prepare for this solemn day, and for the solemn hour of
death just before you. And as this is the last opportunity you will ever have
to attend to the public instructions of God's word, see that you give a
diligent and earnest heed to what may be now spoken to you in the name of the
Lord. --

I would be far from upbraiding you with your wickedness: However, from the
crime you have been convicted of, and for which you have been sentenced to die,
you must be very sensible that your character is pointed out in the black
catalogue of sinners mentioned in my text. Among other atrocious sinners, who
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, the apostle mentions thieves. And were
you chargeable with no other crime than that of theft, this alone would be
sufficient to exclude you the kingdom of God. For this is a direct breach of an
express commandment of God. Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20. 15. And only the
violation of this commandment is an argument of rebellion against the Lord, a
despising his authority and his law, and there is an infinite evil in it, and
it deserves an infinite punishment. You have had solemn warnings against this
vice, in the public punishments you have been brought to; but you presumed to
go on notwithstanding, hardening your self against God and his law, and the laws
of man, as though you could prosper. You have disregarded God and his
threatenings, and the judgment to come. You forsook God, and God forsook you.
You would have none of God, and so he gave you up unto your own heart's lusts,
and to walk in your own counsels. And what is the dismal effect of it? Why, you
have been brought before the tribunal of man, and have been sentenced to die
before the time. And the solemn day is now come -- and preparation is made for
your execution. The grave has opened its mouth to receive you, and you will
presently be laid in it, while your spirit shall go to the world of spirits. --
You are now hovering upon the brink of eternity, and will presently be in it. O
what an awful situation is this! But yet though the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, and you
must be sensible that you are deserving of it, yet through the riches of God's
grace in Christ, you may escape it, and be received to the kingdom of glory.
And if you are interested in the righteousness of Christ, and renewed and
sanctified by the blessed Spirit, you may die in the firm faith and hope of
being so. -- And let me tell you, that if you are in a justified, sanctified
state, you have been awakned to see your wretched, guilty, miserable condition
as a sinner, been led to see what an evil and bitter thing sin is, not merely
as you have exposed yourself to the sword of civil justice, and to the
everlasting wrath of God; but principally, because you have acted a vile,
rebellious, ungrateful part toward the glorious Majesty of heaven, who in
numberless instances has been good and kind and merciful to you; and your heart
is broken and contrite on account hereof: And you have been brought to see that
you are without help and strength in yourself, that you have nothing to
recommend you to God, and that he might justly make you a monument of his
everlasting wrath, because of your heinous wickedness; but yet that there is
hope for you -- that there is a glorious fullness in Christ. -- You have been
led to believe in him as an alsufficient Savior, and to embrace him as the
Lord your righteousness, and to trust your whole soul upon his infinite merits.
And therefore have found a great and mighty change of heart; that you esteem
and love the blessed God supremely and for his own incomparable excellencies as
well as benefits -- that Christ is precious to your soul, that you love the law
of God, and that sin which is opposite to it is most hateful to you -- that you
heartily bow to God and have a supreme regard to his glory, and fervent charity
toward men, and that after all you freely acknowledge yourself an unprofitable
servant, and look for eternal life as the free gift of God, of his rich and
glorious grace through Jesus Christ the only mediator between God and man.

It is no proper season for any one to flatter you, or for you to flatter
yourself. Your eternal all depends upon your finding matters thus with you, as
I have now said. Look critically and thoroughly and impartially into yourself,
and see how it is with you. It is an awful thing for any one, especially* at
the last, as is the cafe with you, to deceive himself, and think he is
something, when he is nothing, from high hopes of heaven, to find himself at
death, sinking down into the lowest hell. A mistake here is irreparable.

It is our hearts desire and prayer to God, that though you must die this day
an ignominious death, yet that you may die in a state of favor with God,
interested in the precious merits of the blessed Jesus, and that you may have
the comfortable, substantial evidences hereof, and that your soul may go to be
at rest with God, and be joined this day to the society of saints and angels in
the kingdom of glory.

Now that you are about retiring from this place, and will have a few moments
left you, prostrate yourself before the throne of God's mercy, spread your sins
and distresses before him; cry to him with importunity, for the exercise of his
mercy toward you, that he would shine into your soul with the light of his
blessed countenance, and enable you to meet death with all the solemn
circumstances attending it, with a holy courage, and that in the fatal moment
you may with a firm faith resign your immortal spirit into the hands of the
blessed Jesus, saying with Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

So now, on the whole, we earnestly recommend you to the grace of God and to
the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ, even unto eternal life.

And now, Brethren! We may here see the bitter fruits and effects of indulged
wickedness. -- Overmuch wickedness tends to an immature death, sometimes by the
sword of civil justice being drawn upon the committers of it, as in the
instance before us, and in the instance we had in this place but about two
years ago, as well as in other instances; and partly also as many vices tend by
a natural causality to shorten men's days upon earth. But then this is not the
worst of it, for it tends to eternal death and destruction, as has been shown
in the preceding discourse. O then, how ought every one, young and old, to
take warning by the examples of others, and shun the paths of vice, and of the
destroyer! Let every sinner immediately repent and turn to God, and fly to
Jesus who saves from sin, and delivers from the wrath to come; and henceforth
live soberly, righteously and godly in the world, that so he may be happy in
the favor of God here, and at last be received to the kingdom of glory. And O
that all Israel may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly!

And in a word -- May all that attend the execution of this poor man, lift up
their hearts in fervent prayer for him, that God would display the riches of
his grace in his everlasting salvation. And may the minds of all present here
and in this place this day, solemnized upon such an affecting occasion; avoid
every thing that is rude and disorderly, retire home in proper season, and take
occasion to bless God for the restraints of his grace, and sensible of their
weakness and liableness to temptations, seek for the guidance of his good
Spirit in the way of duty, and that they may be kept from falling, and be
preserved by the mighty power of God, through faith unto salvation. May it be
thus with every one of us, through the riches of God's grace in Christ Jesus!
to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, power and glory, now
and forevermore!

AMEN.

