ON CHURCH DISCIPLINE; SHOWING, The Reasons of the Author's renouncing that
Part of SAY-BROOK-PLATFORM, ENTITLED, Articles for the Administration of Church
Discipline. IN A SERMON, Preached at NEWTOWN, AUGUST 5, A. D. 1770.

By DAVID JUDSON, A. M.

NEW HAVEN. Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN.

EPHESIANS i. 22.23. "And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of Him
that fills all in all."


THE Son of God, the Second Person in the adorable Trinity, having assumed the
human nature, into a personal union with the divine; he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the accursed death of the cross: who having
thereby satisfied the divine law, for those for whom he was delivered unto
death; was therefore raised again for their justification, and exalted unto,
and seated down at the right hand of the throne of the majesty on high; endowed
with all power and authority to execute the various purposes of his coming and
kingdom, to the everlasting praise of his grace. "Exalted," as said in the
preceding verse, "by the mighty power of God, far above all principality and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come." "Who," as said in the words of our
text, "has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to his church, which is his body; the fullness of him that fills all
in all." All things whether in heaven or on earth, are subjected to the Lord
Jesus Christ, put under him, to be ruled and governed by him, until brought
into entire subjection to the great ends and designs of his kingdom: "For he
must reign till he has put all things under his feet." 1 Cor. 15.25.

But then, at the right hand of the Father, it is in a special manner given to
Christ Jesus, to be the head over all things to the church: even the head of
all life, influence and direction, to that people which are to be gathered
under him as their head, collected together in him, as his body, to be animated
and quickened by him, and to be filled with all his glorious fullness. -- In
further speaking to which, I purpose to consider, and show,

The import of Christ's being the head of his body, the church. The nature of
that body; of what subjects it is made up: and how to be ruled and governed, as
to the order and discipline thereof. -- But,

I. Of the import of Christ's being the head of his body, the church. And as he
is the head, he has in all things the pre-eminence. Is the author and finisher
of the faith. The purchaser, and giver of all spiritual, heavenly and
everlasting mercies and blessings. The great fountain of light and life. The
great Prophet sent of God, to reveal the will of the Father. The great
High Priest, entered into the holy of holies, there to appear in the presence
of God for his people. But that which I have now, more particularly in view, to
be insisted upon is, That Christ's being the Head of his Body, the Church,
implies, that he is the sovereign Lord and sole King thereof. According to that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.6. "Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion."
Compared with John 1.49. "Thou art the Son of God, the King of Israel." And
John 12.13. "Hosannah, blessed is the King of Israel, that comes in the name
of the Lord." And ver. 15. "Fear not, daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes,
sitting on an asses colt."

And that Christ is King, implies, that he is sole lawgiver to his Body, the
Church; as said by the prophet Isaiah, "The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our
lawgiver, the Lord is our king, he will save us." And as king on the holy hill
of Zion. Christ's Church is his kingdom, in and over which he rules and reigns.
And so his kingdom is not of a worldly, but entirely of a spiritual nature. And
consequently a kingdom entirely distinct, from the civil kingdom of this world.
Neither interfering with, nor dependent upon them. Agreeable to the answer,
which Christ himself gave to Pilate; enquiring of him, whether he was the king
of the Jews. "My kingdom is not of this world, if my kingdom were of this world
then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but
now is my kingdom not from hence."

The civil powers that be, are ordained of God, to maintain peace and good
order in the commonwealth: to be a terror to evildoers, and a praise and
encouragement to them that do well. But these civil kingdoms are altogether of
a worldly nature; their weapons are carnal, their punishments are corporal and
secular; and all their honors, emoluments and advantages are temporals. In
regard to which civil kind of matters, Christ said, "Who made me a judge or
divider over you." Luke 12.14. For the kingdom of Christ, is entirely of a
spiritual nature: respecting the conscience, and things spiritual and eternal.
The laws, weapons, and defense, the penalties, benefits and blessings of which,
are all of a spiritual nature. Agreeable to that of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 9.4. "For
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down strong holds." No compulsions, motives and inducements therefore, of a
secular nature, have any thing to do in the kingdom of Christ; whose sole right
it is, as king in Zion, to ordain and appoint, laws, statutes and ordinances,
for the regulation, government and order of his house and kingdom. And who
accordingly has, set forth in his gospel, either by precept or example, all the
laws and rules which he saw needful and fit to appoint, for the regulation and
government of his church. And nothing can be binding upon, or be a safe rule
unto, the consciences of Christ's subjects, but these injunctions only, which
are plainly stamped with his authority. The Lord Jesus did indeed commission
his apostles to give orders and directions about the government of his
churches; who proved their authority from Christ, to do so, by the many
wonderful works, which they wro't in his name. But no other set of men, can
have any claim to such authority, till they can produce the same evidence for
it, that the apostles did. It is said indeed, in the 34th article of the Church
of England, "That every particular or national church has authority, to
ordain, change and abolish ceremonies, or rights of the church, ordained only
of man's authority." And well would it be indeed, to abolish all such rights,
ordained only by men's authority. But to ordain such, to be binding upon the
consciences of men, cannot be done, without infringing upon the royal
prerogative of Christ, as sole king and lawgiver in his church. And it is
equally inconsistent, to introduce any civil laws, however wholesome in the
commonwealth, as a rule of judgment, in matters pertaining to the conscience,
in the church of Christ. As that, would be a reflection upon the kingly office
of Christ, as though he had not given laws himself, sufficient for the due
regulation and government of his church and kingdom, or as though his laws, might
be dispensed with at pleasure, by his subjects. Such must needs be justly
obnoxious, to that, his righteous rebuke. Luke 6.46. "Why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things which I say." Such as would own Christ Jesus, for
their Lord, must subject their consciences, in all respects, without reserve,
entirely to his authority in his word. -- But,

II. Of the nature of this body of Christ, the church, as to the subjects of
which it does consist. And by the church is meant in the gospel, in a more
general sense, all the true members of Christ, even the whole number of true
believers, or all the elect of God, of what nation soever, from the beginning
to the end of the world. All which make up, but one mystical body, of which
Christ is the Head. This is plainly meant, by the church in our text. As also
in Col. 1.1^. "And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, who is the
beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence." In this sense, the church here in this world, is one body with
that perfected in glory; according to that, Heb. 12.22, 23. "But ye are come
unto Mount-Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable company of angels: to the general assembly and church of
the firstborn which are written in heaven." All true believers in Jesus
Christ, belong to, and are the subjects of this one universal church and
kingdom of Christ; begun here in time and perfected in glory. "That he might
present it to himself, a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish." Ep. 5.27. These,
the subjects of Christ's kingdom, in this general sense, are not all joined
together in any one visible congregation here in this world. But in order to
accomplish his gracious purpose toward his church universal, the Lord Jesus
Christ has ordained and appointed, that such as profess to receive him as their
Lord and Savior, be joined together, in particular worshipping congregations.
To be each, as one visible body; unitedly calling upon his Name, hearing his
word, and partaking of his ordinances, and walking together as brethren, in
that order and discipline which he has appointed in his house. And accordingly
the apostles, under the direction of Christ their Lord, did gather, set up and
establish, the first particular church at Jerusalem; where the gospel began to
be preached, from whence the sound thereof was to go forth into all the world:
and other particular churches be gathered and set up, after the pattern of that
first church at Jerusalem. Which church, according to the apostolic account,
plainly appears, to have been made up of such, for the members thereof, as
professed to believe in, and receive the apostolic doctrine, concerning Jesus
Christ. Acts 2.41, etc. "Then they that gladly received his word were baptized,
and the same day, there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And
they continued steadfast in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers. And the Lord added to the church daily such
as should be saved." To that particular church at Jerusalem were daily
additions made, of such as received the apostolic doctrine and were baptized
with the gospel baptism; joined together to hold fellowship in that doctrine,
and in the breaking of bread, in the Lord's Supper, and in prayers. And
together with these, it seems were joined their infant seed, made members
together with them of the same visible body; and so also partakers of baptism
the initiating seal. As to these same persons, St. Peter said just before, "For
the promise is to you, and to your children." These, made not many, but one
worshipping assembly. "They were all with one accord in Solomon's porch." Acts
5.12. It was not, it may be observed, the apostles and elders, that were
denominated the church; but more especially the brethren, even in distinction
from the apostles and elders; as appears from Acts 15.4. "They, (Paul and
Barnabas) were received of the church, and of the apostles and elders;" and v.
22. Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole church, to send
chosen men," etc. The brethren are here denominated the church; which appears
to have had elders over them; besides the apostles, as officers invested with a
special and extraordinary commission, extending even to the ends of the earth.
And from the Acts of the apostles, it appears, that after the model of the
first church at Jerusalem, they actually gathered churches every where in every
place, where a sufficient number appeared to profess the gospel faith,
ordaining elders over every such particular church. For, upon the persecution
that arose about Stephen, many were scatered abroad. And some of them going to
Antioch, "the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and
turned to the Lord; of whom a church was formed there, called the church at
Antioch; to which Paul and Barnabas preached for a time. Act. 11.19. etc. And
from which also Paul and Barnabas were by the command of the Holy Ghost, sent
forth to preach the gospel among the Gentiles. Act. 13.1. etc. Who accordingly
went forth and preached; and returning again through those places where their
preaching had been successful, 'they confirmed the souls of the disciples,
exhorting them to continue in the faith; and when they had ordained them elders
in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord
on whom they believed.' Act. 14.21. etc. Thus having gathered and set up
particular churches in diverse places, and completed their church state, by
ordaining elders over them, they commended them not to any superintending
judicature, but to the Lord, on whom they believed. And thus every particular
congregation, joined together to attend gospel worship and ordinances in one
place, is in the gospel called a church. And where there are numbers of such,
of any province or kingdom, collectively spoken of, they are called churches.
Thus we read of the church at Jerusalem, of the church at Antioch, at Ephesus,
etc. meaning one particular worshipping congregation. But of the churches of
Judah, of Asia, etc. meaning the several particular congregations, which were
in those provinces. And neither is there any instance to be found in the
new testament, of the various particular churches, through a whole province or
kingdom, being collectively called the church of such a country; such as the
church of Rome, the church of England, and the church of Scotland, etc. meaning
a great number of particular assemblies, some how joined together, so as to be
but one church. And so also, it does not appear, that there were any bishops in
the apostolic churches, that had the oversight of a number of particular
churches; nor indeed any bishop at all, but such only, as were elders in some
particular church. Agreeable to that, Acts 20.17. "And from Miletus, he (St.
Paul) sent to Ephesus and called the elders of the church;" compared with ver.
28th. "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God."
Overseers, that is, episcopous, the very word in the original, universally used
in the new testament for bishops. Instead of one bishop, over several
particular churches, there were several elders over that one particular church
at Ephesus. And all those elders were overseers; episcopous, the true scripture
bishops, and such are all gospel elders.

And, III. To the brethren of such particular churches, with their own elder or
elders over them, the exercise of all church discipline belongs. To such
particular churches, Christ has committed all that authority, which he has
given in the new testament, for the continued, standing discipline of his
house; to admit their own members, to receive complaints, to hear, try, judge,
and deal with offenders; to restore the penitent, or to reject and cast off
incorrigible offenders; as pointed out, Mat. 18.15, etc. "Moreover, if thy
brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. But if he will
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word may be established. And if he neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto
thee as an heathen man and a publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven." This is the general commission, and most
explicit direction, given by Christ, for the exercise of discipline in his
house; which is plainly given as to a particular church, and applicable
therefore to every such church. And what is here said, in this particular
verse, is abundantly illustrated, ratified, and confirmed, by the various
declarations here and there set forth in the new testament relative to this
matter. More particularly: From the elders of particular churches, being styled
rulers; as in 1 Timothy 5.17. "Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of
double honor." And, Heb. 13.7. "Remember them that have the rule over you, who
have spoken unto you the word of God." And, ver. 17. "Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they
that must give account." Thus every elder, is by office, a ruler over the
particular church of which he is elder. Besides whom, we read of no other
standing rulers in the church of Christ. And yet, neither are they set to rule
as lords over God's heritage; but as ensamples to the flock. 1 Pet. 5.3. And
consequently to rule with the joint concurrence of their respective churches.
Accordingly particular directions are given, expressly to the brethren, about
this matter. Romans 16.17. "Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrines which ye have learned, and
avoid them." And 2 These. 3.6. "Now we command you brethren, in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks
disorderly." Thus the brethren are called to mark, judge of, and avoid those
that walk disorderly, and cause offenses, contrary to the apostolic doctrine.
Agreeable to that, 1 Cor. 5.11. "But now I have written unto you not to keep
company, if any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or
an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no
not to eat."

And thus the church of Christ at Corinth, acting by the apostles direction, as
a particular church, did put away from among themselves, the incestuous person;
and after his repentance restored him again. 1 Cor. 5.13. "Put away from among
you that wicked person." And, 2 Cor. 2.6, and 8. "Sufficient to such a man is
the punishment which was inflicted of many. Wherefore I beseech you, that ye
would confirm your love toward him." Thus even St. Paul himself did not
attempt authoritatively to restore him, whom the Corinthian church had put away
from among them; and that not even after he had manifested repentance. "But
beseeches them to confirm their love to him." And if not St. Paul, who then
among men, may in such cases, claim juridical authority over particular
churches? Thus it is abundantly manifest, that the whole authority given by
Jesus Christ, for the government, order, and discipline of his house, is given
to individual churches, to be vested in them, and to be exercised by them. And
where Christ himself has placed this authority, there it must abide; and cannot
be given up by particular churches into any other hands, without betraying the
trust which the Lord has committed unto them. Nor can any wrest it out of their
hands, without trespassing upon the royal prerogative of the Lord Jesus Christ;
who must reign till all his enemies are put under his feet.

It is doubtless consistent with the gospel, for particular churches in
different cases, to ask advisory counsel of neighboring elders and churches.
"As in the multitude of counselors there is safety." Prove. 11.14. And
requisite also that elders be ordained by a presbytery of elders. 1 Timothy 4.14.
"Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophesy, with
the laying on of the hands of the presbytery." Compared with 2 Timothy 2.2. "And
the things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also." But all absolute
juridical superiority of any one man, or of any number of men, over such
particular churches, is plainly forbidden. Mat, 20.25. "But Jesus called them
unto him, (his disciples, moved with indignation one at another, about which
should be the greatest) and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them; and they that are great exercise authority upon
them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your minister. And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant." Compared with Mat. 23.8. "But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is
your master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father
upon the earth; for one is your father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called
master; for one is your master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you
shall be your servant." So that juridical authority, over individual churches,
cannot be exercised, by any one or more, without direct infringement upon the
laws of the great Head and King of the church, who will not give his glory to
another. There can be no just pretense, to so much as the plausible shadow of
one instance in the new testament, of an ecclesiastical consistory, synod, or
council, for the countenance and support of those of a modern form, excepting
that in the 15th chapter of the Acts, about the circumcision of the Gentiles. A
question which Paul and Barnabas were sent upon, from Antioch, to the apostles
and elders at Jerusalem: v. 1.2. "And they were received of the church, and of
the apostles and elders." v. 4. "For the apostles and elders came together to
consider of this matter." v. 6. "Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with
the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul
and Barnabas," (v. 22.) with this result, "For it seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things; that ye abstain (...) meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep yourselves ye
shall do well." v. 28, 29. In all which there is no appearance of a synodical
council; but only a meeting of the apostles and elders that were at Jerusalem,
together with that whole church. For Paul and Barnabas were only messengers
proposing the question. And to whom could the determination of such a question
of conscience belong, but to the apostles, who being divinely inspired, could
with propriety say, "It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us." Though they
were pleased to take the concurrence of the elders, with the whole church at
Jerusalem.

But how utterly vain the pretense of uninspired men, to any such kind of
authority, to set forth injunctions, binding upon the conscience?




And if now we should take a view of some of the various forms of church
government, established among professing christians; you may perhaps be better
able to judge for yourselves, whether there be not in many respects, a very sad
deviation from the laws of Christ. And to begin nearest home. In those that are
called the consociated churches, the manner of disciplining offenders, is
allowed to begin with, and to be proceeded in by, particular churches, even
unto excommunication, agreeable to the scriptures. But then instead of the
matters resting there, where the scriptures plainly rest it; the excommunicated
person may apply to the consociation; who, if they see cause, may hear the
case, and order the church to receive such excommunicated person again to their
communion, and that on pain of scandalous contempt, however unanimously the
church might be agreed as to the evidence of his guilt. And instances of such a
kind there actually have been. Besides, such councils called to act
constitutionally, do act not advisorily, but juridically, giving a decisive
judgment to be absolutely binding upon the church, and all the parties
concerned; which I humbly conceive to be really aside from, and even contrary
to, the laws of Christ.

As to the churches called presbyterian, or of the church of Scotland:
according to that constitution, the common brethren of the church have little
to do in matters of church discipline. Their ministers, with their ruling
elders, make a sort of juridical board, before whom lies the first hearing of
all matters of common discipline; from whom appeals lie to their presbyteries;
as also from the presbyteries to provincial synods; and from thence to the
general assembly, composed of delegates from all the presbyteries or synods in
the nation. In whom lies the final decision of all ecclesiastical differences.
So far, according to that constitution, is decisive authority removed from
particular churches. In the consociated churches it is removed; but as it were
one step, up to a consociated council. But in the church of Scotland, it is
removed by various rising degrees, up to a general assembly of ecclesiastical
delegates.

And so also, according to the constitution of the church of England, the
common brethren of particular churches have nothing at all to do in matters of
discipline; nor even the ministers of particular churches, farther than
specified in the rubric, under the order for the administration of the
Lord's Supper. "That the curate having knowledge of any of the communicants,
that they are notorious evildoers, shall advertise such, that in any wise they
presume not to come to the Lord's table, until they have openly declared
themselves truly to have repented," etc. "Provided, that every minister so
repelling any, shall be obliged to give an account of the same to the ordinary,
within fourteen days after, at the farthest." Here the brethren have no hand in
this discipline. The curate alone repels offenders; which yet, he is allowed to
do, but only for fourteen days; within which time, he is obliged to give an
account thereof to the ordinary, that is, to the bishop or arch deacon. "And
the ordinary," as said in the rubric, "shall proceed against the offending
person, according to the canon." By which canon is not doubtless meant the law
of Christ. But the canon law of the church of England, taken chiefly, if not
entirely, from the canon law of the church of Rome. But still, the arch
bishop's court is superior to that of the ordinary's; even as in the church of
Rome, the pope in his conclave of cardinals, is supreme over all other
ecclesiastical judicatures. And whether such methods of church discipline be
not manifestly contrary to the laws of Jesus Christ, I freely submit to you my
hearers to judge for yourselves.

One special reason of such national kind of hierarchies, or national forms of
church government, seems to be taken from a supposition, that the Jewish church
and kingdom was designed to be a sort of pattern for national churches under
the gospel. The kings of Israel were supreme in all matters both civil and
ecclesiastical. And in that church there was one high priest, chief over
numbers of priests of a lower order; all which were superior to the Levites
appointed to lower kinds of services.

In imitation of which, the church of Rome has one high priest, set up in the
pope's office, to be supreme over all ecclesiastical dignities, with a
multiplied gradation of priestly orders under him. And so also in imitation of
the kings of Israel, the kings of Great Britain are deemed by the church of
England, the supreme head thereof; and their ecclesiastical hierarchy aimed to
be modeled, in some measure, after that of the Jewish church. As indeed the
very notion of all national, religious establishments, seems to be derived very
much from the same source, the national establishment of religion in the Jewish
kingdom of old. All which patterns of imitation, derived from the Jewish to the
Christian church, appear to be quite groundless. If it be considered, that the
Jewish state was a type and shadow of spiritual and heav^^ly things in and by
the promised Messiah; that their kings were typical of Christ in his kingly
office; their high priests typical of the high priesthood of Christ; as all
their various offerings were, of the great sacrifice which Christ offered of
himself; and even as the earthly was a type of the heavenly Canaan. All which,
being types and shadows of Christ and heavenly things, were therefore abolished
and done away by the coming of Christ, the substance, as abundantly set forth
in the epistle to the Hebrews.

Or should it be thought a wise device, to have men of learning and superior
abilities selected to be judges in ecclesiastical matters: What device then
could be wiser, than to have the most learned in a nation, such as bishops and
archbishops are supposed to be, for judges in such matters? But how much more
wonderfully wise then still, is the Romish device, of setting up the very
wisest of all, endowed with a spirit of infallibility, to be supreme judge over
all? But the truth is, human policy has no right to devise any thing at all
about church government, different from what the great Head of the church has
appointed. Authority to exercise discipline must rest in the hands of those to
whom Christ himself has committed it, even in every particular church. In
regard to which, it concerns the churches to see to it, that they stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free. In civil matters, men are
commonly wont to account the privilege of being judged by a jury of equals,
essential to their liberty. And so in ecclesiastical matters, the privilege of
judging and being judged as equals in a particular church, is justly to be
esteemed essential to gospel liberty, in regard to the discipline of Christ's
church and kingdom. Respecting which, as exercised by individual churches, is
that, Mat. 18.18. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven:" That is, be approved of, ratified, and confirmed by
Christ the Head. Which discipline is to be proceeded in with a spirit of
meekness, and readiness to forgive, in a sense of our own need of forgiveness.
Mat. 18.5, 6. "Whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives
me; but whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depths of the sea." Compared with ver. 35. "So likewise
shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his brother their trespasses." So that where due regard is had to the
laws of Christ, there will be no tyrannical lording of it over any. But while
there is a forwardness to forgive the penitent, there will be a steady and
unshaken fortitude to reject obstinate offenders.

Some of the special ends designed by such discipline, is the good of
offenders, the maintenance of brotherly love, the honor of Christ, and that
his church may enjoy his promised presence with them. One special end designed,
is the good of offenders, that they may be convicted, humbled, and reclaimed;
"That the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." 1 Cor. 5.5.
Offenders therefore are to be disciplined, even in regard to their own good.

Another end thereby designed, is to maintain that brotherly love which the
gospel requires. Christian brethren are enjoined, "above all things, to have
fervent charity among themselves." 1 Pet. 4.8. But there can be no grounds for
such fervent charity, farther than they appear to one another, to be truly
conformed to Christ. Such therefore as conduct inconsistent with the christian
character, must either be reclaimed or be cast out; that such as do partake
together as brethren, in the spiritual ordinances of Christ's house, may have
fervent charity among themselves. So that it is utterly inconsistent with that
brotherly love, which the gospel requires, to hold communion with an offending
brother, without taking gospel measures to reclaim him. Which discipline, is
also for the honor of Christ, of his church and name in the world. For by this,
said Jesus, "shall all men know that ye are my disciples if ye have love one to
another." John 13.35. In respect therefore to such as do not appear, to be fit
objects of this peculiar love, but unworthy to rank with Christ's members; it
is said, "Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye
are unleavened, for even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us." 1 Cor. 5.7.
"For we being many are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of
that one bread." 1 Cor. 10.17. And it must surely be vilely dishonoring to
Christ the head, for his body, the church, to admit openly profane members, to
partake with them of that one bread, as members together of his one body. And
so also to maintain the discipline of Christ's house according to his
appointment, is requisite to enjoy his promised presence and blessing. As
Christ's promised presence with his church, is to be expected, only while they
walk in his ways, keep his commandments, and attend the orders of his house.
"For if ye love me, keep my commandments," said Jesus, "and I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you
forever. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will manifest my self unto him." John 14.15, etc. "For, if ye keep my
commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Father's
commandments, and abide in his love." John 15.10. Which has respect to all
Christ's commandments, even to such as regard the order and discipline of his
house, as well as to others. Therefore without the due observation thereof, his
special presence and blessing, is not to be expected. But rather the woes which
he has denounced against such as swerve from the faith and order of his house.
As he said, "Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast
and repent; if therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shall not know (...) hour I will come upon thee." Rev. 3.3.

Hence then may be infered,

1. That it is a matter of great importance, that churches take earnest heed,
to attend to, and observe, that order and discipline in Christ's house, which
he himself has ordained and pointed out in his word. The peculiar
characteristic of churches, originates very much from this their manner and
form of discipline. And as Christ said to certain Jews, professing to believe
in him, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." John
8.31. i. e. If we walk according to my word, then will ye appear to be my
disciples in truth. So doubtless may it with just propriety be said of churches
professing the faith of Christ. If they attend to, and observe the orders which
he has appointed in his house, then do they appear to be his churches in
truth. Not but that, as in particular believers, there may be many
imperfections, consistent with their being true disciples of Christ; so there
may doubtless be much imperfection in the order of churches, consistent with
their being true churches of Christ. And although to draw a line precisely
betwixt such as may, and such as cannot be true churches of Christ, may not
belong to fallible men to attempt; yet every one have a right to judge for
themselves about these matters; and all had need to be fully persuaded in their
own minds, as to their own practice, so far as to consort and walk together
with such churches, as appear to them on the whole, most nearly conformable to
the faith and order of the gospel. And yet still it is an undoubted truth, that
churches professing the christian faith, do so far only appear to be the true
churches of Christ, as they appear to walk after the order which he has
prescribed in his word. Therefore it highly concerns every church, as they
would approve themselves a true church of Christ, to see to it that they attend
to the mind and will of Christ, revealed in his word, respecting the order and
discipline of his house, and that they cordially embrace, and steadfastly adhere
thereunto; even in this respect, as well as in every other, cheerfully bearing
the cross after Christ, that living to him as their sovereign Lord and King,
they may reign with him in the kingdom of his glory. -- And hence then,

2dly. Be exhorted my brethren, to see to it with utmost care and diligence,
that ye walk together in the true faith and order of the gospel. That ye submit
yourselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, as sole king and lawgiver in Sion. That
you attend to his will, set forth in his word, as the only rule of faith and
practice; admitting no other rule in matters pertaining to the conscience, but
submiting yourselves entirely to the authority of Christ in his word; that
abiding steadfastly therein, you may appear to be a true church of Christ
indeed. And take earnest heed to yourselves personally, to conduct every one in
particular, as becomes the members of Christ's body, holy in all manner of life
and conversation, even as he that has called you is holy; carefully shuning
all the evil ways of this wicked world, even all covetous and injurious
practices; all bitter and envious passions, all defaming, railing and
backbiting; all intemperate and unclean indulgencies, and all lewd and profane
company, and all vile and filthy conversation. Be on your guard against the sin
that most easily besets you. And strive earnestly after growth and increase in
every christian grace and virtue. That ye may approve yourselves to be the
disciples of Christ in truth. And recommend your selves to the fervent charity
of your christian brethren. And see to it, that you act the part of true
disciples of Christ toward others. That you watch over your children, whom you
have brought with you and given up to the Lord. That you faithfully train them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; instructing, counselling, warning
and reproving them; that being trained up in the way in which they should go,
they may not depart from it.

And take heed also as christian brethren, to watch over exhort and admonish
one another. Suffer not sin upon thy brother, but if he sin, rebuke him.
"Brethren, said the apostle, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself
lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens and so fulfill the law
of Christ. And be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you." But from
incorrigible offenders, be careful to withdraw yourselves, and to put them away
from among you. That you may appear to be, as becomes the body of Christ, knit
together in love, and filled with all his fullness, to the everlasting praise
of his glorious grace.


