AN EXAMINATION Of the late Reverend President Edwards's 'Enquiry on Freedom of
Will;'

AN EXAMINATION Of the late Reverend PRESIDENT EDWARDS's 'Enquiry on Freedom of
Will;' More especially the FOUNDATION PRINCIPLE of his Book, with the TENDENCY,
and CONSEQUENCES of the Reasoning therein contained.

IN THREE PARTS.
PART. I. Of the supposed connection of volition with the highest motive. PART
II. Of the indissoluble connection of moral causes and effects. PART III. Moral
liberty belongs to moral agents. Or Mr. Edwards's necessity, if true in theory,
is not applicable to practice.
With an APPENDIX, containing a specimen of coincidence between the principles
of Mr. EDWARDS's Book, and those of ancient and modern FATALISTS.

Seek not after that which is too hard for thee, and search not into things
that are above thy strength.

SON of SIRACH. It is not of HIM THAT WILLS.

ST. PAUL. BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND, opposite the Courthouse in
Queen Street, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cornhill. M,DCC,LXX.

PREFACE.
THE puzzle' attending disputes on such kind of subjects as Mr. EDWARDS's book
treats of, is probably the principal reason why no animadversions on his
discourse have been yet published. It was presumed that few who might read it
would bestow attention enough to understand it; and of those who should
attentively read and understand it, few would admit its foundation principles.
The author of the present examination is not without apprehension, that the
reason, which has dissuaded others, will be thought sufficient to have
dissuaded him, from such an undertaking. He acknowledges that he was
discouraged with only reading this elaborate and intricate performance some
years since. Yet from the great reputation of Mr. Edwards, and prevalence of
his doctrine, he came to a resolution of giving this book another and attentive
reading: In consequence of which, the following remarks were drawn up 'the
motive' of his 'present writing' and publication 'is a persuasion of the
falsehood of' Mr. Edwards's 'scheme; and this persuasion' he 'grants and sees is
necessary,' he 'cannot help this judgment.' Jackson on human liberty, in answer
to Cato's letters.
And as he has no manner of doubt but the foundation principles of the book
before him are false, so he esteems them of most dangerous tendency.

IN a speculative and metaphysical view, the subject has been largely
discussed by some of the ablest writers. The reader may be assured, that as
little metaphysical reasoning as possible is used in the following pages. For
such reasoning the author has neither abilities, inclination or leisure;
besides that there is no great occasion, and that he persuades himself it would
not be edifying. His principal aim is to consider the subject in a practical
view. In this view of liberty and necessity there is no puzzle, whatever
difficulties attend the subject when considered abstractly. The inquisitive may
find a full answer to the principal arguments of Mr. Edwards's book,
speculatively considered, in Dr. Samuel Clark's demonstration of the being and
attributes of GOD, in answer to Hobbs, Spinoza, and their followers; in the
same learned writer's replies to papers from Mr. Leibnitz, and remarks on Mr.
Collin's book on human liberty; in Jackson's defense of liberty against Cato's
letters, and vindication of the same subject in answer to Collins. To whom the
author gladly refers, as having saved him a task to which he pretends not to be
equal. Others might be mentioned, who have answered similar arguments two
thousand years ago.

AS we are immediately conscious of liberty, as it is a truth of the highest
importance, no embarrassments in theory attending the admission of it, can
oblige us to give it up -- especially as the denial of it plungeth us into a
deeper labyrinth. The human intellect is imperfect; consequently, things may be
consistent though we cannot see how. The principal purpose metaphysics can
serve on practical subjects is to obscure them.

Mr. Edwards indeed professes himself an advocate for liberty. Had he
professedly denied it, the author would not have engaged in this intricate
dispute: For he esteems the denial of liberty a like absurdity and extravagance
as the denial of motion; or a material world; both which have been denied, and
the contrary pretended to be demonstrated, against the universal experience of
mankind. Those things which no man can deny without impeachment of absurdity
and extravagance; it seems absurd to attempt a formal proof of. Should a man,
for example, endeavor to convince one who might require a string of syllogisms
to prove, that the sun shines in a clear day, at twelve o'clock, he would have
a very idle employment: Let him that questions it open his eyes, and he cannot
want conviction. Let a man look into his own breast, and he cannot but perceive
inward freedom -- Inward freedom -- For if freedom be not in the mind, it is no
where. And liberty in the mind implies self-determination.

This kind of liberty our author denies. In this sense of liberty alone has he
any controversy with the writers he opposes. His disagreement with Lord Kaims,
Author of the essays on the principles of morality and natural religion.
is rather in words than any thing real, notwithstanding what our author has
published to screen himself from the imputation of being in the same scheme.
Their general reasoning is the same. They reason on the same principles, and
only differ about the meaning of the word necessity, and a few other words and
phrases. Mr. Edwards affirms, that every volition and moral action is
determined by a moral necessity, which is as absolute as natural; and that
moral habits are owing to the nature of things. He allows only of external
liberty, such as is the effect of necessity in the will -- and constantly
denies a power of self-determination. Lord Kaims and Mr. Hume affirm, 'that man
has, in no case, a power of self-determination; but is, in all his actions,
determined by a moral necessity' -- which necessity they hold to be as real as
any other. The only difference is, that Lord Kaims, while he allows that GOD
has implanted in man's nature an invincible feeling of liberty, maintains, that
this feeling is fallacious: And Mr. Hume denies the subsistence of any such
relation as we signify by the words cause and effect. But whether liberty, as
maintained by Mr. Edwards, be not altogether hypothetic, may appear from the
following pages. And as to his notion of cause and of effect, whenever he uses
the former word for any antecedent, or the occasion of an event or thing, and
the latter for the consequence of another thing (as he tells us he sometimes
does, p. 58.59.) he so far agrees with Mr. Hume in words as well as sense.

THE author has only given the outlines of some (among many other) arguments
which occurred to his mind to evince the aspect Mr. Edwards's scheme has on the
moral perfections and government of GOD, and its consequent practical tendency.
Had he enlarged on them, it would have lengthened out the ensuing examination
much beyond what either he or the reader would choose. The number of pages is
now double to what he at first designed. He hopes for the patience and candor
of the public, to whose opinion he submits these remarks. If they are just,
they need no apology; if not, no apology can be of any service. If any should
suppose that in one respect at lest an apology should be made, viz for
undertaking to criticize the writings of so distinguished an author as Mr.
Edwards; the answer is, that if the particular design of the proposed
examination is properly pursued and executed, and that respect preserved which
is due to the character of a gentleman of Mr. Edwards's merit and eminence, the
author has not transgressed: But of these he is not himself the proper judge;
though he hopes to be acquitted (in the latter of these respects especially) by
every one that is. Whatever reception his performance may meet with, he is
conscious of the rectitude of his own intentions.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, exhibiting a general view of Mr. Edwards's scheme; with the
design and method proposed in these remarks. PART I. On the connection of
volition with the highest motive. SECT. I. Mr. Edwards has not shown wherein
the ENERGY of motive consists. SECT. II. The will not necessarily determined by
the highest motive. SECT. III. External action not determined by the will, upon
Mr. Edwards's scheme. PART II. An examination of Mr. Edwards's doctrine
respecting the indissoluble connection of moral causes and effects. SECT. I.
Whether the will be necessarily determined by an extrinsic cause. SECT. II. Or
by an intrinsic cause. SECT. III. Upon Mr. Edwards's own scheme, there cannot
be natural liberty without moral. SECT. IV. Of GOD's being the author of sin,
upon Mr. Edwards's scheme of necessity; and in what sense he admits this to be
the consequence of his doctrine. SECT. V. On the supposed advantage of moral
evil to the universe. SECT. VI. Containing general observations and reflections
on the scheme of necessity exhibited in Mr Edwards's book. PART III. Showing
that moral liberty, as distinguished from natural, belongs to moral agents: Or
admitting Mr. Edwards's scheme of necessity to be true in theory, it is not
applicable to practice. SECT. I. Internal liberty belongs to moral agency.
SECT. II. Internal liberty consistent with the influence of motives, etc. SECT.
III. Mr. Edwards's necessity, if true in theory, not applicable to practice.
INTRODUCTION, Exhibiting a general view of Mr. Edwards's scheme; with the
design and method proposed in these remarks.
IT is quite beside the purpose of the following remarks to enquire, Whether
the general scheme of doctrine Mr. Edwards intended to establish in his enquiry
be rational and scriptural. It is only the foundation principle we aim to
consider: The system built hereupon, whether true or false, is not, by the
generality of Calvinistic Divines, made to depend on the same basis.

THE principal subject of the book before us is, 'What determines the will?'
And through the whole performance great pains is taken to demonstrate, that
moral necessity and liberty are convertible terms. The perplexity, confusion,
and uncertainty, which disquisitions of this sort are attended with, is
sufficiently known. We shall endeavor to keep out of the clouds as much as the
nature of the subject will admit.

'THE position of chief importance,' we are told is, That the will is
necessarily determined by the strongest motive; meaning by the strongest motive
'that, which, in the mind's present view, has the greatest appearance of
good.' 'Every act of the will has a certain fixed connection herewith, and
depends hereupon, as it is cause -- or the ground and reason of it.' Enquiry
part I. sect. 2.
In support of which it is said, that 'nothing ever comes to pass without a
proportionable cause -- that the acts of the will, and material things, have a
like necessary dependence on a cause without themselves -- that moral causes
may be causes in as proper a sense as any causes whatever -- and moral
necessity may be as absolute as natural.' Enquiry p 30, 40, 48, 58, 52, 66, and
passim.


INDEED, by the word cause Mr. Edwards explains himself to mean, not only 'that
which has a positive efficiency, or influence to produce a thing, or bring it
to pass;' but 'sometimes any antecedent, either natural or moral, positive or
negative, on which an event, either a thing, or the manner and circumstance of
a thing, so depends, that it is the ground and reason, in whole, or in part,
why it is rather than not; or why it is as it is, rather than otherwise.'
Enquiry p. 57, 58, 9.
At the same time he asserts, that every act of the will is an 'effect
necessarily dependent and consequent on a cause, which he calls an efficient
cause; to whose' determination and command volition is as much subject, as the
motions of the hands and feet to the volitions which determine and command them
-- that the acts of the will are as ' passive with respect to the antecedent
cause, ground, or reason of them.' P. 183, 184.
He maintains, upon the whole, an universal necessity -- that all beings, all
events, the manner and all the circumstances of things are necessarily
determined. Yet be professes himself an advocate for liberty, and labors a
distinction between natural and moral necessity, which distinction he
apprehends important -- natural necessity being inconsistent with praise or
blame, while moral is not. The liberty he admits is, however, merely external,
and the result of necessity in the mind.

THIS is a general idea of his plan, so far as it will fall under present
consideration. In pursuing our remarks on which, we shall,

FIRST, Examine the supposed connection of volition with the highest motive.

SECONDLY, The indissoluble connection of moral causes and effects.

THIRDLY, Show that internal, moral liberty, as distinguished from external, or
natural belongs to moral agents: Or admitting Mr. Edwards's scheme of necessity
to be true in theory, it is not applicable to practice. It is also proposed to
add, in an appendix, a specimen of coincidence between Mr. Edwards and some
celebrated infidels, ancient and modern.

N. B. We have made use of the London edition. Wherever the reader finds
particular pages referred to by numerical figures enclosed in a parenthesis,
such place in Mr. Edwards's enquiry is meant, unless notice is given of our
refering to some other author.

PART I On the Connection of Volition with the highest Motive.
SECT. I. Mr. Edwards has not shown wherein the energy of motive consists.
THE enquiry in this place is not, Whether the highest motive has always a
causal influence on the will? But, admitting this to be the case, what it is
that causes any supposed motive to be highest in the mind's view? wherein does
its energy, or power consist? In the next section, we shall examine, whether
the will is indeed determined, in every act, by the highest motive.

WHEN, between two or more objects in the mind's view, one appears most
agreeable; (from whatever cause,) this appearance is the highest or strongest
motive, according to our author. Now as there is a manifest difference between
an object's actually appearing most agreeable, and the cause of this appearance;
the proper question, in the first place, is, What is the ground, reason, or
cause of the agreeable appearance itself. For admitting the strongest motive to
be the more immediate cause of volition, how does this prove that it is the
original cause? Whence is it that any proposed object has the greatest
appearance of good? From what cause? Hither we must ultimately recur for the
ground of volition; [Possibly not stop here.] Till the answer to this question
is found, the original ground of volition is not discovered. For if every
circumstance of things has an answerable cause, that there is a cause why this
or that motive is highest. 'In the question, What determines the will? it is
taken for granted, that something determines it. And the controversy on this
head is, where the foundation of the will's determination is,' (p. 56.) Mr
Edwards says expressly, 'That the act of volition itself (or the will) is
always determined by that in the mind's view of an object, which causes it to
appear most agreeable.' (p. 12) Here, then, is the FOUNDATION of the will's
determination. Mr. Edwards's business, therefore, according to his own state of
the question, was, to point out what causes an object to appear most agreeable.
For if that which CAUSES this appearance be the real cause of volition, then
the agreeable appearance ITSELF cannot be the cause. The agreeable appearance, or
highest motive, as he observes, is nothing distinct from volition, but the very
thing, as will be particularly shown in the next section. We would here just
hint, by the way, that Mr. Edwards has given ample testimony against 'the
position of chief importance in his discourse.' For that the highest motive
does not always determine volition, is pretty apparent, if it is always
determined by that in or about an object which causes it to be, and appear,
most agreeable. The will, in no instance whatsoever, is determined by the
agreeable appearance, but by the cause of such appearance.


THOUGH Mr. Edwards supposed the resolution of this question was 'not necessary
to his purpose,' p. 12. -- 16.
yet he has, in several particulars, remarked what he apprehended may 'have
influence' in causing 'the objects of volition to appear agreeable to the mind.'
He assigns, for instance, 'the apparent nature and circumstances of the object
-- the manner of the mind's view of it -- the state of the mind, by nature or
education -- or the frame it is in on a particular occasion.' But how is this
any answer? Does not the question immediately arise, How comes the object to
have such a particular appearance to the mind? Whence is it apparently
circumstanced as it is? Whence does the mind view it in such a particular
manner? Or from such a particular idea of it, whether 'faint, or clear, strong
and lively?' Whence is the state, temper, or frame of the mind what it is?
Until these things are solved, the question, Whence is it that 'a person's
pleasure is wrong' or right? has received no answer, unless 'a very
impertinent one.'

THERE is no great difficulty, says Mr. Edwards, in showing, not only that it
must needs be so, but also how it is so, that the mind must be influenced in
it is choice by something that has a preponderating influence upon it.' P. 83.
But if 'a preponderating influence on the mind' implies that the choice is
already made, it may 'be a matter of no small difficulty' to show, how the
mind, in making it is choice, can 'be influenced by something that has a
preponderating influence upon it.'

While writing the first part of his book, Mr. Edwards seems to have been
sensible, is was no very easy matter 'to show how it is so,' or why, that the
mind is always determined by the highest motive. His words are, (p. 12.)
'Particularly to enumerate all things pertaining to the mind's view of the
objects of volition, which have influence in their appearing agreeable to the
mind, would be a matter of no small difficulty, and might require a treatise by
itself, and is not necessary to my present purpose.' But (without tarrying to
reconcile this seeming contrast) is this a matter attended with greater
difficulty, or of less importance, or would it require a larger treatise, than
to show, what determines the will to this side, or that?

WE allow, that 'the common people do not ascend up in their reflections and
abstractions to the metaphysical sources, relations and dependencies of things,
in order to form their notion of faultiness -- They do not wait till they have
decided by their refinings, what first determines the will; whether it be
determined by something extrinsic or intrinsic. If this were the case,
multitudes, yea, the far greater part of mankind, nine hundred and ninety nine
out of a thousand would live and die without having any such notion as that of
fault ever entering into their heads; or without so much as once having any
conception, that any body was to be either blamed or commended for any thing.
They do not take any part of their notion of fault or blame from the resolution
of any such questions.' P. 298, 99.
A fuller acknowledgment Mr. Edwards could not have made, that the grand
question, the main subject of his book, What determines the will? is a subtle
and unprofitable one. We are therefore at a loss for the motive of his writing
an elaborate volume to determine a point not to be determined -- at least, by
his own declaration, of no use to one out of a thousand of mankind.

P. 39, 40. Our author observes, that 'into the meaning of the word liberty is
not taken any thing of the cause or original of choice -- how the person came
to have such a volition; whether it was caused by some external motive, or
internal, habitual bias; whether it was necessarily connected with something
foregoing, or not connected. Let the person come by his volition or choice how
he will, yet, if he is able, and there is nothing in the way to hinder his
pursuing and executing his will, the man is fully and perfectly free, according
to the primary and common notion of freedom'.

IT hence appears, that Mr. Edwards esteemed it neither necessary nor useful
for us to know the cause or origin of the will's determination -- ' how a
person comes to have such a volition.' And yet it was a main point in his view
to show, that the strongest motive is the immediate cause of every act of
choice. Now, as was before observed, it is just as necessary and important to
know the original and ultimate, as the next and more immediate cause of
volition. The next and immediate cause is but the effect of some preceding
cause; this of another, and so on. 'The determination of the will, says Mr.
Edwards, supposes an effect, which must have a cause. If the will be
determined, there must be a determiner.' P. 7.
Granted. And if the strongest motive be the determiner, this also must be
determined by some preceding cause. There is a cause or reason of its being
strongest -- something from which it derives, and wherein lies, its great
strength. If therefore, it was of any importance to show, (conformable to Mr.
Edwards's design) what determines the will, and to prove that the strongest
motive does it; it was at least of equal importance to point out, what it is
that causes such motive to be, or appear, strongest. The real cause of
volition is not found, till this matter is explained. The enquiry is not
pursued to the end, and the plan of Mr. Edwards's book but half executed.

'SUPPOSE a chain hung down out of the Heavens, from an unknown height; and
although every link of it gravitated toward the earth, and what it hung upon
was not visible, yet it did not descend, but kept its situation: And, upon
this, a question should arise, What supported or kept up this chain? Would it
be a sufficient answer, to say, that the first, or lowest link hung upon the
second, or that next above it?' without proceeding to show what the second hung
upon'; 'or rather, the first and second together;' and so on, until it was
found 'what supported the whole. Thus it is in a chain of causes and effects.
The last or lowest is suspended upon the cause above it. This again, if it be
not the first cause, is suspended, as an effect, upon something above it, etc.
Wollaston, p. 67.
The original (that is, the true and real) cause of volition is, therefore, yet
to be explained. For if it be the immediate effect of motive, still this cause
is an effect in regard to something preceding -- and whatever is the next or
immediate cause of the strength or energy of motive itself, this again is an
effect in relation to a cause preceding, as well as a cause in relation to
motive -- And thus the enquiry may be pursued in infinitum. (Which shows, by
the way, the futility, at least, of entering on such an enquiry as that which
is the subject of Mr. Edwards's book.) Should it be said, that the energy of
motive, in every case, is to be attributed to the first and supreme cause, as
the immediate efficient -- this, indeed, is making short work; but it is
cutting the knot, rather than untying it. However, when it shall be shown, that
every act of will, in every creature, is an immediate, necessary effect of the
supreme cause, the dispute will at once be at an end.

'THE vulgar notion of blameworthiness, says Mr. Edwards, is, a person's having
his heart wrong, and doing wrong from the heart.' P. 298.
Now has he shown, whence a person's heart comes to be wrong? He takes notice
of this defect in 'the author of the essay on the freedom of the will in GOD
and the creatures,' that he had not given a reason why an act of the will is,
or why it is in this manner, rather than another. P. 72, 77.
Now how has Mr. Edwards supplied this defect? Is what he has said 'a reason
why an act of the will is, or why it is in this manner?' Suppose the highest
motive determines the will, he explains motive to be the apparent good in an
object -- Now what is it that makes, or causes an object to appear good? For
this, by his own principles, is what determines the will. He 'speaks of a
certain sovereignty in motive, whereby it has power to determine volition.
Wherein consists 'this supposed sovereignty?' From what cause does it proceed?
From what 'exercise' of it can either its sovereignty, or its cause, be
inferred? P. 51.
'And so the question returns in infinitum, and the like answer must be made in
infinitum.' For granting that an object's appearing agreeable to the mind is the
ground of the mind's choice, what account is this of the agreeable appearance
itself? Is it a reason why an object appears beautiful or deformed, agreeable or
disagreable? Does it show us, why 'it is most agreeable to some men, to follow
their reason? and to others, to follow their appetites?' Not at all. Nor
consequently, does it show us 'wherein consists the strength of motive' --
whence the motive that determines the will is prepollent -- of what antecedent
cause its determining power is the effect. Every circumstance of things, it is
pleaded, must have a cause. Volition then is the effect of motive -- the latter
the effect of some prior cause -- this of another -- and this again of another,
etc. etc. etc. Where then are we to seek for the true and original cause of
volition?

ALTHOUGH Mr. Edwards cursorily passes the question, Wherein consists the
energy of motive? as beside 'the purpose of his discourse;' yet we must think,
that his main 'position,' and 'the thing of chief importance' upon his scheme,
absolutely required a clear 'explanation' and full discussion of this question.
It is the hinge, on which the controversy, as stated by Mr. Edwards, must
finally turn. He appears to have been scrupulous, whether he had not 'failed in
explaining this thing,' from his hint that if he had, it did 'not overthrow the
position itself, which was the thing of chief importance' in his enquiry, 'viz.
That the will is always determined by the strongest motive,' P. 17, 18.
This position may not be overthrown by a failure in 'explaining wherein the
strength of motives consists;' but we might have expected, and should have been
glad to have seen, a rationale of the position. If true, there is a cause,
ground, or reason of its truth. That cause has not been assigned, or
discovered to our apprehension. It is soon enough to say, whether the position
is true or false, when the foundation of it is understood. But whether it has
a solid support, or is overthrown by Mr. Edwards himself, may appear in the
following section: We conclude the present with this remark.

ALTHOUGH we have no right to require an answer to so subtle a question as this
[What determines the will?] from any but such as undertake of their own accord
to explain the matter; yet, from Mr. Edwards's known abilities, we might have
expected a more satisfactory and rational answer -- especially as he seems to
have apprehended, that the general question concerning liberty was thoroughly
examined and decided in his discourse upon it. But since, after what Mr.
Edwards has said, it still remains abstruse and undetermined, we conclude it
must remain so. For no author we have seen has wrote upon the subject with
greater strength. And we cannot but observe; that Mr. Edwards in some parts of
his book, appears to have been quite sensible that no subject is more intricate
and puzzling than this concerning the determination of the will, considered in
a speculative view. Should any 'find fault, that we have gone into metaphysical
niceties and subtilties;' our reply is, that Mr. Edwards's enquiry is 'a
metaphysical subtilty, and must be treated according to its nature.' P. 347.


SECT. II. The will not necessarily determined by the strongest Motive.
IT is not always the nature of the object in itself, or 'what reason dictates
to be best, and most for the person's happiness, taking in the whole of his
duration,' that is the strongest motive; since the dictate of reason 'is often
overcome by the greater weight of' other considerations. P. 17.
And indeed were the dictate of reason always the strongest motive, and were
the will invariably determined by motive taken in this sense, it is plain, that
sin would never have entered into the world. Now the preferableness of the
object in its own nature, and as apprehended by reason, not being always the
ground or cause of its appearing most agreeable, but something diverse or
contrary, in many instances; the question is, How came beings made upright to
mistake their happiness upon the whole? For mistake it they must; (by
supposition) or otherwise in the first act of sin they could not be determined
by the greatest apparent good.

HERE we may enquire, Whether in innocence any thing but conformity and
subjection to the Creator could appear to be the greatest good? If not, then,
on Mr. Edwards's hypothesis, an innocent creature could never rebel. If, on the
other hand, rebellion against the supreme cause had the appearance of the
greatest good to Adam in innocence, and to apostate angels before their fall,
how does this consist with the general opinion that has been entertained of
the original extent of their rational faculties, and the spiritual image of GOD
with which they were endowed? The powers of intellect in innocent Adam, for
example, have been supposed so great, that consistently herewith it cannot be
doubted but he had the fullest view of duty, and of his highest interest as
connected with it; and consequently could have no apparent superior motive to
transgress. If in innocence he could not hesitate but it was his highest duty
to refrain from the forbidden fruit, he could not, (by supposition) hesitate
but such act of forbearance was also his highest happiness. Therefore the
greatest apparent good was to retain his integrity. Consequently, in
transgressing, his will was not determined by, but against, the highest motive.
Nor can we conceive of a presumptuous sinner, on any other supposition --
meaning hereby, one who acts against present conviction -- or directly in
opposition to the light he has in the very article of sinning.

IT will, perhaps, be said, that innocent Adam's highest good was to forfeit
his integrity. And indeed, on any other hypothesis, the controversy seems to be
brought to an issue, and the opinion of being always necessarily determined by
the highest motive given up. Now should this be said, (which is at least
implied, if not expressed, in what Mr. Edwards has remarked Part iv. Sect. 9.
on the advantage of sin to the creation) we might ask, whether sin could
appear most agreeable to an innocent creature from the nature of the object in
itself? This, we presume Mr Edwards would not say. And if it could not thus
appear from its nature, it will be difficult to show how sin could be, in any
sense, the creature's highest good -- Or how an innocent creature could
apprehend it to be so. But whenever it can be shown, that innocent man, or
rebel angels before their fall, had a full view of the superior advantages of
sin above innocence and righteousness, we believe no body will think it worth
while to controvert farther about any doctrine of religion. An hypothesis so
extraordinary, requires extraordinary proof. We shall have occasion to resume
this point under another part of our remarks.

IN regard to the first entrance of sin into the world, we acknowledge it is an
event, which all denominations of professing christians are equally holden to
account for -- yea, deists as much as christians. Even atheists are no
otherwise excused than as, by their principles, they are not obliged to account
for any thing The truth is, no body can solve this matter. But if the first
sinful volition was the necessary product of the highest motive; then rebellion
against GOD was discerned to be the highest good, when reason and judgment
freely dictated and governed; which they certainly did while the creature
continued innocent. Yea, it follows, that the highest motive to the Creator, as
well as creature, was in behalf of moral evil. How then is sin such an infinite
evil as we have been taught to believe it? Does it not turn out an infinite
good? Rather, how can that deserve the name of sin, which appears most agreeable
even to the Deity himself? Or allowing sin to be the greatest evil, that man
must have an hard task, who undertakes to show, that it is also the greatest
good: And if not the greatest good, how it could have this appearance to
creatures in a state of rectitude -- and even to Almighty GOD himself. Or if it
could not have this appearance to any being in a state of rectitude, how was it
then possible for beings made upright to fall; on supposition that no instance
of volition can be mentioned but what is the effect of, or determined by, the
greatest apparent good? The very idea of moral perfection appears to be lost,
if we pursue to the end such an enquiry as Mr. Edwards has led us into.

"THAT the will always follows the last practical judgment of the
understanding, has passed current as a maxim in the schools: So that if a sick
man shall, in contradiction to his physician's judgment, and his own, indulge
his appetite for meat or drink, he must be supposed previously to have
convinced himself, that his present indulgence is of more value to him than his
health, or even his life. If other men indulge their unreasonable inclinations
at the expense of interest, reputation, inward peace, and everlasting
salvation, they must be supposed to judge with themselves, that this vicious
indulgence ought to be preferred to interest, reputation, peace of conscience,
and everlasting salvation: This way of thinking, which passes so easily with
the learned, goes mighty ill down with men of plain understanding; who, on the
contrary, incline to believe, that in the practice of vice men either do not
think at all, but act like mere animals by the blind impulse of appetite and
affection; or if they attend to what they are doing, that they basely and
absurdly prefer a present gratification to what they know to be their most
valuable interests in this life and the next.

THE truth is, that man is a compound of rational and animal affections, that
without attending to himself, sometimes the one, and at other times the other,
must of necessity prevail, as they happen to be strongest; and that, through
the love of present pleasure, and aversion to present pain, or through mere
pusillanimity, we too often decline the combat; and, in contradiction to our
reason, our conscience, and all the most weighty considerations of honor and
interest, respecting this life and the next, suffer the animal to prevail over
the rational affections.

FOR the remedy, then, of this greatest of all evils, it is not enough the
judgment be well informed,; because however desirous we are of having the
authority of our judgment for whatever we do, and however much we will
endeavor to reconcile our judgment with our inclination; yet when that cannot
be done, we will too often pursue our inclination in contradiction to our
judgment. The only remedy therefore under heaven is, to endeavor, by all means
in our power, to make our rational a match, and, as much as possible, an
overmatch, for our animal affections: In which employment we have a title to
all the assistance, which the teachers of mankind can afford us; and to
stimulate, direct, and support us in this arduous task, seems to be their chief
business." Dr. Oswald's appeal to common sense in behalf of religion, p. 156,
7, 8. margin.

'The perception or last judgment of the understanding, is as distinct from the
actual exertion of the self-motive power, as seeing the way is from walking in
it. Nor will it follow, because the perception of the understanding is denied
to be the immediate, efficient, necessary cause of the exertion of the self-
motive power, that therefore unintelligent matter may be capable of
self-motion; any more than it will follow, if a man's eyes be denied to be the
immediate, efficient, necessary cause of his walking, that therefore the man
may be capable of walking, though he has neither legs nor life. A man's
understanding judges of what he is to do, as his eyes discern the way. But a
blind or winking man has power to walk without seeing. What resemblance is
there between an action, and a perception of the mind? There must therefore be
some distinct principle of motion and action, independent on the perceptive
faculty. That ' exertion which makes action to be action is entirely a distinct
thing from that perception or judgment, by which a man determines beforehand
concerning the reasonableness or fitness of what he is about to act: An agent
not acting according to the last judgment of his understanding, is like a man
shutting his eyes, and walking at a venture down a precipice' (Dr. Samuel
Clark's answer to a third letter from a Gentleman of the University of
Cambridge, annexed to a collection of papers between Mr. Leibnitz and Dr.
Clarke.)

IT is no uncommon thing for men to rebel against the light. That which they
do, they allow not. The law in the members wareth against the law in the mind.
-- Video, meliora proboque;
Deteriora sequor.
Instead of saying, that presumptuous offenders follow the last judgment of
their understanding, when their thoughts the mean while accuse them, it is more
proper to say, that they follow the dictate of lust, passion, or appetite. Mr.
Edwards allows, that men do not always follow the dictate of reason: (p. 17)
They therefore sometimes follow the dictate of some other faculty, distinct
from, and in opposition to it. Mr. Edwards, indeed, includes more than reason
and judgment in the phrase, the dictate of the understanding: But taking the
understanding in his sense for 'the whole faculty of perception,' it is as
different from animal affection and appetite as any two things can be. And 'if
strict propriety of speech be insisted on,' a man must be said to follow the
dictate of that faculty which has the ascendant at any time; whether it be the
understanding or animal appetite: Otherwise we confound the distinction between
that faculty, in respect of which GOD has taught us more than the beasts of
the field, and the appetites (...) has given us in common with them.

'INTELLIGENT beings act sometimes on the view of strong motives, sometimes
upon weak ones, sometimes where things are absolutely indifferent. In which
last case there may be very good reason to act, though two or more ways of
acting may be absolutely indifferent: The motive, or thing considered as in
view, is something extrinsic to the mind. The impression made upon the mind by
the motive, is the perceptive quality, in which the mind is passive: The doing
of any thing upon and after, or in consequence of that perception, this is the
power of self-motion, or action -- Which, in all animate agents, is
spontaneity; and in moral agents, what we call liberty. The not distinguishing
these things, but confounding the motive with the principle of action, and
denying the mind to have any principle of action besides the motive, is the
ground of the whole error.' Papers between Mr. Leibnitz and Dr. Clark, p. 281,
283.




'THE thing of chief importance in his discourse,' Mr. Edwards tells us is
this, 'That the will is always determined by the strongest motive.' This, he
insists, 'is the PREVIOUS ground and reason of every act of volition; so that
in the nature of things volition cannot take place without, but is connected
with it, as the PRODUCING, EFFICIENT cause.' In this principle his whole scheme
is founded -- (without having shown what it is that gives strength and energy
to the motive that determines the will -- what it is that gives or constitutes
the agreeable appearance in an object of choice -- to what the preponderancy, or
efficiency of it upon the will is to be ascribed) Let us enquire how this
'position of chief importance' is supported.

AS no authority can be of equal weight to overthrow this main position as the
author's own, we beg the reader would consider the following passage; which is
so full to our purpose, that we are saved the trouble of a labored confutation
of the principle alluded to. 'I have rather chose to express myself thus, that
the will always is AS the greatest apparent good, or AS what appears most
agreeable, is, than to say, that the will IS DETERMINED BY the greatest apparent
good, or by what seems most agreeable: Because an appearing most agreeable; or
pleasing to the mind, and the mind's preferring and choosing, seem hardly to be
properly and perfectly DISTINCT. If strict propriety of speech be insisted on,
it may more properly be said, that the voluntary ACTION, which is the immediate
FRUIT and CONSEQUENCE of the mind's volition or choice, IS DETERMINED by that
which appears most agreeable, than the preference or choice ITSELF.' P. 11, 12.


HERE it is fully declared, that, 'properly speaking,' volition and the highest
motive are not DISTINCT things -- that the former is only as the latter, and
not determined by it. Motive cannot be the ground and determiner of volition,
and at the same time the act of volition itself. It is not the cause of
volition, but the thing, 'if strict propriety of speech be insisted on.'
Instead of the strongest motive's being the cause of volition, the real truth
is, that volition is the cause of external action. It is this only, 'which is
the immediate fruit and consequence of the mind's volition, that is determined
by' the strongest motive. The reason is obvious: 'For an appearing most
agreeable to the mind, and the mind's actually preferring and choosing, are not
distinct,' but the same thing. 'It is not, therefore, good sense' to say the
former determines the latter -- to speak of motive as the previous ground,
reason, or cause of the EXERTION of an act of the will -- that volition cannot
TAKE PLACE without this as the antecedent cause. 'It is not good sense to speak
of volition as FROM motive -- FROM THE INFLUENCE of the motive, and from the
influence that the motive has on the man for the PRODUCTION of an act of
volition. P. 122, 123.


WHEN Mr. Edwards says, 'it is the voluntary action, and not the will, which
is determined by the highest motive,' there can be no doubt but he means
corporeal action: For thus he explains himself, 'the voluntary action, which is
the fruit and consequence of the mind's volition or choice' -- expressly
distinguishing it (as in the next following words) from 'the act of volition,
or the preference and choice itself.' Instead of showing, therefore, (as he
undertook) what determines the will, Mr. Edwards has only labored to prove,
that the will determines the actions of the body -- For instance, 'the will
determines, by an act of volition or choice, which way the hands and feet shall
move.' P. 47.
Bodily action is the effect, fruit, consequence of the will's determination,
dependent on it, and connected with it, as its cause and determiner. The will
itself is exercised in prefering, choosing, determining; the body in those
motions and operations, which are the effect of the will's determination.

THUS volition being nothing diverse from the strongest motive, but the same
thing with it -- it being improper to say, that the will is determined by the
strongest motive; there can be 'no such relation between' motive and volition
'as is signified by the terms cause and effect.' We are 'brought to the
contradiction of a cause and no cause; that which is the ground and reason of
the existence of a thing, and at the same time is not the ground and reason of
its existence' -- (p. 103, 105) the strongest motive 'is determiner and
determined; mover and moved; a cause that acts and produces effects upon
itself' -- (p. 7) 'volition is from a cause, and no cause; the fruit of motive,
and not the fruit of motive; the beginning of motion and exertion, and yet
consequent on previous exertion self-originated, and has its original from
something else. Cause and effect,' though, 'terms of opposite signification,'
are the same thing -- 'Volition is the effect of volition, and the cause of
volition -- choice is subject to choice, commanded by, and the produce of, an
antecedent act of choice.' Motive 'is the previous ground and reason of the
acts of the will -- Yea, the necessary ground and reason of their exertion;
without which they will not be exerted, and cannot, in the nature of things,
take place: And they do excite these acts of the will, and do this by a
prevailing influence; yea, an influence which prevails to the production of the
act of the will, and for the disposing of the mind to it. Now if motives
dispose the mind to action, then they cause the mind to be disposed; and to
cause the mind to be disposed, is to cause it to be willing; and to cause it to
be willing, is to cause it to will; and that is the same thing as to be the
cause of an act of the will. And yet it is hardly proper to suppose motive to
be a cause of an act of the will; or that a principle of will is moved, or
caused to be exerted by it; or that it has any causality in the production of
it:' And that for this very good reason, that they are not DISTINCT. P. 130, --
136.


WE 'hope' we 'need not labor at all' to show the absurdity' of this scheme,
'and what an whole heap of inconsistencies we have here. The matter is already
so plain, as to render any reasoning upon it impertinent.'

MR. Edwards asserts, as well as Mr Chubb, 'that volition is not governed by
superior strength of the motive that is followed, beyond motives to the
contrary, PREVIOUS to volition itself.' p. 124) It appears, on Mr. Edwards's
'supposition, that volition must be without any previous ground in any motive;
thus: If it be, as he supposes, that the will is not determined' by the
greatest apparent good -- that this is nothing 'distinct' from volition; then
volition cannot be owing to any previous ground, or causality, or superior
strength of the motive that is followed, any more than on the supposition of
the will's determining itself, there being no distinction between the highest
motive, and the act of volition. To say, therefore, that the former determines
the latter, is to say, that the will is self-determined. Yet Mr. Edwards says,
'There is such a thing as a diversity of strength in motives to choice previous
to the choice, itself.' (p. 125) He has not shown us wherein this diversity
lies; or how motives have a strength previous to choice, and yet are not
distinct from it. Would he say, that motives have a superior strength previous
to their standing in the mind's view? or is their appearing strongest to the
mind antecedent to the choice; or co-temporary with it. The latter doubtless:
For this appearance is not distinct from the mind's choice. Had Mr. Edwards
proved, (as he asserts) that there is a ' preponderancy of the inclination
previous to the act of choice,' (p. 260) it might have cleared the matter. But
'certainly, there is no need of multiplying words. We presume there is nothing
more unintelligible, and void of distinct, consistent meaning, in all the
writings of Duns Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas.' 'It is indeed impossible to
offer' Mr. Edwards's 'argument without overthrowing it; the thing supposed in
it being inconsistent with itself, and that which denies itself.' (p. 82)
Motive goes before, and is the producer of volition, which follows it, but is
not distinct from it. By his argument, 'the first sinful volition was
determined by a foregoing sinful volition; the first sinful act of choice was
before the first sinful act of choice 'and chosen and determined by it.' (p.
377, 8.) For the highest motive is the same as volition, and the first sinful
volition sprang from the highest motive: Mr, Edwards also speaks of choosing as
a man pleases -- i. e. as he chooses.
(p. 122)

THAT we have not taken advantage of a passage in advertently wrote by Mr.
Edwards, the reader may see by turning to it. (p. 11, 12) He is there
exhibiting his plan, and intimates his care to express himself with precision,
and so as not to be misapprehended. It is at his entrance on his work. Says he,
' I have rather chosen to express myself thus, that the will always is as the
greatest apparent good, than to say, the will is determined by the greatest
apparent good'; and proceeds to assign a reason for his thus expresssing
himself: 'Because an appearing most agreeable to the mind, and the mind's
choosing, seem hardly to be properly and perfectly distinct. If strict propriety
of speech be insisted on, it may more properly be said, that the voluntary
action, which is the fruit and consequence of the mind's choice, is determined
by that which appears most agreeable, than the preference or choice itself.' Who
will say Mr. Edwards has not here 'expressed himself with strict propriety,'
and given a good reason for 'expressing himself thus?'

'FROM things that have been' remarked, we think it clearly follows, that Mr.
Edwards has equally failed in pointing out the more immediate cause of
volition, as its original cause. By his own declaration, the will is not
determined by, but the same thing with, the strongest motive. He has only
shown what determines external action or conduct -- a point very different from
the determination of the will. And hence (according to Mr. Edwards's own
reasoning) the enquiry, 'What determines the will?' is precisely the same with
this, 'What causes an object to appear most agreeable?' A very different
enquiry, surely, from this, Whether volition is as, or according to, the
agreeable appearance of an object? unless we will confound cause and effect. The
agreeable appearance, says Mr. Edwards, is the mind's preference, choice, or
determination. But antecedent to the mind's view of the object, there must be
something in it [the object] to cause it to appear agreeable when viewed --
something independent on, and prior to the view -- or the mind must be in such
a particular state, frame, or temper -- or view the object under such and such
circumstances, in order to it is appearing thus and thus agreeable. Now when it
can be distinctly shown, what that is in any object itself, or in the state,
manner, and circumstances of the mind viewing it, which causes (produces) the
agreeable appearance; then, perhaps, the determining cause of volition may be
discovered. That which causes the agreeable appearance, produces the highest
motive, that is, volition. Upon Mr. Edwards's own state of the question, there
is no making any sense of his words, to say, that the highest motive is the
cause, or determiner of volition. This he has, in express terms denied. And
yet great part of his book was wrote to prove it. It is the 'position of chief
importance in his discourse.'

IT will possibly be said, 'There is no need of supposing the strongest motive
to be prior to, or distinct from, volition; but that the latter is determined
by the former in the very act of volition'. To this it is sufficient to answer
in Mr. Edwards's own words, 'that the will is not determined by the greatest
apparent good, but the action, which is the fruit of volition, is determined
hereby'. Though we may insist on this as a full reply to the objection; yet we
may also add, with much propriety, Mr. Edwards's remarks P. 53, -- 56,
on the scheme of his opponents, with the small alteration, which the reader
will observe by the words not included under inverted commas.

FIRST, 'IF the determining act' (the highest motive) 'be before the determined
in order of nature, being the cause, ground, or reason of its existence, this
as much proves it to be distinct from it, and independent on it, as if it were
in order of time'.

SECONDLY, 'If the determining act' (the strongest motive)' is not before the
determined, in order of time or nature, nor distinct from it -- I would on this
observe, that the thing in question seems to be forgotten, or kept out of
sight, in a darkness and unintelligibleness of speech. The question is, What
influenceth, directs, or determines the mind or will to come to such a choice
as it does? or what is the cause, ground, or reason, why it concludes thus, and
not otherwise? Now it must be answered, according to, Mr. Edwards's 'notion,
that the will influences, orders, and determines itself'. For the will is
determined by the strongest motive, and this is nothing distinct from volition.
Now that the strongest motive 'causeth, influenceth, and determines the will,
and yet is not antecedent to it;' nor distinct from it, 'is a contradiction.'
To say that one 'thing is the cause or reason of another, is to say, that the
former is prior to the latter. The cause is distinct from the effect, and prior
to it. To say, that the strongest motive, 'orders, influences, determines the
act of volition,' and yet is not 'properly distinct, is to make the exertion
both cause and effect. The question is, What is the cause and reason of the
soul's exerting such an act? To which the answer is, the soul exerts such an
act, and that is the cause of it. And so, by this, the exertion must be prior
to, and distinct from itself.'

THIRDLY, 'If the meaning be, that volition has no cause, and is no effect, but
comes into existence of itself, without any ground or reason'; Mr. Edwards
then, 'doth nothing but confound himself and others with words without a
meaning. Mr. Edwards had a common right with others to express his thoughts in
his own way. But we should have been glad, if he had fixed a precise meaning to
his own terms. And though he has spent a large number of pages (from p. 1, --
43) in explaining terms, yet his definitions are so lengthy and lax, his use of
some words so different from what is common, yea, so differently does he
himself use the same terms, that the reader is almost unavoidably confounded in
a jumble of indeterminate words and phrases. We shall give a few instances. The
term will is sometimes used for an abstract power, property, or faculty; (p.
38, 39.) Sometimes it is confounded with motive; (p. 11, 12.) while at other
times, and indeed more generally, it is used to denote the agent -- As where
the will is said to be the subject of commands, etc -- where the acts of the
will are spoken of -- where motives are represented as influencing and
determining it, i. e. the agent. (For motives do not influence mere properties.)

By motive (the highest) he explains himself to mean the same as volition; (p.
11. 12.) while he also understands by it something extrinsic standing in the
mind's view, and having a tendency, by the appearance it makes, to excite and
engage the mind to such and such volitions -- i. e. to incline and dispose it
to such and such a choice. Again, he means by motives, inclination or
disposition, and expressly blends 'moral motives and inducements' with 'habits
and dispositions of the heart,' making them the same. (p. 29, 31.) That is,
motives are something without themselves, and have a tendency to excite and
engage to themselves, and are not distinct from themselves. (p. 8, 9, 11.)

In like manner, while he is taking pains to make out a distinction between
natural and moral necessity, he confounds them -- (at least in our
apprehension, Part I. Sect. 4.)

THE term cause, as it has been generally used, denotes efficiency, and has
relation to an effect produced -- And Mr. Edwards himself says (after Spinoza
and Hobbs) 'that if it be not sufficient to produce the effect, or does not
always necessarily produce it, there is no such relation subsisting as we
signify by the terms cause and effect. That which seems to be the cause, can be
no cause.' Yet he tells us, 'that he sometimes uses the word cause to signify
any antecedent, which is perhaps rather an occasion than a cause of an event or
thing; and the word effect, for the consequence of another thing'. (p. 58, 59,
103.) But who ever supposed the mere occasion of a thing or event to be the
cause thereof, in such a sense as that the thing or event is necessarily
dependent on, connected with, and proceeds from the occasion of it? Our Lord's
coming was the antecedent and occasion of discord and war. Did these
necessarily proceed from his coming? Was there no more in the consequent than
in the antecedent? Had Mr. Edwards used the terms occasion and consequence,
instead of cause and effect, in those parts of his book, where (by his own
acknowledgement) the former would have been more proper, he might have been
better understood, and would have taken a likelier method to 'cut off occasion
from cavillers and objectors.' (p. 59, 393, 394, margin.)

THE reader will also take notice of the promiscuous use of the words cause,
ground, reason. So far as an action is conformable to right reason, so much
reason there is for it, and no more. Every instance of the divine conduct has
a sufficient reason: It is not so with the conduct of the creature. As much sin
as there is in the world, so much action there is without reason.


There is a great noise made about 'motive's sovereignty and energy', as the
source of all acts of the will; but when the matter comes to be explained, the
meaning is, that these acts arise from nothing, no cause, no power, no
influence, being at all concerned in the matter.' And yet it is maintained,
that 'all acts of volition have a prior ground and reason of their particular
existence; a cause; which antecedently determines them to be, and to be just as
they are. Now how can these things hang together?'

MR. Edwards criticiseth Dr. Clark for admitting 'the necessary connection of
volition with the last dictate of the understanding;' and yet 'supposing the
latter not to be diverse from the act of the will itself.' He has this remark
on the Doctor. 'If the dictate of the understanding be the very same with the
determination of the will or choice, then this determination is no fruit or
effect of choice.' And onwards: If these 'be the same, then liberty consists in
the mind's having power to have what dictates of the understanding it pleases,
having opportunity to choose its own dictates of understanding.' P. 114, 115.
Might not one in Dr. Clark's behalf thus reply? 'Mr. Edwards supposes that
volition has a necessary connection with the highest motive -- and that the
later is not properly distinct from the act of the will. If the highest motive
be the very same with the determination of the will or choice, then this
determination is no fruit or effect of motive. Moreover, Mr. Edwards has
expressed himself thus, it is not proper to say, that the act of volition
itself is determined by the highest motive. If these be the same, then liberty
consists in a man's having power to have what motives he pleases, having
opportunity to choose his own motives. But this is absurd: For it supposes the
choice is already made, before the motive has its effect; and that the volition
is already exerted: That is, choice is prior to choice. Mr Edwards recurs to
the old absurdity of one determination before another, and the cause of it; and
another before that, determining that; and so on in infinitum.' Thus might his
criticism on Dr. Clark be replied to.

UPON the whole: The question, What determines the will? is 'unanswered, and
yet returns.' For aught that appears from Mr. Edwards's discourse, the will is
not properly determined at all. 'Instead of solving the difficulty, or
answering the question with regard to volition, namely, How it comes to exist?
(as he proposes it) he forgets himself, and answers another question quite
diverse, and wholly' remote, namely, What determines material action? The
question is, How volition itself comes to exist? By what cause it is produced?
' Why the soul exerts such an act, and not another? Or why it acts with such a
particular determination? Why its action is thus and thus limited, directed,
determined?' If it be said, its acts proceed from the strongest motive, this is
saying, they are self-determined; (the strongest motive and volition not being
distinct) which is, upon the whole, saying, they exist without a cause.

THEREFORE the supposed strength of motive 'affords no relief from the
difficulties, which' Mr. Edwards's ' notion of a self-determining power in the
will is attended with; nor will it help, in the least, its absurdities and
inconsistencies.' P. 67, 68, 71.
Whether corporeal action be always determined by the will, or the greatest
apparent good, we shall briefly enquire in the next section.

SECT. III. External Action or Conduct not determined by the Will, upon Mr.
Edwards's Scheme.
ALL moral good or evil consisting in the disposition or state of the mind or
will, it is of small moment, comparatively, what determines material action.
Suppose this is indeed determined by the will, the enquiry of chief importance
is, What determines the will itself. The question, What determines the motions
and actions of the body? is quite foreign to the subject. But as Mr. Edwards
affirms, that the will is the true cause of external action or conduct, and
makes the whole of liberty to lie here, we will examine this position, on his
own principles.

'THE voluntary action, which is the fruit and consequence of volition, is
determined by that which appears most agreeable;' or by the will which 'always
is as the greatest apparent good,' and 'not properly distinct' from it.
'Liberty is a power, opportunity any one has of doing, or conducting according
to his will, being free from external hindrance or compulsion. -- Or a power of
executing his will. There are two things that are contrary to liberty. One is
constraint; the same is otherwise called force and coaction; which is a
person's being necessitated to do a thing contrary to his will. The other is
restraint; which is his being hindered, and not having power to do according to
his will.' Part I. Sect. 5.
In the determination of the will itself, he supposes a man cannot be free.
'To talk of liberty, or the contrary, as belonging to the very will itself, is
not to speak good sense.' Part II. Sect. 1.
He censures Dr Whitby as saying, 'That a man exercises liberty, not only in
external actions, but in the acts of the will themselves' P 76, 77.
(p. 76, 77) He supposes there is a cause, prior to the will's own acts,
determining volition. 'Let the person come by his volition how he will, if
there is nothing in the way to hinder his pursuing and executing it, he is
fully and perfectly free'. Upon the whole, liberty consists not in a power of
Quaere, When St. Paul says, 'To will is present with me; but how to perform
that which is good I find not', is he to be understood as speaking of external
or internal impediment? If of the latter, then there are other things opposed
to liberty beside outward constraint or restraint. If of the former, this
wholly frees from moral blame. When be also speaks of a man's 'having power
over his own will', (in a particular instance alluded to) does he mean power
over the external acts? If this be the meaning, could a man have power here
without first purposing in his heart to refrain in the thing spoken of. And if
in this purpose he has not power over himself (i. e. if it be not his own
purpose) how could he be said to have power over the outward act?

AGAIN, the same apostle observes, 'The spirit lusts against the flesh, and
the flesh against the spirit, so that ye cannot do the things which ye would.'
Is this to be understood of external impediment? Is the 'law in the members
warring against the law of the mind,' an external law? 'The good that I would,
I do not: But the evil which I would not, that I do.' Is this meant of an
external will?


willing, but in an opportunity of doing what is already willed -- of executing
a choice already made, not in a power of choosing. It is not at all applicable
to the mind. The state of the will is fixed by necessity -- and from hence
proceed external actions.

NOW how is it possible that action and conduct should be free, and yet be the
effects of a necessary cause? 'There is not more in the effect than in the
cause. Those things which are indissolubly connected with other things that are
necessary, are themselves necessary.' How is corporeal action determined by the
will, when 'the will in no instance is its own determiner', consequently not in
the particular determination to move the body? At least, the will determines
this no otherwise than as it is itself determined hereto by an antecedent,
necessary cause. Or how can that be called a voluntary determination, which is
the effect of necessity? or that a voluntary action to which a man is
necessarily determined? If the act of the will, which is supposed to determine
and fix the external acts of the body, be not itself free, according to Mr.
Edwards's own reasoning, the actions proceeding herefrom cannot be so. HAD Mr.
Edwards attended to his own reasoning, he would not have affirmed, that
external actions might be free, when the will, which determines them, is
subject to necessity. For, says he, 'if the determining act be necessary, the
man cannot be the subject of command or government in his external actions;
because these are all necessary, being the necessary effects of the acts of the
will themselves'. (P. 224, 225, 256, also p. 46, 47, 48.)
'An act of the will is an act of choice'. Now if there be no liberty exercised
in choosing; preferring, wherein is liberty exercised at all? What is choice
distinct from liberty? Yet we are told, that liberty is exercised only in the
execution of choice. That we have not a power of election or liberty in the act
of volition, at least not in the first and leading act of choice, which
determines all the rest.

IF, therefore, freedom be not in the will, we should be glad to know where it
is? Whether any being can be said to do, or conduct according to his pleasure
or choice. Choice and pleasure (so called) is fixed by a previous necessary
cause -- and doing or conducting fixed by volition -- Now the immediate fruit
and consequences of volition must be of the same nature with their cause --
alike necessary. In other words, the will is no cause at all. For a necessary
cause is not properly speaking a cause; it is nothing distinct from a mere
instrument. A cause, strictly so called, must be free; at least so far as
praise or blame, reward or punishment, belong to it.

UPON the whole, external actions must ultimately be determined, not by the
will, but by that cause which determines the will, agreeable to our author's
own principles. The will being in no instance it is own determiner, there is in
no instance a power or capacity of choice in mankind. For choice is the same as
the will's determination: A power or capacity of choice, therefore, would be a
power of self-determination, which Mr. Edwards's whole scheme is designed to
show the absurdity of.

THE sum of Mr. Edwards's scheme appears to be this. Liberty consists in a
man's power to execute his will -- to do or conduct according to what is
willed. His will is (not determined by, but is) the greatest apparent good. And
yet every volition is the necessary effect of the greatest apparent good,
produced and determined by it as the efficient cause -- which cause, however,
is nothing distinct from the effect produced. From what particular cause any
object comes to have the greatest appearance of good is yet a secret, of no use
to be known to nine hundred and ninety nine out a thousand of mankind For the
satisfaction of the thousandth person, Mr. Edwards has labored to explore this
secret; and yet his 'having failed here does not overthrow the position, which
was the thing of chief importance in his discourse;' for it only remains to be
-- explained and proved. Antecedent necessity determines the will; this
determines corporeal actions; and action is voluntary; i. e. is willed, or
caused to be willed -- there is no outward compulsion or restraint in the case,
but only a necessary inward determination. Liberty is indeed necessary to
praise or blame. But the acts of the body being free from outward coaction or
impediment, there is no need of liberty in the mind, as a foundation of moral
government.

THESE, as near as we can come at them, are Mr. Edwards's sentiments: The
mention of which sufficiently exposes the absurdity of the scheme -- it is
repugnancy to itself; to common sense, to all morality and religion; and
consequently the perplexity and folly of applying metaphysical reasoning to a
subject, which can be obscured only by the subtilty of argument.

PART II. An examination of Mr. Edwards's doctrine respecting the indissoluble
connection of moral causes and effects.
WERE we remarking on the writings of an avowed FATALIST, a somewhat different
method might be expected from what we shall pursue. But our controversy being
with an eminent CHRISTIAN DIVINE several things may be taken for granted,
which, in arguing, with a fatalist, would need proof. Accordingly we desire
these few obvious principles of natural religion not less than christianity,
may be considered as data in the present argument.

FIRST, That there is an intelligent, designing author of nature; or original
cause of all beings and things; who (by the terms) is uncaused -- existing
prior to, and exclusive of, all design contributing to his existence. Mr.
Edwards has intimated, indeed, that there is in the nature of things a
foundation for the knowledge of the being of a GOD, without any evidence of it
from his works' -- but adds, 'We have not strength of mind to comprehend 'his
existence' in this ' independent manner'. The way that mankind come to the
knowledge of his being is that which the apostle speaks of, Romans 1.20. We first
ascend and prove a posteriori, or from effects, that there must be an eternal
cause. And then, secondly, prove by argumentation, not intuition, that this
being must be necessarily existent. And then, thirdly, from the proved
necessity of his existence, we may descend, and prove many of his perfections a
priori' (P. 60, 61.)

But is it arguing a priori to argue from effects? 'If strict propriety of
speech be insisted on,' does not this peculiar kind of argument suppose, that
the being of a GOD may be proved 'without ANY evidence of it from his works?'
If so, there seems to be some jumble in descending to this argument 'from the
proved necessity of GOD's existence'. We cannot but take notice, that in what
we have here extracted, the terms are changed in the latter part of the
paragraph from what they were in the beginning of it. It is first given as the
author's opinion, that there is a foundation in nature for our coming to the
knowledge of the BEING of a GOD, without any evidence of it from his works. But
at the close of the paragraph it is observed, that 'from the proved necessity
of his existence, we may prove many of his PERFECTIONS a priori.' In the same
place Mr. Edwards observes, 'we argue his being, from our own being, and the
being of other things' -- which is the only medium to prove the being of a GOD
(p. 386.) What 'foundation is there then, in the nature of things, for the
knowledge of the BEING of a GOD, without any evidence of it from his works'?
What medium of proof?

Dr. SAMUEL CLARK, in his 'demonstration of the being and attributes of GOD,'
undertakes to prove, that he 'exists by a necessity absolute in the nature of
the thing itself' -- 'a necessity antecedent. (in the order of nature, and of
our ideas, though not of time) to the supposition of his existence' -- which
necessity he assigns as 'the natural ground, foundation, cause, or reason of
GOD's being.'

Now though we would not choose to dissent from such a master of reason, yet the
enquiry in a manner forces itself upon us, Where is the propriety of supposing
any thing, in any sense, to be the PRIOR ground of the existence of the first
cause? Does not this convey the idea of an effect produced? The Dr. remarks on
Spinoza's doctrine of necessity, (or 'the necessary following of an effect from
it is cause') that 'this necessity must still be determined by something
antecedent, and so on infinitely.' Might not a Spinozist reply, that that
necessity, which Dr. Clark faith is the cause of the existence of GOD must be
determined by something antecedent? and so on'?

The Dr. takes his rise to the necessity of the divine existence from hence,
That 'there has existed from eternity some one independent being, the author
of all other beings.' (vid. p. 8, -- 15. Edit. 10th.) On this postulatum he
proceeds. Hence, and from things said in his seventh letter, it is probable he
really meant not to prove the certain existence of GOD a priori, but his
particular perfections. 'The infinity, eternity, unity of GOD, etc must be
demonstrated from the nature of necessary existence; from the nature and
consequences of that necessity, by which the first cause exists' And yet,
speaking of the 'scholastic way of proving the EXISTENCE of the self-existent
being, from the absolute perfection of his nature,' the Dr. remarks, 'All or
any perfections presuppose existence; which is petitio principii. But bare
necessity of existence does not presuppose, but infer existence. In this case,
here must nothing be presupposed, no nature whatsoever,' (Letter 6th, p. 490,
491.)

WHY then did the Dr. lay down his two first propositions (p. 8, 11.) as the
media of proof? If necessity 'doth not presuppose, but infer existence; yet the
method the Dr. takes to prove this necessity PRESUPPOSES a nature and
existence: it supposes that there exists an eternal, independent being -- the
author of all other beings. The very thing to be proved.

ADMITTING the Dr's position, that necessity is the cause of the divine
existence; to what purpose is it with an atheist? It takes for granted the
thing in question. The enquiry is not, How GOD exists? but, Whether he exists?
Existence, and the cause of existence, are very distinct. An enquiry about the
latter plainly presupposes the former. So that while the Dr. endeavors to
prove, that GOD exists 'from a cause within himself,' he takes for granted,
that there is a GOD; and only accounts for a peculiar circumstance, or this
mode of his existence, that it is 'by a necessity of nature.' Whereas the
subject of enquiry between an atheist and a theist is not the modus of
existence, but the simple truth or fact -- is there in reality 'an eternal,
independent being, the author of all other beings? Now from what can this point
possibly be argued but from the phenomenon of nature? If, from surveying
visible creation, the atheist is not convinced that GOD IS, how can we go a
step farther with him? Must he not think it impertinent, and petitio principii,
if we undertake to show him, -- HOW GOD exists? Or to assign a ground and
reason of an existence, which he believes nothing of? But if from the frame of
nature he is convinced of the certain existence of GOD, he is no longer an
atheist, and therefore needs not the argument a priori for his conviction.

Or suppose the atheist, for argument's sake, to admit that GOD is, but demands
to have the cause or ground of his existence assigned and explained. Is any
theist holden to show him, how the divine being existed from eternity? Can this
be done? Has Dr. Clark attempted it? In one word, are the phenomenon of nature
sufficient to prove the being and perfections of GOD? If they are; what need of
any other argument than that a posteriori? If they are not, it is certain the
argument a priori can produce no conviction: For this resolves itself into the
argument a posteriori.

THAT the being of a GOD is indeed necessary, every thing round us declares. If
the things that are seen were created and made, the self-existence and eternity
of the creator is proved beyond doubt. For whatever has a beginning exists
from some cause without itself. Now as this cannot be said of the creator of
all things and beings, it follows, that he must be self-existent and eternal.

THE Dr. tells us, that 'the eternity of GOD' (either a part ante, or a part
post) 'can no otherwise be proved than by the argument a priori.' But,
admitting an author of nature, does it not follow, that he existed, not merely
from the beginning of the phenomenon of nature, but from everlasting? and being
independent, must always continue to exist? Do not these things follow, without
considering the 'intrinsic nature of necessary existence'? (which is allowed to
be inexplicable.) Do not they follow from this simple consideration, that the
original cause exists from no external cause? St. Paul supposes the eternity
of GOD is no less evident from the things that are made, than his existence,
power, and godhead. The invisible things of him, from the creation of the
world, are CLEARLY seen, being understood by the the things that are made, EVEN
HIS ETERNAL POWER AND GODHEAD; so that they are without excuse, who will not
admit this proof.

THE Dr. observes upon the whole, that 'the proof a priori is capable of being
understood only by a few attentive minds; because it is of use only against
learned and metaphysical difficulties' -- while the proof a posteriori is level
to all men's capacities' -- that this, therefore, 'is by far the most generally
useful argument, and what GOD expects moral agents should be determined by' But
if the eternity and immortality of GOD cannot be proved a posteriori, how is
this argument sufficient with common people? Do not they need an argument to
prove that GOD is eternal and immortal as well as philosophers? Are the
generality incapable of receiving any proof of this point? Or is it the
privilege of the learned, that 'GOD, as moral governor,' does not 'expect they
should be determined by' that evidence, whereby ' moral agents should be
determined'?

WHAT the Dr. says concerning the unity and infinity of GOD, that they are
proveable only a priori, we think liable to much the same exceptions.
Metaphysical reasoning on this subject, as well as some other points of
theology, instead of relieving any philosophic difficulty, has, on the
contrary, given great advantage to infidelity.


Whence it follows,

SECONDLY, That all things are originally what the creator made them, and
intended they should be. Whether animate or inanimate, rational or irrational,
throughout all worlds -- they have all such powers and properties, such
relations, connections and destination, as the great former of them has given
and intended. Causes and effects can be traced no higher. We must stop at the
author of nature, the first and original cause.

THIRDLY, Besides absolute or natural perfections (as eternity, self existence,
independance, infinity, etc.) the first cause is a being of a particular moral
character -- is immutably just, holy good, true, etc.

FOURTHLY, That the moral perfections of GOD correspond to the moral
discernment he has given to us. For when we say, God is holy, just, good etc,
we speak altogether unintelligibly, if we suppose these perfections in him to
be essentially different from the perceptions implanted in us. Not but the
deity possesses these moral perfections in a degree far above finite
conception; yet as in these he proposes his own example to our imitation, so
that which may be known of God in this regard is manifest from the moral
faculty in man, whereby he is a law to himself. (Not meaning to exclude the
help and improvement derived from revelation.)

FIFTHLY, That the moral character of God is that foundation of religion, as
the moral nature of man is of his accountableness.

ON the footing of these principles, we shall proceed to examine Mr. Edwards's
doctrine of necessity.

SECT. I. Whether the will be necessarily determined by an extrinsic cause?
MR. Edwards would have his readers 'observe, that when he speaks of connection
of causes and effects, he has respect to moral causes, as well as those that
are called natural in distinction from them -- that the acts of the will may be
as certainly and indissolubly connected with the moral cause, as natural
effects with their natural causes -- that the connection is as sure and perfect
between moral causes and effects, as natural; that moral necessity may be as
absolute as natural necessity.' Part I. Sect. 4. p. 30, 31, 32.
Yea, he advertiseth us, that 'where he uses this distinction of moral and
natural necessity, he would not be understood to suppose, that if any thing
comes to pass by the former kind of necessity, the nature of things is not
concerned in it, as well as in the latter. I do not mean to determine, that
when a moral motive is so strong, that the act of the will infallibly follows,
this is not owing to the nature of things. I suppose that necessity, which is
called natural, in distinction from moral, is so called because mere nature is
concerned, without any thing of choice; not because nature has never any hand
in our choice: For, choice arises from nature as truly as other events.' So
that, upon the whole, much the same rules are supposed to take place in the
moral world, in GOD's government of moral agents (so called) as in the
adjustment and disposal of natural things. What Mr. Edwards intended by a moral
cause, we cannot satisfy ourselves. Sometimes he appears to reason as if he
supposed there was really no distinction between a moral and natural cause,
(31, 32.) or none to be perceived; while more generally he seems to suppose a
distinction of great importance; which, however, he has not so clearly pointed
out as were to be wished.

INDEED, if there be not a real and important distinction between moral causes
and natural, it plainly follows, that Mr. Edwards has taken pains to no
purpose to show, that natural necessity wholly precludes from praise or blame,
while moral necessity does not at all. And if there be a real and important
distinction, it is of importance that it be clearly seen.

IN the section last referred to, Mr. Edwards suggests, that 'when we speak of
choice as distinct from nature, it is without reflection and research; names
being given to things according to what is most obvious. But though the
dependence and connection between acts of volition or choice, and their causes,
according to established laws, is not so sensible and obvious, as that
established law and order which is seen in the material world; and though men
make a distinction between nature and choice as if they were completely and
universally distinct; yet choice arises from nature as truly as other events
However, these are the names that these two kinds of necessity have usually
been called by; (viz. natural and moral) and they must be distinguished by some
names or other; for there is a distinction or difference between them, that is
very important in it is consequences: Which difference does not lie so much in
the nature of the connection, as in the two terms connected.' The difference is
important, but not sensible and obvious. 'The cause, with which the effect is
connected, is of a particular kind, viz of a moral nature -- the effect also is
of a particular kind, being of a moral nature.' But are we not told in this
same place, that the effect is also connected with the natural cause, and is
owing to the nature of things? There is the joint influence of moral and
natural necessity in moral events -- their influence is closely linked
together. Now till the measure of influence to be ascribed to moral necessity
is distinctly apprehended, it is impossible to tell when, and how far, a person
is rewardable or punishable -- natural necessity (by supposition) being
inconsistent with reward or punishment. But let any one examine Mr. Edwards's
book, and say, whether he has shown when and how far the acts of the will
proceed from natural necessity, and when, or how far from moral. Whether the so
much labored distinction, or difference between natural and moral causes is
not confounded and exploded?

IT is difficult to determine whether Mr. Edwards supposed the acts of the will
to be the necessary effects of an intrinsic cause, or an extrinsic. These are
used so promiscuously and indeterminately through his book, volition being
sometimes ascribed to the one, sometimes to the other, that, though they are
essentially different and opposite, it is hard to say which he more especially
intended by that moral necessity, to which he every where supposes the will is
subject. Either internal, original bias, or something extrinsic, is the cause,
to whose efficiency, determination, command, decision, the will is as much
subject, as the motion of the body to the will -- this being 'as passive and
necessary with respect to the antecedent determining cause of it,' as the
motions of the hands and feet with respect to the determination of the will.
(183, 184)

WE rather think it was Mr. Edwards's opinion, that the will is determined by
an extrinsic cause. But since this is by no means certain from his book --
since he has not expressed himself clearly, or we are incapable judges of this
intricate subject, we shall take liberty to examine his doctrine on both
suppositions -- either of an extrinsic, or intrinsic cause. The former shall be
the subject of the present section.

WHETHER volition is necessarily determined by an extrinsic cause? Mr. Edwards
asserts, that the acts of the will are not necessary in themselves, or in their
own nature; but by their connection with some cause that is necessary in
itself. In his own words, they 'are necessary by a necessity of consequence.'
The only way that any thing that is to come to pass hereafter, is, or can be,
necessary, is by a connection with something that is necessary in it is own
nature, or something that already is, or has been; so that the one being
supposed, the other certainly follows. This also is the only way that all
things past, (excepting those which were from eternity) could be necessary
before they came to pass, or could come to pass necessarily; and therefore the
only way in which any effect or event, or any thing whatsoever that ever has
had, or will have a beginning, has come into being necessarily, or will
hereafter necessarily exist. And therefore THIS is the necessity which
especially belongs, to controversies about the acts of the will.' P. 25, 102,
103.
From all which it follows, that the, acts of the will are necessary ^^^Y by
their connection with the self-existent being. For he only existed from
eternity. His existence only is necessary in itself. He therefore is the
necessary cause of all volition -- of sinful volitions equally as holy ones.
Either therefore the acts of the will do not come to pass necessarily, Unless
it be said, that they are necessary by a connection with this proposition, 'two
and two make four' -- or this, 'all lines drawn from the center of a circle to
the circumference are equal.' (p. 24.)
(as Mr. Edwards supposes) or GOD is the author and source of that necessity by
which they come to pass. Whether the latter is reconcilable with divine moral
rectitude, 'let those who have human understanding in exercise judge.'

THE voluntary, designing cause of the great wickedness creatures are guilty
of, must be either GOD or themselves. The whole wickedness must be charged to
the one or the other. Now that creatures are not the voluntary designing cause
of their own wickedness (if we may call it their own) appears from hence, that
wickedness lies in the state of the will, not in the actions which proceed
from, or are the fruits of it. Mr. Edwards teaches, that men must be the
authors of external actions, by being the causes of them by an act of will or
choice, in order to praise or blame; but that no such thing holds with respect
to the acts of the will THEMSELVES, that they are the designing, voluntary
cause of them. (277.) In the internal act, (viz. volition) the agent, or rather
subject, is not self-determined; i. e. is not the cause of it. 'Freedom of will
is not essential to the nature of virtue and vice.' (256.)

'IN external actions men are self-directed, self-determined; and their wills
are the cause of the motions of their bodies, and the external things that are
done; so that unless men do them voluntarily, and the action be determined by
their antecedent volition, it is no action or doing of theirs.' (286. 287.)
That is, they are the voluntary cause, not of the evil will in them, which is
the essence of vice, but only of the external action, which is the mere body
and form of it. The cause of sin is without themselves. In what constitutes
it is nature, they are directed, determined, by some superior agent, who is the
cause of every internal act of the will. For volition has a cause itself, as
well as is the cause of corporeal action Any one sees, that men's being the
authors of corporeal action merely, 'is no moral evil, any more than sickness,
or some other natural calamity, which arises from a' natural 'cause'.

ESPECIALLY when it is farther considered, in what sense men are the authors of
corporeal action, upon Mr. Edwards's scheme, will it appear, that they cannot,
on this account, be chargeable with moral evil. 'Every act or the will is
necessary, because dependent and consequent on a necessary cause.' "There is as
much reason to believe that all things are voluntary, as that all things are
necessary; and I desire any one to show me that the one is more clear and
certain than the other. If he says, that motives which determine or cause the
mind to exert what I call voluntary actions, are necessary, and therefore the
effects or actions following the motives are also necessary; this is just as
true a consequence as that because voluntary actions concur to the production
of necessary effects, therefore these effects are voluntary. As for example,
the motive of my present writing is a persuasion of the falsehood of Cato's
scheme; and this persuasion I grant and see is necessary, I cannot help this
judgment; but still, my writing, I also see, is no more necessary than the
increase of the motion of my blood, or of the beating of my pulse is voluntary,
though the cause concurring to it was my voluntary drinking a certain quantity
of spirits. Nay I can with as much reason argue that all natural effects are
voluntary in their immediate causes, or proceed from their choice or will,
because GOD their first cause is a voluntary and free agent; as Cato can argue
from the second causes or motives of human actions being necessary, that the
immediate cause, the mind, is a necessary, not a voluntary agent. But there is
no end of arguing, or rather trifting, with such sort of fallacies.' Jackson's
defense of liberty against Cato's latters, p. 64, 65.
Therefore the actions of the body are necessary, being dependent and
consequent on the determination of the will, which is dependent and consequent
on a prior cause -- 'indissolubly connected with what is necessary in it is own
nature' Therefore men are not the authors, the cause, of corporeal action, in
any proper sense at all; as they are not the authors of inward volition For 'it
cannot be, that' they 'should be the active, voluntary, determining cause of'
their 'own volitions' -- or 'of the first and leading volition, which
determines the whole affair.' (224, 225, 70, 71.)

TO what extrinsic cause then, or to whom, are the volitions of men to be
ascribed, since they are not the cause of them themselves? By whom or what is
the state of men's will determined? According to Mr. Edwards, it is the
strongest motive from without. But motives to choice are exhibited to the mind
by some agent: By whom are they exhibited? In regard to sinful volitions we
know that one man enticeth another, and Satan enticeth all mankind. But this
will not be given as an answer to our question; since the sinful act of one
sinner in enticing another, and of Satan in tempting all men, must be
determined by a previous cause -- an antecedent highest motive exhibited by
some other agent. (Though, by the way, it may be difficult to show, how one man
can be the cause of sin in another, when he cannot be the cause of it himself.)
What we are enquiring after is, the cause of 'the first and leading sinful
volition, which determines the whole affair.' Nor is there any stop, till we
arrive at the first cause, 'whose immediate conduct Mr. Edwards says, is first
in the series of events, connected with nothing preceding.'

WILL it now be said, that GOD is the cause of those dispositions of heart, and
acts of the will, which are so odious in their own nature? On Mr. Edwards's
scheme this must be said. For the acts of the will, not being necessary in
their own nature, but by connection with a cause that is so; and no cause being
thus necessary but he who existed from eternity, it undeniably follows, that
every sinful volition proceeds ultimately from him, as the cause and source
(...). And to say, that the volitions themselves are vicious, but that the
cause is not so, equally militates against Mr. Edwards's own scheme, and common
sense.

ON reading section I. part IV. of Mr. Edwards's book, it was matter of much
surprise to find a gentleman of his abilities using so weak an argument,
descending to so thin a subtility, as this, "that the essence of virtue and
vice is not in their cause, but in their nature." The pains taken with this,
(argument shall we call it?) the stress laid upon it, is indeed no mark of a
good cause. But since every thing advanced by so eminent a writer may be
thought to merit attention, we shall briefly consider the subject of this
section. Mr. Edwards's own reasoning will assist us here, as in other parts of
these remarks.

FOR 'there cannot be more in the effect than in the cause.' (62.) Volition
therefore cannot be virtuous or vicious farther than it is cause is so. We may
not detach the nature of effects from the efficient. 'It may be wickedness in
the cause, that it produces wickedness.' Supposing then, that 'the wicked act
of the cause in producing wickedness, is one wickedness; and the wickedness
produced another' -- what follows is, that in every sinful volition there are
two wickednesses -- one chargeable to the cause, the other to the subject of
the volition. Now if the cause be 'diverse from the subject of' volition, how
does it relieve the difficulty at all, if upon the scheme of necessary
connection, GOD stands chargeable with doing wickedly? And is not this the
plain consequence of the doctrine, 'that the acts of the will are indissolubly
connected with a cause that is necessary in it is own nature'? And if it will be
allowed, that GOD can do wickedly considered as the cause of sinful volitions,
we may just as well ascribe all moral evil to him.

SECT. II. Whether the will be necessarily determined by an intrinsic cause.
HOWEVER repugnant this hypothesis is to that already examined, yet it is
frequently made in Mr. Edwards's book. Our business is not to reconcile him
with himself, But to remark on what we find. His meaning would doubtless have
been clearer, had the subject he undertook been intelligible. He appears to
have been bewildered at times in his own subtilty.

TO say, that the acts of the will are necessary from internal, original bias,
is not very consistent with saying, they are the necessary effects of an
extrinsic cause. For what is this but saying, they are necessary in their own
nature? therefore not necessary by a necessity of consequence? Yet Mr. Edwards
expressly asserts, that every thing which ever had, or will have a beginning, is
necessary only by a necessity of consequence. Now if the acts of the will are
effects of an extrinsic cause only, then they cannot be the effects of an
intrinsic cause also. But original bias and inclination is intrinsic. If this
therefore necessarily determines volition, then the other position of it is
proceeding from an extrinsic, consequential necessity, (an eternal, necessary
cause) must be given up. For 'how can these things hang together'? Or will any
suppose, that Mr. Edwards when he faith, 'the state or act of the will is from
the determination of an intrinsic cause,' meant by this cause the Deity
inhabiting and actuating every intelligent creature? by a positive efficiency
producing every volition of theirs? Such a supposition, we cannot believe any
one will make, however necessary to reconcile Mr. Edwards to himself. This is a
sense of GOD's working in men to will, and to do; of our living, moving, and
having our being in him, which we presume none will espouse. For if it makes
him the author of virtuous dispositions in men, in the most strict and absolute
sense; it will be remembered, that it also makes him, in the same sense, the
author of every vicious inclination and propensity. On this hypothesis, there
is properly but one agent in the universe.

'MORAL necessity,' says Mr. Edwards, 'lies in the will, and is the will's
propensity'. How then does it lie in something exhibited to the mind from
without, which is prior to the will, and gives it a necessary determination?
Surely the will's propensity is not prior to its propensity. Nothing in the
will itself can be the moral necessity by which it is determined, if this
necessity be really prior to will. Besides, to be determined by a cause in
itself, is to be self determined, if words have any meaning. And moreover, this
is making the will necessary in it is own nature. Both which are contrary to
supposition. What confounding again of cause and effect! Volition is the
antecedent, necessary cause of volition! The will is necessarily determined in
every act by a necessity prior and superior to it; and yet this necessity is
nothing diverse or distinct from volition!

MOREOVER, if an intrinsic cause, or original bias and propensity, be that
necessity by which the will is determined, what is this but being determined by
nature? For original propensity is natural propensity. Original necessity is
natural necessity. Agreably Mr. Edwards says, 'Moral necessity is a species of
philosophical' -- Natural philosophy, we conclude he means -- though indeed it
is alike applicable to his moral philosophy, and that of many scepticks in our
nation.
(294, 295. 30^.) that 'moral events arise from nature as truly as others.'
(31, 32.) Therefore, as was hinted before, moral necessity, as truly as
natural, precludes from praise or blame -- and that for this good reason, that
moral necessity is natural. This is applicable to the necessity of the first
sinful volition, if indeed it was necessary before it came to pass -- And
consequent sinful volitions being the effects of the first, it equally holds as
to these also.

THERE seems, indeed, to be some difficulty, in regard to the principle
implanted in the regenerate by the Spirit of GOD, upon this hypothesis of Mr.
Edwards. For he, we presume, would not deny, that they were born in sin; and
that the bias in regeneration is changed from what it was by nature.
Consequently, the holiness and perseverance of the saints is not necessary from
native, original propensity, but from some other cause.

WHATEVER may be said in regard to the inability of fallen man; Mr. Edwards's
principle has equal respect to the moral power of man in innocence, and of the
rebel angels before their fall. Their original bias and inclination, it will be
allowed, proceeded immediately from the creator. If then their sin was the
effect of a necessity originally in their will, or was their will's original
propensity, it was so entirely owing to the nature of things, that (by
supposition) it could not involve them in guilt -- Or if connected with the
eternal cause, who alone is necessary in his own nature, it could not upon our
author's own scheme; be their sin. The whole guilt, if any, must be imputed to
the first cause. For the first sin, of angels and man, was once future; and
therefore could not be necessary in itself, but only by the aforesaid necessity
of consequence. (p. 25.) And then, whatever moral impotency now cleaves to
mankind, or damned spirits, this being connected with the first sin, which was
connected with the original, necessary bias of innocence; it follows, that the
sins of fallen creatures are necessary in the same way that the first sinful
volition was -- the only way in which all things and events whatsoever, which
are not eternal, are, or can be necessary. They do not therefore partake of the
essence of sin; or if they do, involve the creator in it.

INDEED the supposition of being necessarily determined by original, internal
bias, does, upon the whole, lead to much the same consequences with that of
supposing the acts of the will to be necessary by a necessity of consequence --
since, agreeable to the second preliminary proposition, original bias must be
ultimately ascribed to the original cause of all things. What is natural is the
constitution of the author of nature. Moral events, Mr. Edwards instructs us,
are owing, partly at least, to the nature of things -- proceed, at least in
part, from natural causes. Now, by his own principles, so far as the nature of
things operates to their production, neither good nor ill desert is applicable
to the subject of volition. Had he told us in what respects, and how far,
volition is owing to natural necessity, we might have known wherein, and how
far, the creature is accountable. For herein, and so far, Mr. Edwards grants,
it [volition] is not properly his own act -- he is not the proper subject of
command, etc.

IF volition be partly owing to natural causes, and the subject so far is not
answerable; what is this but charging the moral turpitude of a sinful volition
on GOD, so far as it is the effect of natural necessity? Now as well may we
attribute the whole moral turpitude to God, as the least measure of it.

IT moreover follows, that the holiness of the angels, who never sinned, being
among those moral events which are owing to the nature of things, is no
holiness; unworthy of praise. The same thing follows with respect so the
holiness of the man CHRIST JESUS, and of GOD himself. For 'natural necessity is
wholly inconsistent with just praise and blame.' And would Mr. Edwards deny,
that the holiness of GOD, his moral rectitude in general, is necessary in it is
own nature? And what is this, but to be necessary by a natural necessity?

FARTHER, by Mr. Edwards's principles, all virtue and vice in creatures is
native or original. For every act of volition is the necessary effect of
internal, original bias -- i. e. is owing to the original frame of the mind.
The angels that self, and our common progenitors, were therefore 'made with a
fixed, prevailing principle of sin in the heart.' Otherwise their sin proceeded
not from internal, original bias -- any more than from an 'indissoluble
connection with a cause necessary in it is own nature.' If in truth their
original bias was not to evil -- if they were endowed with the moral image of
GOD, then their sinful volition was not the effect of original propensity --
nor did the necessity of it lie in the will, in it is primitive state. Nor
consequently will this account for the permanency of holiness in the angels in
heaven. This cannot be the rationale of the abiding principle of holiness in
them; since it appears from fact, that creatures endowed with the moral image
of GOD, may deface and forfeit it.

SUPPOSE 'the essence of virtue and vice lies in the nature of volition, not in
the cause'; it then follows, that the intrinsic cause, the internal bias or
propensity (which is supposed to be the moral necessity that determines the
will) is not that which constitutes the goodness, or wickedness, of the acts of
the will. A vicious man's bias and inclination to sin, is not that which makes
him sinful; the essence of his sin lying not in such bias or inclination, but
in the nature of the wicked thing. A shrewd solution! as if the character of
moral agents were not always estimated from their propensity to good or evil.
If 'moral necessity lies in the will, and is the will's propensity,' it either
follows, that there is no good or evil in any dispositions implanted in the
hearts of men by nature; (contrary to assertion, p. 303.) or if there be any
good or evil in such dispositions, this is entirely a distinct goodness or
wickedness from the volitions themselves, which they are the cause of. 'It
would imply a contradiction to suppose, that these two are the same individual'
goodness or 'wickedness. The' good or 'wicked act of the cause, in producing'
goodness or 'wickedness is one' goodness or 'wickedness; and the' goodness or
'wickedness produced, if there be any produced, is another.' Will this be
called arguing! What does it amount to? The plain truth is, that when we set
ourselves to judge of human actions, we must have no consideration of the
source of them, but entirely detach them from their causes. Be the efficient
who or what it will, all we have to attend to is, the effect produced -- by
this we must estimate the goodness or wickedness of men, whether they determine
themselves, or are determined ab extra -- whether they have power over their
own wills, or have not. He therefore that with one original talent makes as
great improvement as another with five, is no more praiseworthy -- that is, is
not accepted according to that he has. He that offends against five degrees of
light originally given, is guilty in no higher degree than he that offends
against but one degree of light. The volition, or act, in both cases, we
suppose to be the same in regard to the subject matter of duty or sin -- the
same also in the general nature thereof. What then is the reason of different
degrees of punishment for the same crime in different persons? Not the nature
of the crime as abstracted from the circumstances of the agent, but as
connected and compared herewith. Now if men are not the cause of their own
volitions, then a determination to sin against ten degrees of light differs
nothing from the like determination against a single degree of light: In both
cases, the determination itself is alike necessary and unavoidable. So that
there is no foundation for different degrees of guilt; because, though we are
will not to speak of superior and lesser advantages, yet there is no real ground
for this distinction, intelligent creatures being in no case the authors, the
voluntary designing cause of their inward determinations; at least not of the
first and leading act, which decides the whole matter. How then, without having
recourse to the cause, can we judge of the natute of sin?

INDEED had Mr. Edwards succeeded in his attempt to show, that the "essence of
virtue and vice is not in their cause, but in their nature", he would not have
obviated the objection so often made to the doctrine of necessity, but never
answered, that it is charging GOD with sin.

FOR admitting GOD to be the original cause of volition, but that being the
cause of a sinful volition in the creature is a distinct wickedness from that
which the cause produces in the effect; still the supreme cause is supposed in
fault; is charged with producing sin. There is no evading the consequence,
indeed, that the whole guilt of men's evil dispositions is chargeable on GOD,
not themselves, or on blind necessity and fatality, if the things Mr. Edwards
advances be true. For who will charge another with what he is acknowledged not
to be the author or cause of? If therefore men's volitions are virtuous or
vicious, and they not the designing causes of them themselves; (which Mr.
Edwards throughout his book says they are not) it follows, that the virtue or
vice of their volitions is to be ascribed to the cause, whoever or whatever
this cause is. This consequence may appear more plainly to follow from the
scheme of necessity we are examining, in the succeeding sections.

SECT. III. Upon Mr. Edwards's own Scheme, there cannot be natural Liberty
without moral.
WE acknowledge the title of this section contains a position directly
repugnant to Mr. Edwards's whole scheme, and yet trust we shall make it appear
that the thing asserted plainly follows from things he has advanced.

LIBERTY with respect to natural actions can be neither more nor less than
according to the freedom of the will, or mind. For natural actions, by
supposition, are dependent and consequent on, the fruits and effects of, the
will's determination, which is the cause of them. Now 'there cannot be more in
the effect than in the cause. Those things which are indissolubly connected
with other things that are necessary, are themselves necessary.' Therefore if
the acts of the will are necessary, those outward acts, which are the effects
of necessity in the will, must be necessary 'by a necessity of consequence.'
Now every act of the will is said to be necessary. 'The soul itself is the
object of something acting upon, and influencing it. The first and determining
act of choice, which decides the whole affair, is out of our power.' So that in
natural actions we are 'caused to act by some other agent.' Mr. Edwards faith,
'it is no more a contradiction, to suppose that action may be the effect of
some other cause, besides the agent or being that acts, than to suppose that
life may be the effect of some other cause besides the liver, or being that
lives, in whom life is caused to be.' Is a man active in that act by which he
is brought into being?
(286.) The acts of the soul or will being, therefore, necessary effects of
some other cause than the agent, let it be shown how there can be so much as
natural liberty -- meaning hereby a freedom from outward constraint or
restraint.

MR. Edwards asserts, 'The liberty of the will is not exercised in any thing
but what the will does'. (99.) 'The will in no instance whatever is it is own
determiner'. Therefore the liberty of the will is not exercised in any of the
determinations of the will. Therefore not in determining to move the body.
Therefore corporeal action is not voluntary. Therefore the will does nothing.
Therefore it is exercised in nothing. Mr. Edwards promises to 'demonstrate',
that 'if the first act in the train, determining and fixing the rest, be not
free, none of them all are free.' And asserts, that ' GOD's own immediate
conduct is original in the series.'

In one word, external action is no more in our power than internal. To say
that the will determines the former is not true: For this would be to suppose
it is its own determiner at least in this particular determination to move the
body; contrary to assertion, that it is in no instance whatever it is own
determiner. But suppose material actions to be determined by the will, that
herein men are the voluntary causes of their own actions -- this is really
attributing no power to the will or agent -- since all the acts of the will
suppose an answerable cause without, as much as creation supposes a creator.
(62.)

If material actions are subject to, and commanded by, the will, still this is
subject to and determined by preceding necessity. So that natural liberty is
given up. For that is a strange kind of liberty, which is founded in, and
results out of, necessity. Whether this necessity be natural or moral --
whether it proceeds from an extrinsic or intrinsic cause, it equally militates
against the supposition of freedom. The intelligent system is a curious piece
of mechanism.

Page 232 (and elsewhere) Mr. Edwards has an evasion, which scarce deserves a
serious answer It is this, 'that a man may be said to have a thing in his
power, if he has it at his election; i. e. if he now pleases, and has a direct
and immediate desire for it, he is not unable to do it.' This, in most writers,
would be esteemed mere quibbling. For if a man is morally incapable of a
'direct and immediate desire' to a thing, how can he be said to have it in his
power? Would Mr. Edwards say, that things are in or out of men's power, farther
than choosing or refusing is so, as well as the consequent acts depending
hereon? It is not improper to say, 'that a person' cannot 'perform those
actions, which depend on an act of will, when the act of will itself cannot be
present,' but is forever impossible' -- when the disposition to the contrary is
'as strong and immovable as the bars of a castle,' by nature -- when want of
inclination proceeds from nature; or original bias. For 'the event is dependent
on it is cause.' And the cause not being put, the event cannot take place.
Admitting that such a state of the will may be required as is forever
impossible; this can be only on a supposition of an ability once given and
possessed, but lost. Who will say, that a man has in his power what is and must
be impossible? So that when we are told, 'that the common people, in their
notion of a faulty or praiseworthy deed, suppose the man does it in the
exercise of liberty; but that their notion of liberty is only a person's having
opportunity of doing as he pleases' -- i. e. of executing a choice already
made, we must esteem this trifting. For what liberty is there when choice
itself is out of a man's power -- is the effect of an antecedent necessary
cause? 'In the first act of choice, which decides the whole matter,' he is
necessarily determined. In this Mr. Edwards constantly asserts a man has not
power, or liberty of choice, while he grants him a power or capacity of
consequent choice. That is, in other words, a capacity of being acted upon by
some other cause or agent.

UPON the whole: Mr. Edwards allows, that liberty is essential to praise or
blame, reward or punishment; but teaches, that the internal state of the mind
or will proceeds not from, is not determined by, ourselves. Quaere, Whether Mr.
Edwards's motto at all favors this opinion? It is taken from Romans ix.xvi. It is
not of him that wills. That is, (if we attend to the words taken by
themselves, or in their connection) outward action is not of him that wills.
It is supposed he has willed, and that the will is from himself -- HIM that
wills. But he has not power or opportunity to execute his will. Isaac did
really will to give the blessing to Esau -- Esau did run for venison to obtain
it. But the will of the one, and the running of the other, were overruled.
External action only is determimed by us. With what truth and propriety even
this can be said on Mr. Edwards's scheme, we trust is sufficiently manifest.

SECT. IV. Of GOD's being the Author of Sin, upon Mr. Edwards's Scheme of
necessity; and in what Sense he admits this to be the Consequence of his
Doctrine.
MR Edwards teaches, 'That GOD, when he had made man, so ordered his
circumstances, that from these circumstances, together with the withholding
divine influence and assistance, his sin infallibly followed.' And when it is
asked hereupon, 'why might not GOD as well have first made man with a fixed,
prevailing principle of sin in his heart?' Mr. Edwards intimates in his answer,
that GOD might indeed have done so; but adds, that if man had been thus made at
first, 'it would not have been so visible, that sin did not arise from GOD, as
the positive cause, and real source of it -- that therefore it was meet man
should not be made with sin in his heart, that sin might appear to arise from
the imperfection of the creature, 'and not from GOD as the efficient or
fountain.' He allows GOD to be the author of sin in any sense but being 'the
agent, or actor of sin, or doer of the wicked thing.' He 'disposeth the state
of events in such a manner, that sin most certainly follows therefrom. In such
a sense, I do not deny, that GOD is the author of sin. It is no reproach for
the most high to be thus the author of sin. In such a manner GOD is the orderer
and disposer of sin, though not the actor of it, or doer of the wicked thing.'
(Part iv. sect. 9, 10. and p. 402, 408.

Now how does it appear, on these principles, that God is not the positive
cause, and real source of moral evil? Every one perceives a difference between
doing (or being the subject of) a wicked thing, and being the efficient cause
and fountain of it -- Mr. Edwards allows, that the moral turpitude lies wholly
in the inward propensity, and can no farther be applied to the corporeal
action, than as a vicious principle is supposed to be the source of it. If then
we have no power of self-determination in relation to the internal acts and
exercises of the mind -- if the only thing wherein human liberty consists, is,
a power of executing what is already willed -- if volition springs not from man
as the source, cause, or efficient of it -- if he is only the subject, the
doer, the actor of sin -- Who then is the positive cause and fountain of it? if
not the creature, who but the creator? Every thing but the action or doing of
wickedness, Mr. Edwards expressly affirms GOD to be the author of, and says it
is no reproach to him. So that unless he would confound cause and effect --
unless he would allow men to be 'the designing voluntary cause of their own
volitions;' (which he constantly denies) there is no evading the consequence,
that GOD is the source and fountain, the positive cause and efficient, of moral
evil -- yea, Mr. Edwards says, that he 'decisively orders all the volitions of
moral agents by a positive influence' -- (40.) which is nothing less than
saying in express terms, that he is the positive cause and efficient of them.

Mr. Edwards's notion of human liberty, as being exercised and concerned in
outward actions only, in contradistinction from an inward power of
self-determination (or activity in volition -- or liberty in the mind or will)
if viewed in it is direct and immediate consequences, we think must appear to
subvert the very foundation of religion and morality. This appears to be the
plain consequence by his own principles. For he very justly observes, that 'the
essence of all moral good or evil lies in the internal inclinations,
dispositions, volitions' -- that as these 'are the cause of outward actions, so
the moral good or evil of such actions does not lie at all in the actions
themselves, which taken by themselves are nothing of a moral nature; but in the
internal inclinations and volitions which are the cause of them' -- (276) that
'vice and virtue lie in the state or frame of the soul, and in this only' --
that 'the very willing is the doing; when once a man has willed, the thing is
performed, and nothing else remains to be done -- that the will itself is the
proper object of commands, as well as those actions which are the effects of
the will. It is manifest the soul only is properly and directly the subject of
precepts or commands, that only being capable of receiving or perceiving them.
The motions or state of the body are matter of command only as they are subject
to the soul, and connected with it is acts.' Part 3. Sect. 4. and 5.
Now if inward freedom enters not into the notion of human liberty (33, 38, 39,
40, 131, 132, 189, 194, 213, -- 215, 234, 236, 256, -- 289, and passim.) then
we are not free in that wherein lies the essence of virtue and vice: And if we
are not free in this respect especially, how are we free in any sense that is
of the least importance? how can we be virtuous or vicious, if liberty (as Mr.
Edwards grants) is necessary to moral good or evil? Yea, if we are not free
with respect to the thoughts, affections and purposes of our hearts, our inward
inclinations and volitions, has not Mr. Edwards shown undeniably that we
cannot be free in regard to outward actions? 'If there be a series of acts, the
determining act is more especially the subject of command -- because it is this
act that determines the whole affair.' So that we are not at liberty in that
which determines the whole character. Nothing can be more futile than the
evasion, that 'the essence of virtue and vice lies in the nature of volition,
not in the cause' -- as if mere effects might be virtuous or vicious, and the
cause that produces them not so -- Or supposing the cause (of a sinful
volition, for instance) to be vicious, as if the passive effect would be
another and distinct wickedness. Besides, if the subject of such a volition,
who is altogether passive herein, is vicious notwithstanding, then how is
liberty necessary to praise or blame? If he is vicious at all, he is so on
account of the volition itself, and on this account only -- Whether he has
power or opportunity to execute the volition, does not come into consideration.

MOREOVER, outward actions being determined by the will, and partaking of the
nature of moral good or evil only with reference to their cause, viz. internal
volition -- how is this (internal volition) virtuous (...) in it is own nature,
when the acts of the body are not? Volition has a cause, a prior determiner,
no less than external conduct. Why then are outward acts declared virtuous or
vicious only with reference to their cause, while this is denied of volition?
Has every act of volition an antecedent, necessary cause, which determines
not only volition, but, of consequence, outward actions? And is not the virtue
or vice of volition to be attributed to its cause, as much as the evil of
external acts to the inward disposition and determination? 'Thus' Mr. Edwards's
'notion of liberty, consisting' in external freedom, 'is repugnant to itself,
and shuts itself wholly out of the world.'

WERE it indeed true, as Mr Edwards incidentally observes, (contrary to the
general doctrine of his book, and his whole scheme) that we 'have command over
our thoughts' -- (p. 894) that 'the acts of the will are free' -- that 'the
soul has freedom' -- (p. 116, 224) this might solve the difficulty, as it would
be to make men the voluntary designing cause of those inward acts wherein the
nature of virtue and vice consists. But, as before observed, Mr. Edwards
constantly denies an inward principle, source, or power of activity -- and
blames those divines who contend for the freedom of the soul in willing. He
allows, that a man has 'power to move his body agreably to an antecedent act
of choice, but not to use or exert the faculties of his soul.' (p. 131) How
then 'hath the soul a power of volition or choice?' (p. 39) of choosing for
instance, to move the body, when it has not a power of exerting its own
faculties? How much more consistent would it have been for Mr Edwards to have
said, that the will's determining is a necessary determining -- for the soul to
act necessarily is evermore to act necessarily? -- (that is, the will does not
determine, the soul does not act) than to say, 'the will's determining is a
free determining -- for the soul to act voluntarily is evermore to act
electively'? The will, the soul, may be acted upon, and have such a volition or
choice produced in it, in consequence, and as the effect, of some cause
operating on it, deciding and determining the volition. What Mr. Edwards calls
the soul's voluntary, elective acts, are the effects of a cause independent on
man. The acts and exercises of the human mind (if they may be called its acts)
are owing not to any active power in the mind, to any thing within its power,
but entirely to the energy of a necessary cause, which is prior to what are
called its own acts. Volition is free or voluntary with a freedom of moral
necessity -- a necessity as absolute as natural. And thus it is, that a man's
heart comes to be wrong or right.

MR. Edwards teaches, that GOD 'orders the volitions of moral agents, among
other events, with such a decisive disposal, that the events are infallibly
connected with his disposal -- that an universal, determining providence infers
an infallible, previous fixedness of all events -- that GOD's own immediate
conduct is first in the series, and this alone unconnected with any thing
preceding -- that he causes the disposition of the mind to be more in favor
of such acts' -- (vicious no less than virtuous) 'or brings the mind more
into view of powerful motives and inducements' -- that all things are
invariably settled -- and 'necessity belongs to all moral agents.' His scheme,
upon the whole, appears to be nearly the same with that exhibited by the
celebrated Mr. Hume, an epicurean atheist, which we shall give the reader in
his own words. 'There is a continued chain of necessary causes, foreordained,
and pre-determined, reaching from the original cause of all to every single
volition of every human creature. While we act, we are, at the same time, acted
upon. The ultimate author of all our volitions is the Creator of the world, who
first bestowed motion on this immense machine, and placed all beings in that
position, whence every subsequent event, by an inevitable necessity, must
result.'

TO this scheme, Mr. Hume supposes it will be objected in the following form.
'Human actions, therefore, either can have no moral turpitude at all, as
proceeding from so good a cause; or if they have any turpitude, they involve
our Creator in the same guilt, while he is acknowledged to be their ultimate
cause and author. Wherever a continued chain of necessary causes is fixed, that
being, either finite or infinite, who produces the first, is likewise the
author of all the rest, and must both bear the blame, and acquire the praise,
which belong to them. Our clearest and most unalterable ideas of morality
establish this rule upon unquestionable reasons, when we examine the
consequences of any human action; and these reasons must still have greater
force, when applied to the volitions and intentions of a being infinitely wise
and powerful. Ignorance or impotence may be pleaded for so limited a creature
as man; but those imperfections have no place in our Creator He foresaw, he
ordained, he intended all those actions of men, which we so rashly pronounce
criminal. And we must conclude, therefore, either that they are not criminal,
or that the Deity, not man, is accountable for them. But as either of these
positions is absurd and impious, it follows that the doctrine from which they
are deduced cannot possibly be true, as being liable to all the same
objections. An absurd consequence, if necessary, proves the original doctrine
to be absurd, in the same manner that criminal actions render criminal the
original cause, if the connection between them be necessary and inevitable.'
Essays by David Hume, Esquire vol. iii. p. 151, 152, 153.


THIS objection, which Mr. Hume states to himself, may be made with the same
propriety to the general scheme of our author. From Mr Hume's answer, it is
sufficiently manifest what his principles were. He tells us, 'It is not
possible to explain distinctly, how the Deity can be the immediate cause of all
the actions of men, without being the author of sin and moral turpitude. These
are mysteries, which mere natural and unassisted reason is very unfit to
handle; and whatever system it embraces it must find itself involved in
inextricable difficulties, and even contradictions, at every step which it
takes with regard to such subjects.' Ibid p. 156.


MR. Hume acknowledges, that upon his scheme, the Deity is the mediate,
original cause or all the actions of men; and virtually admits the consequence;
(that he is therefore the author of sin and moral turpitude) by observing, that
it is not possible distinctly to explain, how he can be the one, and not the
other. Now let it be shown, that Mr. Edwards's scheme is not liable to the
foregoing objection, or admitting the objection, let the consequence be shown
not to follow, and it will afford no small satisfaction to many, who are
greatly embarrassed with Mr. Edwards's scheme or necessary connection. Whoever
examines part ii. sect. 3d, 4th, 9th, 12th, and 13th. Part iii. sect. 3d, 4th,
and 6th. Part iv. sect. 9th and 10th, and the conclusion of his discourse,
must, we are persuaded, see the objection, as above stated, to be just -- And
if the consequence also be fairly drawn, does it not prove the doctrine against
which the objection lies to be false and absurd? absolutely irreconcilable with
the moral character of GOD?

SECT. V. On the supposed Advantage of moral Evil to the Universe.
HAVING taken notice of Mr. Edwards's doctrine, in asserting GOD to be the
author of sin, except that he is not 'the actor of it, or doer of the wicked
thing; and the evasion which such a doctrine needed, that 'the essence of a
sinful volition is in its nature, not in its cause'; the next advance he makes,
in order to reconcile the existence of sin with the divine choice and
determination, in the invariable necessity or it, is, that moral evil is best
for the world -- that therefore 'an infinitely wise being, who always chooses
what is best, must choose there should be such a thing' -- that this is not
choosing what is properly evil upon the whole, because 'of the great good which
is the consequence of sin, for the sake' of which GOD is supposed to 'will
sin.' He therefore asserts, that 'moral evil is not of a bad, but good
tendency' -- that 'the coming to pass of every individual act of sin is truly,
all things considered, agreeable to infinite wisdom and goodness.' (Part iv.
sect. 9th.)

FOR all this he quotes with approbation Dr. Turnbull, against whom he had
before wrote and published part of an elaborate volume. When it is asked,
Whence comes evil? this Gentleman denies the hypothesis, and answers, 'There is
no evil in the universe. What! is there no misery, no vice in the world? or are
not these evils? Evils indeed they are; that is, those of one sort are hurtful,
and those of the other sort are equally hurtful and abominable; But they are
not evil or mischievous with respect to the whole. The evil which happens is
requisite to the greater good.'

THAT GOD may, and does many times, overrule things so, as to bring good out of
moral evil, we deny not. From the apostasy of mankind, he has taken occasion
to manifest the exceeding riches of his grace. He also frequently improves
vicious and profligate sinners (beside, and contrary to, their own intention)
as instruments of great and general good. But does it therefore follow, that
profligate wickedness is not of bad, but good tendency? That every individual
act of it is agreeable to perfect wisdom and goodness, and best for the world?

'THOUGH the constitution of our nature, from whence we are capable of vice and
misery, may, as it undoubtedly does, contribute to the perfection and happiness
of the world; and though the actual permission of evil may be beneficial to it:
(that is, it would have been more mischievous, not that a wicked person had
himself abstained from his own wickedness, but that any one had forcibly
prevented it, than that it was permitted:) Yet notwithstanding, it might have
been much better for the world, if this very evil had never been done. Nay, it
is most clearly conceivable, that the very commission of wickedness may be
beneficial to the world, and yet, that it would be infinitely more beneficial
for men to refrain from it. For thus, in the wise and good constitution of the
natural world, there are disorders which bring their own cures; diseases, which
are themselves remedies. Many a man would have died, had it not been for the
gout or a fever; yet it would be thought madness to assert, that sickness is a
better or a more perfect state than health; though the like, with regard to the
moral world, has been asserted. Butler's Analogy, edit. 4, p. 188, 189.


GOD's law, originally given to man, was doubtless good and perfect. It was
doubtless agreeable to perfect wisdom and goodness, that he should yield a
steady and uniform obedience to it. Thus he would have glorified his Creator,
answered the end of his being, and provided for his own highest happiness. But
supposing moral evil to be no evil upon the whole, but a great good, such
consequences as these will follow. That the law given to man at first was
imperfect -- that it was better, all things considered, that the divine law
(the law of man's nature) should be broke than kept -- that GOD threatened
disobedience with the penalty of death, and yet chose man should rebel, 'for
the sake of the great good consequent on sin' -- that the ends of infinite
wisdom and goodness could be answered, no possible way devised to advance the
highest happiness of the intelligent creation, but by the entrance of infinite
evil into the world -- that the revolt of men and angels was in compliance with
the end of their being, and the wise and gracious intention of the Creator --
(and if so, 'why did not GOD make them at first with a fixed prevailing
principle of sin?') Yea, it follows, that intemperance, debauchery, oppression,
murder, malice, envy, all the lusts of the flesh and spirit, greatly conduce
to the good of the world, and are perfectly agreeable to the wise and good
governor of it. What obligations do mankind owe to drunkards and gluttons, to
fornicators and adulterers, to the fraudulent and oppressors, to thieves and
liars, and false swearers, to robbers and murderers, and all that great
multitude, whom the faithful and true witness has expressly excluded from the
heavenly Jerusalem, and consigned to one common lake of fire and brimstone!
Rev. xxi 8 and xxii 15.
Which judgment according to truth the world have been wont to testify their
approbation of in their treatment of such persons -- that is, their greatest
benefactors! Base ingratitude!

HOW sin came to be permitted is more than we can comprehend. To say it could
not have been prevented is saying more than any one knows. To say that' GOD
chose it, and determined the will of the creature to it, is impious, even
supposing it is in fact followed with greater good, than otherwise would have
been -- which supposition is, however, but mere conjecture at best, and without
any solid foundation. For unless we can tell what would have been had sin never
entered the world, it is impossible we should be able to judge, by way of
comparison, of the greater good consequent upon it; or be able to say, that it
was best upon the whole. From the miseries of it, which we see and feel, we
have no special reason to infer its superior advantages, and good tendency. And
notwithstanding the infinite reason we have to receive it as a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that JESUS CHRIST came into the world to save
sinners; yet that he came to restore mankind to a better state than they would
have been raised to, had they never sinned, is more than we have yet learned
from the holy scriptures.

BE this as it will: Suppose it to be indeed true, that the consequence of sin
is the greater good of the universe, it will not therefore follow, that GOD
must choose and determine it. If an apostle supposed their damnation to be just,
who do evil with a view to greater good; shall we venture to impute any thing
like this to GOD? Suppose (in the instances Mr. Edwards brings) Joseph's
brethren had foreseen the consequences of their treatment of him, would this
have justified their conduct, and rendered it meritorious? -- what as wise and
good men they must have chose? (p. 374, 375) The same question, on the same
supposition, offers itself in relation to the murderers of our Savior. To say
that GOD wills evil for the sake of its good tendency, is a reproach to an holy
and good being, who cannot choose moral evil at all -- any more than a man of
reason and conscience can choose what he knows to be sinful, from the clearest
prospect of great public advantage. The moral Governor of the world will
pursue the happiness of it, in such ways, and by such means only, as are just
and holy. And we might with more propriety suppose, he will not take care of
the happiness of his creatures at all, than that he does this by choosing sin as
the only sure means of the greatest good. To admit that any created being can
act in a manner contrary to what it does, or fulfill any other end, is
tantamount, says Mr. Collins, to allowing it to be independent of the Deity;
and consequently, to have it in its election and power to thwart the schemes of
the great author and superintendent of all things, etc. His answerer very
justly replies, 'All this is nothing but supposing it a contradiction that GOD
should endue the human mind, or any creature, with liberty of action. For if
liberty is a perfection possible to be communicated to any creature, it follows
from the nature of the thing, that it must be in the power and election of the
agent, to act in a manner contrary to what it does, and to fulfill another end.
But this liberty does not at all infer that man is independent of the Deity;
any more than the power of breaking human laws infers that subjects are
independent of their governors. Man is ever subject to the providential
government of GOD, and accountable to him for his actions; and, as he does good
or evil to himself or others, is liable to receive rewards or punishments. This
sufficiently shows the dependency of man upon GOD; and as much so, as if his
actions were necessary. For as in the latter case, he would depend upon GOD as
an instrument only in the hands of an agent; or, as the inanimate creation
depends upon him, merely as a machine upon the framer and director of it; so in
the former case he depends upon GOD as a moral governor, who superintends his
actions, and from whom he has reason to expect to be recompensed according to
his work -- And no power whatsoever can deliver him out of GOD's hands. Is such
a creature then independent of GOD? On the contrary, as his subjection to GOD's
providential government and final judgment is the greatest, so it is the only
dependency which a rational creature as such can be under unto GOD.

NOR again, if it any consequence of liberty, that man will have it in his
election and power to thwart the schemes, and resist the will of the great
author of his being -- For, supposing human liberty, it must be supposed from
the nature of it, that the will of GOD, and the scheme of his government formed
by it, is a moral providence and superintendency, like that of a rational
monarch over his subjects, who gives them laws, enjoining obedience to them,
and establishing them with the sanction of rewards and punishments. It is the
will of GOD, that we should act freely, and have it in our power either to do
or not do his commandments, that he may appear to be a moral and righteous
governor, by rewarding those who choose to do: at which is right and good, and
by punishing those who wilfully commit evil.' Jackson's vindication of human
liberty against A. Collins, Esquire p. 56, -- 59.




THE late Rev. Mr. Clap, President of Yale- College, in Connecticut, in his
'history and vindication of the doctines of the New England churches,' (p. 19)
has exhibited 'a new scheme of religion,' which he apprehended was prevailing,
in opposition to those doctrines -- Mentioning 'this fundamental principle' of
the new scheme, 'That the happiness of the creature is the sole end of the
creation,' the worthy President remarks, 'This naturally leads to most, if not
all, of the rest' (meaning all the other errors of the new scheme of divinity.)
'For this must be the sole rule of all GOD's conduct toward us, and of ours
toward him; and it is certain, that GOD's sole end and ultimate design can
never be frustrated.' Whether the President had Mr. Edwards's book in view, is
uncertain. We can only say, that besides the authors particularly set down, he
mentions 'other books' from which he made his collection of errors, without
informing us who the authors were. But though we apprehend Mr. Edwards's book
as exceptionable as any mentioned by the President; yet we rather think this
book was not in his view. For we were some years ago informed, (and upon
enquiry found it to be true) that this book was introduced by the President to
be recited by the students of the college -- and suppose it is still continued.

SECT. VI. Containing general Observations and Reflections on the Scheme of
Necessity exhibited in Mr. Edwards's Book.
NOTWITHSTANDING all Mr. Edwards has said upon the distinction between natural
and moral necessity, we cannot but think this 'distinction altogether
impertinent in the present controversy.' For 'that which is necessary, is
necessary, must be, and cannot be prevented.' If there be a real necessity on
the mind in all its acts, it is quite immaterial whether this necessity, by
which the mind is in every instance determined, be called natural or moral.
Whether will and endeavor is overcome by external, constraint; or whether such
a state of the will or soul is produced by some necessary cause, extrinsic or
intrinsic, amounts to much the same thing in the end. There is exactly the same
propriety in saying, that such a thing cannot be done, is impossible,
unavoidable, necessary, etc, where there is a moral inability to it, as in
applying these epithets to a physical inability: For if the act of the mind, on
which the natural act depends, be for ever impossible, the natural act must be
alike impossible -- unless it be said, that it is possible an effect may be
produced without a cause. What Mr. Edwards has said to show, that natural
actions, which are determined by the mind, are possible, when the determination
of the mind itself respecting them is forever impossible, is unsatisfactory,
and unintelligible to us. If no being can choose or act otherwise than he does,
we cannot conceive of a necessity more absolute; and such is the necessity
maintained by Mr. Edwards -- only he approves not the terms natural necessity,
and thinks the word certainty more proper -- While he asserts all events to be
morally necessary -- and that in things thus necessary there is a 'connection
prior and superior to will and endeavor.' (294.)

AFTER all that has been said, moral necessity is, properly speaking, natural
necessity; moral power is natural power. The one is as original to us as the
other. The latter is interwoven in our frame no otherwise than the former. The
moral faculty, or power, which Mr. Edwards says belongs to moral agency, is a
natural faculty or power. So that whatever moral capacity or incapacity is
attributed to mankind, the same is natural. If man is a law to himself it is by
nature that he is so, having the work of the law written on his heart. And as
to the inability of man, Mr. Edwards, we presume, believed this to be derived
from nature -- to have it is source in 'the want of original righteousness, and
the corruption of the whole nature.' Now an inability which has it is source in
the very nature of man may surely be called a natural inability.

MUCH has been said to show, that every moral event must have an answerable
cause. Be it so. Every such event must then have a moral cause. And whether any
other than an intelligent mind can be such a cause, let those who have common
understanding judge. If it be admitted, that a moral cause must be a moral
agent, then it will follow, that we are the causes of our own volitions, or
that our maker is the cause of them. Mr. Edwards denies the first -- therefore
our volitions are to be attributed to GOD as their proper cause. But however
this might be admitted of holy volitions, we cannot think it will be admitted
of sinful ones. And if not, what regard should be had to a doctrine of which
this is the direct consequence? We are self-determined, or determined by the
deity. If there be any difference between a cause, and a mere instrument, the
former denotes a mind that has wisdom, power etc, in a greater or less degree,
according to the effects ascribed to it. And if moral events, through a chain
of second causes, center in the deity, as natural effects do, what is this but
running up morals to mechanism? any pains Mr. Edwards has taken to avoid such
an imputation on his scheme notwithstanding.

IN our author's scheme, necessity is universal. The divine will is always
determined by it, and the will of every creature. Now GOD is either the author
of this necessity, to which he himself is subject, or he is not. If he is, then
all the ^^^ects of it are to be ascribed to him as their proper cause. If he is
not, then there is some cause prior to the first cause, binding and determining
him -- he is caused to determine as he does by something extrinsic (For to say
he is determined by sometning intrinsic, is to say he is self-determined --
contrary to supposition.) His being and volitions are effects as much as those
of finite creatures. That necessity, which is said to be the cause of every
determination of the divine will, the cause and ground of his existence and
perfections, is prior, by supposition, to his existence and volitions. And this
necessity must be determined by something preceding, and so on. Yea, Mr.
Edwards makes express mention of the cause of moral necessity -- and says, that
the cause of this necessity is equally necessary as of natural. That is, there
is a necessary cause of this cause, and so on in infinitum. Thus we are run
back far into nonentity, and have to enquire, By what cause the first cause
exists -- which cause is an effect in relation to something preceding, and
this an effect with relation to something still preceding, etc. etc. And if
something exterior and prior to the Deity determines him, what is this but
affirming him to be the almighty minister of fate? However Mr. Edwards has
expressed his disinclination to fatalism, (in which we doubt not his sincerity)
we think his reasoning is plainly on the side of absolute fatality; and suppose
he was caught in his own subtilty. Upon his scheme it follows, that the actions
of all finite beings are the agency of the Deity; and his is not properly
speaking agency, but instrumentality -- a subjection to blind necessity and
fate. There is no self-mover, self-direction, self-determination, or source of
activity, in the universe. Liberty is banished out of the world -- and the
world must have been eternal.

WHETHER GOD could have acted otherwise than he has? is a curious rather than
profitable enquiry. And as to the notion' of 'fitness of things, independent of
the things themselves, and without reference to the sovereign mind,' it is
difficult even to imagine it; to say nothing of the impiety implied in such a
thought.

WE have represented what we apprehend is the plain tendency, and indeed only
consistent sense, of the scheme of necessity before us. Whether it was copied
from Mr. Hume, Hobbs, Spinoza, or any of the old heathen Philosophers we do not
say. We hint the thing because of a remarkable coincidence we have exhibited at
the close of these remarks, in some extracts from them, set over against
similar passages of Mr. Edwards's book. Though we have a right to renew valid
objections, how often soever they have been made before, until some tolerable
answer is given to them (especially when the old doctrines, to which the like
objections were formerly made, but not answered, are received.) Yet we would
not repeat the charge, without giving a specimen in support of it. We really
are persuaded, that there can be no possible confutation of fatalism on the
principles of Mr. Edwards's book. He speaks with satisfaction of the progress
of metaphysic science; (325) of which and its 'terrible doings,' his own book,
among others on fatality, is an alarming proof. [ Epicurus, Mr. Edwards reminds
us, was 'the father of atheism and licentiousness,' David Hume, Esquire is the
father of modern epicurism: And whoever has read his essays and Mr. Edwards's
enquiry is better able to judge than one can from the few select passages we
have extracted, of the agreement between them.]

NOT that we suppose Mr. Edwards saw, or allowed, the tendency and consequences
of his scheme to be such as we have here represented; he has repeatedly
declared the contrary. Still if the consequences are fairly deduced -- if in
those passages wherein he professes himself a friend to liberty he is either
repugnant to himself, or allows no liberty that is of any moment, or not
connected with moral agency -- let any man of reason say, whether his scheme
can be safe. His doctrine of necessary connection, if plainly reducible to the
consequences we have mentioned, if consistent with itself only in that sense we
have taken it, will be rejected by all who have a due regard to the moral
perfections of GOD, for which we doubt not in the least but Mr. Edwards had a
supreme veneration. But great and good men are not always wise.

IT is very much Mr. Edwards's method to answer objections by endeavoring to
reduce the scheme of his adversaries to the same absurdity; which, though it be
a good argument ad hominem, is by no means satisfactory. We might have expected
some other answer in particular to the objections of the fate of the heathen,
Hobbs 's necessity, making men machines, making GOD the author of sin, as well
as other objections, than he has given. But as we may presume Mr. Edwards gave
what appeared to him the best answer to these and such like objections to the
doctrine of necessity; so we conclude from his known skill in the subject, no
solid answer can be given to these objections; otherwise he would have favored
the world with such an answer, instead of evasive ones. Though we will allow he
might think those answers to objections solid, which we must take the liberty
to call evasive.

THOUGH we think no book has been published in this country of more dangerous
tendency, yet did we not at the same time suppose the author to have been a
serious firm believer of religion, natural and revealed, and zealously
concerned for the interest of practical godliness, we should not have taken the
trouble to enter on this puzzling subject of liberty and necessity -- which, as
Mr. Hume remarks, 'is the most contentious question of metaphysics, the most
contentious science.' If what has been remarked is sufficient to show the
absurd and dangerous consequences of admitting a necessary connection of moral
causes and effects from the beginning of the world, or a similar connection of
moral acts with a supposed necessary cause preceding, as of natural events
with their causes; the inconsistence of our author's scheme with itself; and
the perfect futility of entering into nice disquisitions on such a subject, one
main end of these remarks hitherto has been answered. But as it may be thought
insufficient to have done this in some measure, without proceeding to exhibit a
scheme more consonant to truth and reason, this is what we shall attempt in the
following part of our subject.

PART III. Showing that internal moral Liberty, as distinguished from external
or natural, belongs to moral Agency: Or admitting Mr. Edwards's Scheme of
Necessity to be true in Theory, that it is not applicable to Practice.
SECT. I. Internal Liberty belongs to moral Agents.
WITHOUT controverting with Mr. Edwards, or any others, the propriety or
impropriety of ascribing liberty to the faculty of will, Mr. Edwards suggests,
(p. 38, 39) that some have supposed liberty to belong to the 'faculty, power,
or property called will, abstractedly considered; and says 'To talk of liberty
or the contrary, as belonging to the very will itself, is not to speak good
sense. For the will itself is not an agent that has a will. That which has the
power of volition or choice is the man or soul, and not the power of volition
itself.' We know of none, who have contended for the freedom of the will, that
have used the term will in this abstracted sense. This curious distinction
(made to show, that there it not liberty in the will) was not sufficiently
attended to by our author. For through his book, the term will is generally
used to denote the soul, the man, the agent, the mind. He speaks of the will's
acts, and says, The will is the proper object of commands, etc. Now Mr.
Edwards would not say, that a property acts, or is the object of command, etc.
or to any particular faculty: The proper question is, Whether there be
internal liberty in moral agents, or moral liberty in distinction from natural?
whether there be freedom in the mind, or soul? If it can be shown, that the
mind or soul is free, it is to very little purpose to enquire, in what
particular faculty of the agent freedom lies; or whether in any one faculty
exclusively, or especially. Such an enquiry cannot be very edifying.
Metaphysicians may think it a fit subject of speculation; but to common sense
it appears frivolous. The simple notion of liberty we shall argue for, is this,
that mankind have inward moral freedom Some have supposed, that spontaneous
animal motion proves liberty. But though this may be an evidence of such kind
of liberty as Mr. Edwards allows belongs to moral agents, yet we think it
suggests not the idea of internal, moral liberty -- the only liberty which
properly belongs to the subject of religion and morals.
-- a power of self-determination. (Not meaning by self-determination such a
power in 'the property or faculty of will,' but in the agent.) It may otherwise
be called an inward principle or power of activity. That such a power belongs
to moral agents, particularly to mankind, is what we shall endeavor to evince;
without endeavoring to state the exact measure in which it is possessed, or
within what sphere exercised by them. In some it may be in greater perfection,
in others less. But some degree of it is essential to moral agency. At least
all moral agents, during their probation, possess it in some measure and degree.

MR. Edwards, as has been shown, denies all self-determining power, and inward
liberty -- asserting, that ' every determination of the will in choosing and
refusing is necessary.' (p 111, 113) But that an inward principle of activity,
and power of volition or choice, belongs to mankind, we think is in a manner
self-evident. For it is granted on all hands, that moral good and evil lie in
the state of the mind, or prevailing internal disposition of the agent. Liberty
therefore, if at all necessary to virtue and vice, must be exercised in that
wherein the nature of morality and religion consists -- that is, in the inward
man. A freedom from external constraint is a liberty belonging to fools and
madmen, and to the brute creatures. These, therefore, are as capable of virtue
and vice, praise and blame, as beings endowed with, and in the exercise of
reason, if this external (hypothetical) liberty is the only thing necessary to
moral agency. Fools, madmen, and brutes, if they are not bound or imprisoned,
have natural liberty. They have a power, faculty, or property called will.
Their actions are as voluntary (in many respects) as those of mankind, who are
of a found understanding The actions of brutes proceed from inclination and
design -- an inclination and design proceeding from nature, or internal,
original bias.

IF then an action's being voluntary (in the sense of Mr. Edwards's book) makes
it virtuous or vicious, the lower animals are so as really as intelligent
creatures. As we are not accustomed to talk of virtuous or vicious herds of
cattle, the epithets, as applied to them, may sound something odd and harsh at
first; but by the help of metaphysics we may in time be reconciled to such
language. We are not, indeed, to suppose our oxen and horses are morally good
or bad in those actions of theirs which are against their wills -- to which
they are externally impelled -- Or in regard to any instances of forbearance,
which are owing to external impediment -- to which they have a will, and
endeavor to perform, but are hindered from doing as they would. But the cases
of coaction and restraint excepted, let it be shown, on the present hypothesis,
that they are not proper subjects of commendation or blame, reward or
punishment -- and by the same arguments we presume it may be shown, that
mankind are not. If power or opportunity to execute a will or choice already
produced by some extrinsic cause, be all that is meant by liberty, or that is
necessary to moral agency, liberty is perfectly ideal, and the controversy
about it is about a mere word. But if liberty be really essential to moral
agency, as Mr. Edwards admits; and if there cannot be liberty of acting or
conducting farther than there is liberty of willing, choosing, preferring, as
has been shown -- the plain consequence is, that liberty in the mind is
essential to moral agency. Upon Mr. Edwards's scheme of liberty, it is not for
the acts and exercises of their minds that men are accountable, but only for
their outward actions. There is no moral turpitude in such a state of the soul
or will as our Savior describes, Matt. v. 28, 32, but only in the execution of
such a disposition. We know, indeed, that Mr. Edwards intended not to assert
any such thing as this, that malice, envy, pride, impure desires, etc. are
innocent until they become effects: But is not this the consequence of his
allowing, that liberty is necessary to moral agency, while he makes this
liberty consist only in a power a man has to execute his will. If Mr. Edwards
intended not to assert the above consequence, (as it is plain he did not) then
in the enquiry wherein the liberty of man consists, something farther is to be
considered than material action -- There must be internal liberty, if liberty
enters into the notion of a praiseworthy deed, or the contrary. The proper
question, is, Whether we have and exercise liberty in that wherein the nature
of virtue and vice consists? And one might think this would not be made a
question.

TO say that the mind is necessarily determined in all its acts, is making
mankind necessary agents in that thing which distinguishes them from the
inferior creatures. Without moral liberty, it is plain their actions cannot be
of a moral nature, any more than those can be called naturally free actions,
which proceed from natural necessity. Abridge a man's natural liberty ever so
much, his moral freedom may remain; and if it does, the willing or unwilling
mind is rewardable or punishable. On the contrary, suppose moral liberty taken
away, or rather, never to have been possessed, and there is an utter incapacity
of moral action. 'Man either has within himself a principle of action, properly
speaking, that it, a self-moving faculty, a principle or power of beginning
motion; or he has not. If he has within himself such a principle, then he is a
free, and not a necessary agent. For every necessary agent is moved necessarily
by something else; and then that which moved it, not the thing itself which is
moved, is the true and only cause of the action. If man has not within himself
a principle or power of self-motion, then every motion and action of man is
strictly and properly produced by the efficiency of some extrinsic cause: Which
cause must be either what we usually call the motive or reason, upon which a
man acts; or else it must be some insensible subtle matter, or some other being
or substance making an impression upon him.

IF the reasons or motives upon which a man acts, be the immediate or efficient
cause of the action; then either abstract notions (as all reasons and motives
are) are themselves substance; or else that which has itself no real substance
can put a body into motion: Either of which is manifestly absurd.

IF insensible subtle matter, or any other being or substance, continually
making impression upon a man, be the immediate and efficient cause of his
acting; then the motion of that subtle matter or substance must be caused by
some other substance, and the motion of that by some other, till at last we
arrive at a free agent; and then liberty is a possible thing; and then man
possibly may have liberty: And if he may possibly have it, then experience will
prove that he probably, nay, that he certainly has it. If we never arrive at
any free cause; then there is in infinitum a progression of motions without any
mover, of effects without any cause, things acted without any agent.'

DR. Samuel Clark's remarks on the 'philosophical enquiry concerning human
liberty,' wrote by A. Collins, Esquire p. 42, 43, 44.

THE author of Cato's letters replies to Dr. Clark, 'We see and feel, that
desires and fears, that abstract notions or images of the brain, alter the
disposition of the whole fabric, and often destroy the whole contexture of it.'
'This is true, says his answerer (Mr. Jackson) but nothing to the purpose to
show, that abstract notions are the immediate and efficient cause of action or
active motion, which is Dr. Clark's argument.

I GRANT that abstract notions, such as sudden surprises, violent passions, or
madness will, by a forcible and irresistible impulse, compel the mind to move
the body; in such cases, though the abstract notions do not immediately
themselves move the body, yet (which is all one) they force the mind to move it
whether it will or no; but then this motion (though called action) is no more
really or properly action, than the motion of a man, who is driven by a storm
or whirlwind, is an action. If it shall still be insisted on, that every event
or effect, howsoever produced, is an action; then the motions of ships* and
clocks are actions, and all motion is action, and there will be no such thing
as passion in nature: And yet nevertheless there will appear to be as much
difference betwixt these natural motions and human actions, as between the
ideas of necessity and freedom.' Jackson's answer to Cato's letters, p. 198,
199.

DR. Clark, (in his 'demonstration of the being and attributes of GOD,' (tenth
edition p. 83, 86) has argued the possibility and reality of the communication
of liberty to man in the following clear and conclusive manner. 'As a power of
beginning motion, is not in itself an impossible thing; because it must of
necessity be in the supreme cause: So neither is it impossible to be
communicated to created beings. The reason is plain: Because no powers are
impossible to be communicated, but only those which imply self-existence, and
absolute indepedency -- I know, the maintainers of fate are very confident,
that a power of beginning motion, is nothing less than being really
independent, or being able to act independently from any superior cause. But
this is only a childish trifling with words: For a power of acting
independently in this sense, communicated at the pleasure of the supreme cause,
and continued only during the same good pleasure, is no more real and absolute
independency, than the power of existing -- or than the power of being
conscious, or any other power whatsoever, can be said to imply independency. In
reality, it is altogether as hard to conceive, how consciousness, or the power
of perception, should be communicated to a created being, as how the power of
self-motion should be so -- Yet no man doubts, but that he himself, and all
others, have truly a power of perception. And therefore in like manner (however
hard it may be to conceive, as to the manner of it; yet since, as has been now
proved, it can never be shown to be impossible and expressly contradictory, that
a power of self-motion should be communicated.) I suppose no considering man
can doubt, but that he actually has also a power of self-motion. For the
arguments drawn from continual experience and observation, to prove that we
have such a power, are so strong, that nothing less than a strict demonstration
that the thing is absolutely impossible, and implies an express contradiction,
can make us in the least doubt that we have it not. We have all the same
experience, the same marks and evidence exactly of our having really a power of
self-motion; as the most rigid fatalist could possibly contrive to require, if
he was to make the supposition of a man's being endued with that power. There
is no one thing that such a man can imagine ought to follow from the
supposition of self-motion, which every man does not now as much feel and
actually experience in himself, as it can possibly be imagined any man would
do, supposing the thing were true. Wherefore to affirm, notwithstanding all
this, that the spirits, by which a man moves the members of his body, and
ranges the thoughts of his mind, are themselves moved wholly by air or subtler
matter inspired into the body; and that again by other external matter, and so
on; as the wheels of a clock are moved by the weights, and those weights by
gravitation, and so on; without a man's having the least power, by any
principle within himself, to think any one thought, or impel his own spirits in
order to move any member of his body: All this is so contrary to experience and
the reason of things, that unless the idea of self-motion were in itself as
evidently and clearly a contradiction, as that two and two should make five, a
man ought to, be ashamed to talk at that rate. Nay, a man of any considerable
degree of modesty, would even in that case be almost tempted rather to doubt
the truth of his faculties, than take upon him to assert one such intolerable
absurdity, merely for the avoiding of another. There are some indeed, who
denying men the power of beginning motion, would yet seem in some manner to
account for their actions, by allowing them a power of determining motion. But
this also is a mere ludicrous trifling with words. For if that power of
determining motion, be no other in a man, than that which is in a stone to
reflect a ball one certain way, this is just nothing at all. But if he has a
power of determining the motion of his spirits any way, as he himself pleases;
this is in all respects the very same as the power of beginning motion.'




THAT we have internal liberty is apparent from our moral discernment, that
faculty Mr. Edwards himself speaks of. We shall rest the whole proof of our
doctrine on this single point. This moral discernment, it is allowed, is the
principal power that distinguishes us from the brute creation: In respect of
this our maker having taught us more than the beasts of the field, and made us
wiser than the fowls of heaven: In respect of this man is by nature a law to
himself, having the work of the law written on his heart.

THAT we have a power of deliberating, judging, preferring, will not be
disputed, being matter or experience. The perception of right and wrong, good
and ill-desert, Mr. Edwards justly observes, 'is one of the first ideas
children have.' This faculty approves some actions, and condemns others,
detached from the consideration of their effects and consequences. The
exercises of our minds, our thoughts, affections, designs, are the object of
this faculty, no less than the conduct they lead to. Yea, for these especially
(if not only) it approves or condemns us, as these are the foundation of life
and conduct. In censuring or commending the conduct of others, we go upon a
supposition of intelligence and design: For we judge very differently of the
same actions as performed by an idiot, or madman, and by one in possession of
reason. And when it appears that an action proceeded not from design, or that a
different and contrary purpose was intended from what is actually effected, our
opinion of it is changed. We approve good intentions, and condemn evil ones, in
ourselves, (and in others so far as such intentions can be known) though evil
comes of what was meant for good, and vice versa.

NOW our estimating the moral character from internal dispositions is on a
supposition that these are within the power of the agent. Whether he shall
execute his will or not, depends not on himself. He may be hindered herefrom,
or compelled to do contrary to his will -- which alters not the internal
character. If we are made the means or instruments of what we do not intend, or
are externally hindered from what we do intend, we are judged according to what
we would have done. The reason is, that we have internal liberty in many
instances, when we have not external. It is therefore much more proper to say,
that natural necessity, in any supposed case, though it excuses an external
act, or the omission of such an act, yet hinders not but the state of the will
may be right or wrong in such case; than to say, that moral necessity is
consistent with praise or blame, because not attended with natural necessity.
We are condemned or approved of ourselves for a willing or unwilling mind, and
have a natural apprehension, that the judgment of GOD will second our own. But
did ever any man commend or accuse himself for what he knew to be necessary and
unavoidable -- not within his power, or not determined by himself? The inward
perturbation vicious men feel proceeds from a conviction that they might have
cultivated another frame of heart. If external constraint, or natural
necessity, renders a person incapable of such commands as respect material
action, moral necessity, or internal constraint, must render him equally
incapable of such commands as respect the exercises of the mind, or acts of
volition -- (admitting this to be original, and not the consequence of internal
liberty abused.) We are said to be the 'voluntary, designing causes of
corporeal action.' Be it so, 'the essence of virtue and vice lies not in their
cause.' And moreover, in a series of acts, connected and dependent, the praise
or blame is to be attributed to the original act. But of this (which determines
all the rest) we are not the voluntary causes. (p. 48, 284, 256) To return from
this short digression.

THE moral capacity we have been speaking of, including moral obligation
undeniably proves the internal liberty of mankind. As it implies a rule or
guide of life, with authority and sanctions, as we have an inward perception of
good or ill-desert, according as we have followed, or departed from, the
direction of this leading principle; so we could not perceive ourselves to be
under it as a law, and reproach ourselves for disobedience, were we fully
persuaded such disobedience was a matter of real necessity. We experience, that
'our happiness or misery is not our fate' -- Meaning here by these terms, not
so much that kind of happiness or misery which depends on a man's outward
condition and circumstances, as that which we signify by the words, peace,
serenity, and joy of heart, on the one hand; and disquietude of mind, vexation
or anguish of spirit on the other. The good man is satisfied from himself. The
wicked is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest. These different and
opposite sensations, which constitute our chief happiness or misery in this
world, and are accompanied more or less with hope or fear for futurity, it is
impossible we should have, were we not internally free. We may suppose them to
be as strong in those who are wholly deprived of external freedom, as in those
who are fully possessed of it. So that however external necessity may wholly
prevent our being rewardable or punishable for the outward action, it by no
means does for the inward disposition, provided this depends on ourselves.
Hence the injunction, Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the
issues of life. It is in the power of man to lay any external necessity upon
us, but no internal one. No chains can bind the soul but those of our own
imposing. The captive, prisoner, etc. may be as free, in the religious sense,
as any man. A person wholly deprived of his bodily powers of action may yet be
free in the noblest sense.

WE shall now proceed to show, that internal liberty, in finite beings placed
upon trial, implies an opportunity and capacity of choosing and acting otherwise
than they in fact do. Finite beings, we say; because we pretend not to know
what the perfect liberty of the Infinite Being is 'So far as we are free, we
are not necessarily determined, so that we could not but make the choice we do.'

WHETHER the holy angels ever had a moral ability of falling, we need not
enquire; though we have no ground to determine the contrary. Beings made
upright, we know, have revoked. Now if the malignity of apostate spirits
against GOD, their unalterable opposition to him, be the consequence of
perverting a moral power they once had, it shows that finite beings may possess
a liberty of choosing and acting otherwise than they do; and consequently, that
liberty may be distinguished from, and opposed to, moral necessity. So with
respect to apostate man, if he had originally a moral power of retaining his
innocence, the inference is, that he possessed liberty, not only as opposed to
constraint from without, but as opposed to moral necessity. From the fall of
angels and man, the inference therefore is not, that they were morally unable
to keep their first estate; but that they had a moral power, and abused it,
Indeed, in the case of their first sin, moral necessity must have been strictly
natural -- Not, as we are will not to call habits, a second nature, but a first
nature. So that moral or criminal inability supposes a moral power once
possessed but forfeited.

IF, on the contrary, it be supposed, that neither man, nor the angels that
fell, had a moral ability at first to continue in a state of rectitude, to whom
but their Creator must their fall be attributed? Their original powers were
such as he endowed them with. They could be required to exert no other. Their
abilities, relations, and destination being such as their great Former gave and
intended, they could be answerable only for what was given. If, therefore, the
first act of sin 'necessarily followed from GOD's withholding assistance, or if
that assistance was not afforded, which was absolutely necessary to the
avoiding' the first transgression, what is this but making GOD the proper
author of it? How consistent this is with his moral character, or the
possibility of sin, we need not say. But if GOD be the immediate author of the
first act of disobedience in the creature, he is consequentially the author of
all the moral defilement and inability proceeding therefrom; since 'the first
act in the train determines and fixes the rest.' So that if 'there is not, and
never can be, either in existence or idea, a freedom from moral necessity, or a
power of self-determination -- if every moral event is immediately or
ultimately ordered and determined by GOD' -- (403, 404.) the consequence is,
either that there is not, and never can be, sin in the world; or if there is,
it is wholly chargeable on the first cause. The only way to evade this
consequence is to admit, that the duty of angels and man, before their fall,
was no other than they had a moral as well as natural power to do. To suppose
their duty exceeded their abilities would be the injustice, which the slothful
servant charged his Lord with.

FROM what has been said, it appears, that there is no need of our examining
into any moral impotency derived from the fall, or the moral inability of
fallen man. For Mr. Edwards supposes this kind of impotency to have taken
place in innocence, as really as since the apostasy. That is, there was a moral
necessity of the first sin -- therefore a moral incapacity of refraining from
it, Mr. Edwards's doctrine manifestly implies a moral inability in man and
angels before their fall. He says he 'has demonstrated, that the futurity of
all events is established by previous necessity, either natural or moral; and
that it is manifest that the sovereign Creator and Disposer of the world has
ordered this necessity, by ordering his own conduct, either in designedly
acting, or forbearing to act. That the whole series of events is connected with
something in the state of things, either positive or negative, which is
original in the series; i. e. something which is connected with nothing
preceding that, but GOD's own IMMEDIATE conduct' -- and in regard 'to the
state and acts of the will, EVERY event of this kind is necessary by a moral
necessity' -- (p. 402, 403, 405, 406) 'The will always has an inability to act
otherwise than it does'; (p. 35) that is, the man, or agent, or soul -- 'for
the faculty of will does not act, but the agent that has it.' GOD does
decisively in his providence determine all the volitions and actions of moral
agents, either by positive influence or permission -- meaning by permission,
not only 'the not hindering sin, but disposing the state and circumstances of
things in such a manner, that sin certainly and infallibly follows from his
disposal -- that GOD, when he had made man, so ordered his circumstances, that
from these circumstances, together with the withholding divine influence and
assistance, his sin infallibly followed.' (p. 376)

THE first sin of angels and man was then morally necessary, and proceeded from
their original state and circumstances -- from GOD's withholding necessary
assistance. And this proves their original moral inability; which inability
being 'connected with nothing preceding, BUT GOD's OWN IMMEDIATE CONDUCT,
which is ORIGINAL in the series,' he must be the author of it. For if he
himself necessitated them to sin, by doing or forbearing what rendered the
first sin unavoidable -- if sin followed from his ordering and disposal, that
maxim in philosophy is strictly applicable, ' Causa deficiens, in rebus
necessa^^^s; not causam porsa efficientem reducenda est. In things necessary,
the deficient cause must be reduced to the efficient. And in this case the
reason is evident; because the not doing what is required, or not avoiding what
is forbidden, must follow from the position of the necessary cause of the
deficiency.' 'The moral necessity Mr. Edwards contends for, as it runs up to
the first entrance of sin into the world, supposes an inability in the time of
innocence -- and that GOD's own immediate conduct is first in the series of
causes and effects; so to say the first sin, or any other, was not necessary by
a natural necessity, no way relieves the difficulty. For natural liberty
depends on moral liberty, by his own principles. And to say that the first
cause and supreme orderer of all things made angels and men so at first, as
that their original sin became necessary in consequence of a moral inability
they were created with, it making the supreme cause 'the proper author the
efficient cause,' of all the sins of men and devils. To which objection it is
really surprising to find Mr. Edwards returning this answer, that the doctrine
of his opposers is involved in the same difficulty. For admit it to be so, is
this a proper answer? If either his doctrine or theirs is justly chargeable
with such a consequence, by all the regard we owe to a Deity and moral Governor
we are bound to reject a scheme which contains such an imputation upon him.

IT hence appears, that the case Mr. Edwards instanceth in, 'of a man for his
rebellion cast into prison, and loaded with chains, on whom his Prince has
compassion, orders his chains to be knocked off, and the prison doors to be set
open -- but who is full of such malignity, that he cannot be willing to accept
the offer of forgiveness' -- (p. 305, 306) that this case is quite aliene from
the purpose, and no way applicable to Mr. Edwards's doctrine. For by his
principles, there is a necessity on the minds of men, strong as grates of
brass, and bars of iron -- which necessity extends to the first entrance of sin
into the world. Hence the angels that fell, and our common progenitors, could
not be willing to abide in their primitive state. Hence sinners continue
impenitent. Internal chains, strong as the bars of a castle bound the morning
stars to revolt from Heaven -- bound Adam and Eve to sin -- and bind all who
stand out against the gospel invitation.


And if the moral necessity of the first sin, though as real, (p. 230) was not
in the same degree with that of subsequent sins; yet the increased imbecility
being a necessary effect of what was original, that is finally to be resolved
into this; and this to be attributed to the first cause -- who made man upright
indeed, in his own moral image, but really incapable of retaining his primitive
rectitude.

WHATEVER has been supposed to be the present moral inability of mankind,
Calvinistic divines have ever maintained, not that it was original, but
consequent to the fall -- the judicial animadversion of the Deity upon the
first offense. We are inclined to think Mr. Edwards was in the same opinion
upon the whole, though he has expressed himself so as to give full reason for
our attributing the contrary to him -- that is, bringing a charge of
self-repugnancy. For Mr. Edwards asserts, that man was 'endowed at first with
the moral or spiritual image of GOD,' in distinction from his natural image --
By the latter also he explains himself to mean, 'an understanding to perceive
the difference between moral good and evil; a capacity of discerning that moral
worthiness and demerit, by which some things are praiseworthy, others
deserving of blame and punishment; and also a capacity of choice, and choice
guided by understanding, and a power of acting according to choice.' (p. 41,
43) Consequently, he had a capacity of making this choice, to continue in the
state of moral rectitude wherein he was created. Consequently, a (moral) power
of abiding in that state. Consequently, his fall from it was not an event
morally necessary. Consequently, not infallibly connected with the divine
disposal and determination. Consequently, the supposed fixed connection of
every moral event with a previous moral cause, could not antecede the apostasy,
but must (if real) be subsequent to it. Consequently, in every such event
'GOD's own immediate conduct' cannot be supposed to be 'original in the
series.' The difficulty arising from divine prescience we pretend not to be
able to clear. It is sufficient that it equally lies against Mr. Edwards's
doctrine.

UPON admitting, with the generality of Calvinistic divines, original, internal
freedom in man; that his moral imbecility was consequent to, and the punishment
of, the first offense; that the moral impotency of apostate spirits also is the
fruit and effect of their revolt; the moral perfections of GOD are vindicated,
and he is freed from the impious charge of being the author of their sin: But
how this charge can be removed on the foundation Mr. Edwards proceeds upon is
difficult to conceive; nor indeed has he taken much pains to remove it, though
he allows it 'is infinitely to be abhorred, and denies it to be the consequence
of what he has laid down.' In what sense he thought it was to be 'abhorred,'
and will not allow it to be the 'consequence' of what he has said, has been
already remarked. Sect. iv. Part ii. of these remarks.
However great that impotency is which mankind derive from Adam, there is a
manifest difference between a moral inability or necessity derived from the
fall of man, and a like kind of inability or necessity original to the human
race. Mr. Edwards's doctrine of necessity is inconsistent with the opinion of
our having lost our power in Adam; since he could not lose a power he never had.

WE have but one thing farther to add. While we acknowledge the fallen state of
our nature, and the impotency derived from the fall, the proper question on the
gospel plan is, Whether salvation is offered to sinners on practicable terms?
The offer presupposes our lost and perishing state. Is it then adapted to this
state of mankind? Is there a possibility of accepting it? Rather, is there no
impropriety, is there not a palpable contradiction, in speaking of an offer on
terms known to be morally impossible? The present question is not, Whether
fallen man has power, independently of the aids of grace, to accept the gospel
proposals? but, Whether such assistances are tendered with the call of the
gospel as that an acceptance of it is morally possible?

OR suppose it morally impossible, that great numbers, who are externally
called by the gospel, should accept the invitation of it -- suppose their final
condemnation to be just notwithstanding, in consequence of their relation to
Adam, and the moral inability derived from him; yet who will say that they
merit a sorer punishment, a greater damnation, when their rejecting the gospel
is supposed to be the necessary consequence of GOD's withholding that
assistance, without which they cannot embrace it? A proposal of pardon and life
to rebels against heaven, on impracticable terms, accompanied with a
threatening of aggravated condemnation, seems hardly reconcilable with the
discoveries GOD has made of himself as having shown the exceeding riches of
his grace in CHRIST JESUS -- Not willing any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance -- Commanding all men every where to repent -- Whoever will,
let him come, and take the waters of life freely.

IT may be said, 'True indeed, whosoever will let him come. We grant, if they
have a will, they may come. But we assert, that none but such as actually come
can will to come.' Now what says the scripture? When our Savior upbraids the
Jews, 'Ye will not come to me that ye might have life,' does this imply that it
was forever morally impossible for them to have come? or does it suppose, on
the contrary, that they might have willed to come? Why else are they upbraided
for not coming? How often would he have gathered them, but they would not? Was
there not a time, therefore, when they might have known the things belonging to
their peace? I set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore
CHOOSE life -- implying a moral capacity of choosing as well as conducting
according to choice: And indeed, without supposing the former, how can the
latter be said to be in any one's power? It is so only in consequence of
volition or choice. If the cause be out of our power, the effect must be of
course. Besides, 'the very willing or choosing is the doing: When once a man
has willed or chosen, the thing is done.' Had not that servant, who received
the single talent, a moral power to have improved that talent well? In
consequence of such improvement, would he not have received more? According to
that, 'To him that has, shall be given,' etc. Was he not condemned out of his
own mouth?

LET us add here, that the supposition of sinners being abandoned and given up
of GOD, implies, that they once had a moral power to turn and live -- Always
remembering to include the means and influences of grace when we speak of such
a power. For it is GOD that works in us to WILL and to DO; which is the
argument to our working out our own salvation. Does not the demand of the
Prophet, What could have been done more to my vineyard? imply that means and
influences on GOD's part are afforded, or tendered, in such measure to sinners,
as renders their compliance with the terms of salvation possible at least? We
have, indeed, no warrant to say absolutely, that he could not have done more
for the conversion of the Jews -- that he could not have converted them by an
immediate, irresistible influence. He that 'is able to raise up children to
Abraham out of the stones,' could, no doubt, have done this, had he seen fit.
It is enough that the means used with them were sufficient, though not
unconquerable.

BUT we may dismiss this matter. Mr. Edwards's doctrine is, that the first sin
of angels and man as was really necessary, as the wickedness of abandoned
sinners and apostate spirits -- So that what has been last observed, relating
to the necessity of the sins of fallen creatures, while on probation, and in
the time of GOD's grace and visitation, no way affects our main argument. Mr.
Edwards has offered a chain of reasoning in proof that man has in no case,
and never had, a power of self-determination; but is, and always was,
determined by a moral necessity, which necessity is as real as any other. This
necessity, he affirms, belongs to all finite beings, and to the Creator himself
-- At the same time he has taken great pains to show, that it is consistent
with the most perfect liberty.

SECT. II. Internal moral liberty, as distinct from external, consistent with
the influence of motives, and use of commands, exhortations, promises,
warnings, threatenings, etc.
WE readily grant, there can be no act of choice without some motive or
inducement. But if what has been observed, with respect to the power of
creatures made upright to retain or forfeit their innocence, be admitted, it
clearly follows, that the application of commands, invitations, monitions, etc.
is consistent with a freedom to either side. For who questions but rebel angels
had the highest inducements, before their fall, to abide in their first estate?
We need not scruple to say, the strongest possible motives could not be wanting
in the presence of GOD -- that it was the highest apparent good, as well as
their highest duty, and what they had a moral ability for, to continue subject
to the great Creator. And it is really one of the most inexplicable events,
that beings in their situation should fall. This event shows, beyond question,
that a liberty to either side is consistent with the most powerful motives to
bias and incline the will to one side.

SO in the case of innocent Adam, no one will say, that the motives in
paradise, to hold fast his integrity, were insufficient -- or that their not
proving effectual necessarily proceeded from the original, moral state of his
will, possessed of the moral image of GOD. That he had a moral capacity to
sustain the federal trial is here taken for granted. Among other commands,
written on his heart, or communicated by special intercourse with Deity, he had
one prohibition properly positive, which was made the test of his fidelity,
accompanied with an express threat, that he should die in case of
non-forbearance in that instance; and implying a promise of life, if he
refrained in this article. Whatever be understood by the death threatened, the
threatening was sufficiently awful. Yet against the clearest warning, against
the highest motives to the contrary, he ventured to take and eat. Commands,
invitations, promises, admonitions, etc. are therefore consistent with a moral
ability to hearken or not hearken to them.

FOR the same reason that sin could not be morally necessary at first, it will
be difficult to prove, that the continued holiness of good angels was morally
necessary from the beginning. Mr. Edwards seems to suppose a difference as to
the degree of moral necessity; but expressly maintains, that the reality of it
is the same in all instances. Part III. Sect. 4th.
That is to say, though every act of every creature is certain and fixed
decisively beforehand, yet there are different degrees of absolute certainty.

FARTHER, with regard to fallen man, Mr. Edwards allows, that commands, etc.
are given to, and means used with sinners, in unregeneracy. From hence he
partly argues his doctrine of necessity. Ibid, and Sect. 7. and p. 384.
They have a moral understanding, and the same natural powers of action, with
holy and good men -- To which end moral inducements of various kinds are laid
before them.

THE doctrine of necessary connection of means and ends, as stated by Mr.
Edwards, implies one or other of the following things: Either that no means are
employed with the unregenerate in order to their conversion -- or none that
have a tendency to the end -- or that they have not a moral power of using them
-- or their use of them is certainly and infallibly successful.

THAT means are used with unregenerate sinners, Mr. Edwards grants. But since
the doctrine he defends may seem to imply, that means are never used with the
finally impenitent, (at least not to bring them to repentance, but only to
confirm them in wickedness, and lead them to destruction) we shall just hint,
that the whole economy of providence and grace is a means used with the
righteous and wicked in common, for the confirmation, improvement and comfort
of the former, and conviction and reformation of the latter. Extraordinary and
ordinary means are used to this end. Of the former kind are miracles, prophecy,
tongues, vouchsafed at special seasons, and in diverse manners; together with
singular and alarming interpositions of providence. To the latter kind belong a
written, standing revelation, a public ministry and institutions of worship,
the strivings of the divine spirit, various providential allotments etc. The
word of truth in particular is an external appointed means of regeneration,
repentance from dead works, convertion, or that faith by which those live who
are passed from death to life. If any reject the tender of salvation, the
messengers of it are directed to wipe off the dust of their feet as a testimony
against the despisers of their message; leaving with them this solemn
protestation, 'Be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of GOD is come unto you.'
We might mention the patience of GOD toward sinners, etc. -- whence it is
apparent that means, powerful means, are used for the conversion even of those,
who are at length resigned up to their own hearts lust. But as this matter
appears not to be contested by Mr. Edwards, we shall pass to the next thing
above mentioned.

WHETHER the means used with the unregenerate have any tendency to the end? The
very proposing of this question is enough. For whenever we use the means, it is
in relation to some end. We intend by it the media through which any end is
attained. So that to speak of means, and deny their conduciveness to the end,
is an affront to common sense, as nothing can properly be called a means
farther than it has, or is supposed to have, a tendency to accomplish an end.
And as all who maintain there are any instituted means of conversion, allow
them to have been ordained by infinite wisdom, it would be impeaching supreme
wisdom and goodness to say, they are not calculated in the best manner to lead
sinners to repentance.

NOT that any external means are efficacious in themselves, but only through
the divine concurrence with them. So it is in temporal and worldly matters; and
so it is in the concerns of religion. Means and endeavors do not ensure worldly
success. They are in vain except GOD works with them. Yet who hesitates one
moment, whether the divine concurrence is to be expected in the use, and
through the instrumentality, of the means he has prescribed, or the contrary?
Exempt cases there are wherein means are superseded in men's temporal affairs:
There may be like instances in the affairs of salvation. But these being exempt
cases is a reason why spiritual blessings are much rather to be expected in the
use, than in the neglect of means.

IT is the united voice of all Calvinistic divines, that there is the greatest
possible encouragement to the endeavors of unconverted men in the use of the
means of salvation. Mr. Edwards allows, that moral inducements are used with
them; and says, 'it is of the nature of such inducements, that they have
something inviting, some tendency to induce and dispose to virtuous volition;
to give the mind an inclination or bias to virtue -- that they can operate only
by biassing the will, and giving it a certain inclination one way -- (p. 119,
125.) that motives have in themselves this nature and tendency in different
degrees, some greater, others less.' Now by Mr. Edwards's principles every
inclination, however weak, is of the nature of a disposition to virtue, and
leading to it. (For there can be no inducements to virtue but such as operate
by giving the mind an inclination to it) If then the motives used with the
unregenerate may excite a virtuous inclination, though in the lowest degree, we
may, for the same reason, suppose this inclination increased to than degree as
to become prepollent, through the influence of moral means and inducements, in
subordination to him who works all in all. And in proportion to the
preponderation of the mind in favor of virtue, is the degree of virtue. How
consistent these things are with Mr. Edwards's 4th and 5th Sect. part 3d. and
other things said in his book, those may judge, who will be at the pains to
examine and compare them.

IF it be said, in the next place, that the unregenerate have not a moral power
to use the means of grace: This is the same absurdity as to say, the means have
no tendency to the end. For how can means be said to be afforded, which cannot
be used? At best, they are as if not afforded. How then can the gospel be
preached for a witness to such as finally reject it? Why is it taken from some,
because they bring not forth the fruit of the kingdom, when they never had it
in their power to receive its testimony? Can they be liable to an aggravated
punishment for not using means, which they could not improve to any purpose? We
repeat it to prevent mistakes that when we speak of the ability of unregenerate
men to use the means of grace, we mean not an independent power in themselves:
(This the regenerate have not) But that such influences of grace are
vouchsafed, together with external means, as that those might embrace the
gospel call, who, in event, reject it against themselves.

MOREOVER, there is a wide difference in the characters of unregenerate men.
Some such are nearer the kingdom of GOD than others. There is more hope of some
than others of this character -- Which things cannot be said consistently with
the supposition of unregenerate men's being utterly incapable of any good
effect from the means of grace, through their own endeavors in the use of
them, and the common strivings of GOD's spirit. And yet, what less is implied
in the assertion, that they cannot use the means that are employed with them,
cannot improve a supposed price in their hands? For how then is the gospel a
dispensation of grace to them? Is it not rather a dispensation of wrath? To say
that their incapacity is not natural, but moral, is saying nothing to the
purpose, as we trust has been shown. If the incapacity be real, it is no
matter under what name it go^^. Is it determined beforehand, that any of the
unregenerate shall not use the means, of grace, or shall not succeed? If it is,
let any man show, how the gospel can be a privilege to them, or they liable to
a greater damnation for abusing it.

TO say lastly, that the endeavors of the unregenerate in the use of the means
of grace are infallibly connected with success, is to say, that no means are
employed with those who die in their sins; contrary to what Mr. Edwards
expressly allows. And yet he must either say this, or else that none but the
regenerate can use the means of grace. We may just as well affirm, that all
converted men must profit equally under the means of salvation, as that none
can improve them at all but they who succeed. One may venture to assert, that
such as hear the word, and anon with joy receive it, use the means of grace,
though they should endure but a while.

THE means of religion, as those of this life, are used with different degrees
of application by different persons; which is the true ground (ordinarily) of
their different success. But we deny that any are commanded, invited, exhorted,
etc. to exert powers and faculties they are not possessed of -- to act from
principles they are not endowed with -- to use means out of their power. Such
faculties, principles, powers, and affections as they are possessed of, such
means as are within their power are the only ones they are possessed of, such
means as are within their power are the only ones they can be required to act
from and improve. Arguments laid before wicked men are adapted to operate on
their reason and moral discernment -- on the principle of ingenuity and
gratitude -- on their hope, fear, joy, sorrow, and the various movements of the
mind. Nor can it be proposed they should act from the highest spiritual
principles while unregenerate, but from such as they are capable of being
influenced by as reasonable beings, possessed of a moral faculty, and subjects
of moral government -- who have an advocate for GOD within them, to whom he
has deputed his authority -- a principle which is by nature supreme, and
implanted to give law to the animal affections and appetites.

'THE end of laws, we acknowledge, is to bind to one side; and the end of
commands is to turn the will one way.' But we cannot agree with Mr. Edwards,
'that laws and commands are therefore of no use, unless they actually turn the
will that way' which they require. Part III. Sect. 4th p. 226.
Mr Edwards would not say, that any of GOD's laws or commands are useless --
that he might not justly require subjection to his anointed from those who
said, Let us break their bands as under, and cast away their cords from us. The
title of the section, from which we have extracted the above words, is,
Commands consistent with moral inability. Now is the will of those, who are
under moral necessity of disobeying, turned and biassed that way the command
is? Mr. Edwards has offered many reasons why their will ought to be turned to
this side -- to evince the propriety of the commands given them notwithstanding
their original inability to turn this way. But he has not shown clearly, that
'commands and laws are therefore of no use,' because the subject will not be
bound thereby. Or admitting he had shown this, we need not say how much or how
little it makes for his purpose. One thing is hence obvious, that by his own
confession and argument, commands, invitations etc, are of no use where there
is a moral necessity of being biassed, or going, the contrary way.

MOREOVER, as wicked men may have inducements to virtue, consistent with the
supposition of their persisting in vice; in like manner good men have
allurements to vice. Such allurements they meet with from the flesh, the world,
and the devil. Hence they are called to watch and pray, that they enter not
into temptation -- to fight -- to strive for the mastery -- to deny themselves,
and take up the cross -- to take heed lest they fall -- and in general to work
out their own salvation with fear and trembling. Now temptations and
allurements to sin 'operate by giving the mind an inclination to it -- biassing
the will this way.' So that as inducements to holiness may be consistently used
with those who at present are under the dominion of sin, with a prospect of
changing their present prevailing bias and inclination; allurements to sin may
also be laid before those whose prevailing bias is to holiness, not without a
possibility and prospect of their being overcome -- with which view they are
always proposed by the tempter. Adam, endowed with the moral image of GOD, was
overcome: And are his fallen sons exempt from danger? The regenerate fall from
virtue frequently through inadvertence, and the strength of a present
temptation. They are, therefore, under no moral necessity of being perfect, nor
indeed can be free from sin in this life. Or will any undertake to show, that
the sins they fall into are morally necessary? According to Mr. Edwards's
doctrine they are so indeed. To suppose farther, as his doctrine does, that the
imperfect holiness of the saints in this life is necessary by a moral
necessity, is a palpable contradiction: For such a necessity being supposed
would prove them incapable of any lapse whatever. Necessity is fixed and
uniform, admitting of no variety or dissonancy of character: Whereas the moral
characters of good christians are mixed, and in many instances contradictory.
David's murder and adultery were very inconsistent with his general character,
and cannot be supposed to have been morally necessary, consistent with the
opinion, that by the same necessity he was a man after GOD's own heart.

UPON the whole, powerful motives to holiness, joined with a prevailing
propensity this way are yet to be found where there are in many instances
contrary volitions; and in some instances, on some occasions, to an high
degree. Nor have the maintainers of the doctrine of the saints perseverance
been wont to ground it on the supposed indefectibility of the spiritual
principle in them, in itself considered, but on the covenant and power of GOD
engaged to them.

Mr. Edwards very justly observes, that some crimes are more heinous than
others in their own nature: Nor would he deny, but that of some more is
required than of others. We may ask, On what ground? if all volition and action
is necessary, in the sense of his book. How is a 'person under previous
obligation to consider beforehand in some cases more than others?' (p. 262) Can
he consider without motives to consideration presented to his mind? Can he be
the cause of new motives to himself? Does he necessarily follow those exhibited
ab extra? Could he, among many motives to choice, have viewed any one otherwise
than he in fact does? The whole controversy, in a manner, terms on the
resolution of these questions. Every reader perceives on which side Mr. Edwards
was in regard to them: And every reader, 'from the bare proposal of them, may
see at once, whether or no, or how far Mr. Edwards's doctrine is reconcilable
with the supposition of different degrees of guilt, and obligations to consider
previous to making choice. It seems hardly proper to speak of tendency and
influence in motives to choice, when all things are settled and determined
beforehand by established laws in nature, so that every intelligent creature is
necessitated to choose and improve, or refuse and neglect such and such things,
called means. So sure and perfect a connection of causes and effects,
antecedents and consequents, as he has endeavored to make appear, leaves no
room to speak of a mere tendency in motives, which have a certain sovereignty
in determining every act of every being in the universe.

SECT. III. Allowing Mr. Edwards's scheme of necessity to be true in theory, it
is not applicable to practice.
AS we have supposed the doctrine of necessity maintained in Mr. Edwards's
enquiry runs up to absolute fatality, we shall in this section consider it in
this view. We shall suppose such a necessity to be indeed agreeable to
philosophic truth. Taking for granted the coincidence between Mr. Edwards and a
strict fatalist, Dr. Butler's reasoning with the latter is in a good measure
applicable to the former. We shall accordingly take the liberty to extract from
the chapter of his analogy, entitled, 'Of the opinion of necessity, considered
as influencing practice.' He introduces what he there observes with this
apology to his readers: 'As the puzzle and obscurity, which must unavoidably
arise from arguing upon so absurd a supposition as that of universal necessity,
will, I fear, easily be seen; it will, I hope, as easily be excused.'

WHEN it is said by a fatalist, that the whole constitution of nature, and the
actions of men, that every thing, and every mode and circumstance of every
thing, is necessary and could not possibly have been otherwise; it is to be
observed, that this necessity does not exclude deliberation, choice,
preference, and acting from certain principles, and to certain ends: Because
all this is matter oi undoubted experience, acknowledged by all, and what every
man may, every moment, be conscious of. And hence it follows, that necessity,
alone and of itself, is in no sort an account of the constitution of nature,
and how things came to be and to continue as they are, but only an account of
this circumstance, relating to their origin and continuance, that they could
not have been otherwise than they are and have been.

NECESSITY as much requires and supposes a necessary agent, as freedom requires
and supposes a free agent, to be the former of the world. And the appearances
of design and of final causes in the constitution of nature, as really prove
this acting agent, to be an intelligent designer, or to act from choice, upon
the scheme of necessity, supposed possible, as upon that of freedom.

SUPPOSE then a fatalist to educate any one, from his youth up, in his own
principles, that the child should reason upon them, and conclude that since he
cannot possibly behave otherwise than he does, he is not a subject of blame or
commendation, nor can deserve to be rewarded or punished: Imagine him to
eradicate the very perceptions of blame and commendation out of his mind, by
means of this system; to form his temper, and character, and behavior to it;
and from it to judge of the treatment he was to expect, say, from reasonable
men, upon his coming abroad into the world -- I cannot forbear stopping here to
ask, Whether anyone of common sense would think fit, that a child should be put
upon these speculations, and be left to apply them to practice? And a man has
little pretense to reason, who is not sensible, that we are all children in
speculations of this kind. However, the child would doubtless be highly
delighted to find himself freed from the restraints of fear and shame, with
which his play-fellows were fettered and embarrassed; and highly conceited in
his superior knowledge so far beyond his years. But conceit and vanity would be
the least bad part of the influence, which these principles must have, when
thus reasoned and acted upon, during the course of his education. He must
either be allowed to go on, and be the plague of all about him, and himself
too, even to his own destruction: Or else correction must be continually made
use of, to supply the want of those natural perceptions of blame and
commendation, which we have supposed to be removed; and to give him a practical
impression, of what he had reasoned himself out of the belief of, that he was
in fact an accountable child, and to be punished for doing what he was forbid.
It is therefore in reality impossible, but that the correction which he must
meet with, in the course of his education, must convince him, that if the
scheme he was instructed in were not false; yet that he reasoned inconclusively
upon it, and some how or other misapplied it to practice and common life. But
supposing the child's temper could remain still formed to the system, and his
expectation of the treatment he was to have in the world be regulated by it; so
as to expect that no reasonable man would blame or punish him, for any thing
which he should do, because he could not help doing it: Upon this supposition,
it is mainifest he would, upon his coming abroad into the world, be
insupportable to society, and the treatment he would receive from it, would
render it so to him; and he could not fail of doing somewhat, very soon, for
which he would be delivered over into the hands of civil justice. And thus, in
the end, he would be convinced of the obligations he was under to his wise
instructor. Or suppose this scheme of fatality, in any other way, applied to
practice, such practical application of it will be found equally absurd;
equally fallacious in a practical sense: For instance, that if a man be
destined to live such a time, he shall live to it, though he take no care of
his own preservation; or if he be destined to die before that time, no care can
prevent it. Therefore all care to preserve one's own life is to be neglected,
which is the fallacy instanced in by the ancients.

BUT now on the contrary, none of these practical absurdities can be drawn,
from reasoning upon the supposition, that we are free, but all such reasoning
with regard to the common affairs of life, is justified by experience. And
therefore, though it were admitted that this opinion of necessity were
speculatively true; yet, with regard to practice, it is as if it were false, so
far as our experience reaches; that is, to the whole of our present life. For,
the constitution of the world, and the condition in which we are actually
placed, is, as if we were free. And it may perhaps justly be concluded, that
since the whole process of action, through every step of it, suspense,
deliberation, inclining one way, determining, and at last doing as we
determine; is as if we were free, therefore we are so. But the thing here
insisted on is, that under the present natural government of the world, we find
we are treated and dealt with, as if we were free, prior to all consideration
whether we are or not. Were this opinion therefore of necessity admitted to be
ever so true; yet such is in fact our condition and the natural course of
things, that whenever we apply it to life and practice, this application of it
always misleads us, and cannot but mislead us, in a most dreadful manner, with
regard to our present interest. And how can people think themselves so very
secure then, that the same application of the same opinion may not mislead them
also, in some analogous manner, with respect to a future, a more general and
more important interest? For religion being a practical subject; and the
analogy of nature showing us, that we have not faculties to apply this opinion,
were it a true one, to practical subjects; whenever we do apply it to the
subject of religion, and thence conclude that we are free from its obligations,
it is plain this conclusion cannot be depended upon.

THE notion of necessity, with respect to practical subjects, therefore is as
it were not true. Nor does this contain any reflection upon reason; but only
upon what is unreasonable. For to pretend to act upon reason, in opposition to
practical principles, which the author of our nature gave us to act upon; and
to pretend to apply our reason to subjects, with regard to which, our own short
views, and even our experience, will show us, it cannot be depended upon; and
such, at best, the subject of necessity must be; this is vanity, conceit and
unreasonableness.

BUT this is not all. For we find within ourselves a will, and are conscious of
a character. Now if this, in us, be reconcilable with fate, it is
reconcilable with it, in the author of nature. And besides, natural government
and final causes imply a character and a will in the governor and designer; a
will concerning the creatures whom he governs. The author of nature then being
certainly of some character or other, notwithstanding necessity; it is evident
this necessity is as reconcilable with the particular character of
benevolence, veracity, and justice in him, which attributes are the foundation
of religion, as with any other character: Sure we find this necessity no more
hinders men from being benevolent than cruel; true, than faultless; just than
unjust.

WE find GOD exercises the same kind of government over us, with that a father
exercises over his children, and a civil magistrate over his subjects. Now,
whatever becomes of abstract questions concerning liberty and necessity, it
evidently appears to us, that veracity and justice must be the natural rule and
measure of exercising this government or authority, to a being, who can have no
competitions, or interfering of interests, with his creatures and his subjects.

WE have endeavored to keep in view the design we mentioned in the
introduction, to examine only the groundwork of Mr. Edwards's book without
entering into consideration of the particular doctrines built thereupon.
Whether they stand or fall with the foundation, is beside our purpose to say --
Or whether what has been offered at all weakens this foundation is not for us
to determine. One thing, perhaps, appears, that men of strong powers and great
abilities are wont to wade beyond their depth, and bewilder themselves and
others with speculations abstruse and unprofitable -- to say no worse. Great
geniuses are fruitful, many times, of great errors. There is a show of science,
falsely so called, which is especially incongruous in handling moral and
religious subjects; wherein the simple (who make much the greater part of
mankind) are alike concerned as the wise and learned -- and which, therefore,
ought to be treated with the utmost plainness.

WE do not deny but Mr. Edwards was 'worthy of the name of a Philosopher:' (p.
401) But we appeal to the public, whether some of the most famed Philosophers
in the English nation, for many years back, and at this day, have not
philosophised themselves into skepticism? One of first distinction in
particular (whose essays on some moral subjects are so nearly akin to Mr.
Edwards on necessity, that a reader might think the latter copied from the
former) appears plainly to be a disbeliever in natural religion, not less than
revealed. Hume's essay, Vol. III. Sect. 7, 8, 10, 11. etc.
However, we have not the least suspicion of Mr. Edwards's inclination either
to atheism or deism. We doubt not he had a strong practical sense of religion,
which overbalanced his theory. But when great disputants are possessed of a
particular hypothesis, they are apt to defend it many times by a method of
reasoning, which leads to most dangerous consequences -- without seeing or
allowing those consequences, which, if fairly deduced, demonstrate the
hypothesis itself to be wrong, or that they have argued wrong from it.

IF we have misrepresented Mr. Edwards, it has not been through design; nor
have we knowingly 'insisted on difficulties not belonging to the controversy.'
Whether our 'indignation or disdain' has been 'raised at the sight of his
discourse,' others must be left to judge. No one, we may presume, will say,
that much pains have been used to 'set forth' the doctrines of his book 'in
colors shocking to the imaginations, and moving to the passions of those, who
have either too little capacity, or too much confidence of the opinions they
have imbibed, and contempt of the contrary, to try the matter by any serious
and circumspect examination.' Mr. Edwards, it seems, was aware of being charged
with maintaining 'horrid and blasphemous doctrines, the fate of the heathen,
Hobbs's necessity, making men mere machines,' etc. Whether he had any reason to
apprehend such an indictment is a matter we refer to the reader: To whose
judgment we also submit the following proposed specimen of the coincidence
between Mr. Edwards's doctrines, and those of some celebrated infidels.

THE APPENDIX. Exhibiting a specimen of coincidence between the principles of
Mr. Edwards's book, and those of ancient and modern Fatalists.
A LEARNED writer, Jackson.
who has distinctly examined the opinion of the ancients concerning fate, in a
defense of human liberty in answer to Cato 's letters, has clearly shown, That
the freedom of human actions was the almost unanimous doctrine of the
philosophers -- that it was taught by the five great sects among the heathen,
which comprehended all the philosophy of Greece and Rome; viz. The Stoics,
Platonics, Epicureans, Aristatelians and Academics -- That the most reasonable
of the ancients, of all sects, were agreed, on the one hand, that NECESSITY was
to be excluded from human actions, that so the distinction of virtue and vice,
and the rewards and punishments both of divine and human laws founded upon
them, might be preserved inviolated: On the other hand, that fate, even with
respect to human actions (as well as to external events consequent upon them,
in which it was absolute and uncontrolable) was so far to be retained, as that
it was to be allowed that antecedent causes were motives of acting, though the
principle and efficient cause of action was a natural power and free exertion
of the mind itself. Some things they held to be destined, others not; and
distinguished the causes of things into antecedent and efficient, that they
might exempt some from necessity, and subject others to it; placing the human
will among those which they allowed not to be under necessity -- always meaning
by the efficient cause of human actions a principle of self-motion and exertion
in the mind or agent -- by the antecedent cause, the motive of action to the
general efficient cause. Absolute fatality or necessity, with respect to man,
was understood only of external providential events, consequential to the
nature of their actions, presupposed to be free, and in their own power.

THEIR notion of liberty, upon the whole, was, First, a principle or power of
action, self-motion, exertion, or causation in the mind. In other words, that
the cause of voluntary motion is in the nature of the mind itself, whatever
external motive may proceed, or concur to the exertion of it. Hence, Secondly,
That motives are only assistant, not efficient causes. Thirdly, They maintained
a freedom from necessity, as well as from external constraint and coaction;
allowing necessity only in regard to providential events. Fourthly, A power of
acting or not acting, of choosing and acting variously, or differently from what
we do.

THESE propositions express the sense in which liberty was asserted by all the
ancient philosophers of EMINENCE. The opposers of this doctrine were chiefly
Leucippus, Empedocles, and Democritus, the first founders, of the Epicurean
sect; Heraclitus, Diodorus, and some astrologers and fortune tellers among the
Stoics; who maintained universal, absolute fate -- To whom Plutarch joins
Thales, Parmenides, Pythagoras, and others, who asserted, that 'necessity is
omnipotent, and exercises an empire over every thing' -- 'that the world is
infested by necessity.' Plutarch's morals, vol. 3. c. 25. p. 170. translated
from the Greek, 2d. edition, London.


THE asserters of universal fate had different notions about it. Diodorus and
Democritus were of the atomical sect, who made every thing the necessary effect
of the eternal motion and concourse of atoms, supposing an external chain of
effects, without any original cause or agent at all. Heraclitus derived every
thing from the first cause of the universe as the efficient, stiling it fate;
and supposing not only all other things which exist, but the purposes of our
minds also, proceed from the efficient power of it -- Which was making no agent
in the world but the supreme cause, and human actions nothing but the
operations of GOD in men, actuating them, and every thing else, as the soul
does the body.

The astrological notion of fate was, that every thing was effected by the
circumvolution of the universe, and the positions and appearances of the
planets and fixed stars.

ANOTHER notion of fatality was founded in the supposition of a mutual, eternal
concatenation and chain of causes whereby things posterior always follow those
which are antecedent, and are resolved into them, as existing by them, and
necessarily consequent to those which precede them. This was the most
plausible, and most insisted on by the maintainers of necessity -- grounded on
the supposition; that there was no internal principle or cause of motion or
action in the mind at all: Concerning which Cicero says, that 'as it deprives
the mind of it is free will, and subjects it to a necessary fatality, it is not
tolerable.' Whether or how far this was Mr, Edwards's opinion, those who have
read his book may easily judge: Also what presumption of it is truth arises
from it is being rejected by the most reasonable and learned philosophers of all
sects, who were full in the four propositions abovementioned -- all which are
very expressly contradicted by Mr. Edwards, who allows not of a principle of
self-motion in the mind -- a freedom from necessity -- a power of acting
otherwise than we do -- and ascribes efficiency to motives.

NOT that we suppose the oppugnation of Mr. Edward's scheme to the doctrine of
the most eminent philosophers, and the agreement of it with their opinion who
dissented from the common belief, proves it to be false. The wisest
philosophers had but rude notions of religion and morality in general; ( The
world by wisdom knew not GOD) yet, on some things many of them expressed
themselves justly; and on a point so evident as human liberty, they were
capable judges, if on any.

THE same learned writer, to whom we have been chiefly indebted for the above
account of the opinion of the philosophers on the subject before us, has also
shown, that the freedom of human actions was universally, and without any
controversy, received and maintained by the ancient christians. He refers us to
Origin and Eusebius, two as learned writers, and as well skilled in the
philosophy of their times, as any the world affords. He gives us the following
passages, among others, from them. 'If not only external events, but our
internal designs proceeding from reason, are subject to fate; and if the minds
of men are under the impulse of an inexorable Mr. Edwards uses the word
irrefragable.
necessity, then farewell philosophy! farewell religion -- This opinion (of
necessity) is an incentive and encouragement to licentiousness, injustice, and
a thousand other evils, and directly tends to the subversion of every condition
of life.' Praep. Evang. lib. 6. p. 242, 243. quoted in Jackson's defense of
liberty, p. 205, 206.
'From the notion, (of necessity) faith Origin, it follows, That the faculty of
will is wholly taken away; and with it praise and dispraise, and the difference
between things that are commendable, and things that are blameworthy: And this
being so, the so much proclaimed equity of the judgment of GOD vanishes, and
his threatenings to punish those who commit sin, and the promises of rewards
and blessedness to those who do well, fall to the ground. For there is no
reason for either the one or the other -- If all events are necessary, it is
irrational to entreat GOD for any thing -- We confess that many things, which
are not in our power, are causes of many things that are in our power; without
which, namely, those things which are not in our power, other things, which are
in our power, would not be done. But those things which are in our power, and
are done consequential to antecedent things, which are not in our power, are
done so as that notwithstanding these antecedent things, we might have done
otherwise. But if any one would have it, that our free will is wholly
independent of every thing in the world, so as that we do not choose to do some
things by reason of certain (precedent) accidents, he forgets that he is a part
of the world, and comprehended within human society, and the circumambient
air.' Orig. apud Eusebius. praep, evang. lib. 6. p. 281, 283, 290, quoted by
Jackson, p. 81, 82, 112, 113.


'IF Cato (says his answerer, p. 149.) had any regard for, or had ever read the
writings of the primitive Christians, he must have seen and owned, that no
doctrine was more unanimously and universally insisted on, and inculcated by
them than that of human liberty: And the contrary doctrine of the necessity of
human actions was a principal branch of the error of the Valentinians,
Marcionites, and Manichees, who, in consequence of it, led most profligate and
wicked lives.'

SOME of the most distinguished maintainers of universal necessity, in the last
and present century, were Hobbs, Spinoza, Collins, Leibnitz, the authors of
Cato's letters, Hume, among the Atheists and Deists; and Lord Kaims and Mr.
Edwards among the advocates for revelation. Our author's agreement with these
on the article of necessity may more distinctly appear from the following
extracts. We shall place the similar passages over against each other in
different columns, that the reader may have a readier view of the coincidence.

SPINOZA.
It was impossible for GOD to have produced things in any respect different
from what they are. ( Clark's demonstration, p. 27, 28, 29, 49, 50)

LEIBNITZ. The same. (Vid. papers between Leibnitz and Dr. Clark, p. 159, 161,
229, 233)

HOBBS. Every effect must needs be owing to some cause, and that cause must
produce the effect NECESSARILY. Because if it be a sufficient cause, the effect
cannot but follow; and if it be not a sufficient cause, it will not be at all a
cause of that thing, ( Clark's demonstration, p. 88)

LEIBNITZ. Nothing happens without a sufficient reason why it is, or why it is
thus rather than otherwise. A man never has a sufficient reason to act, when he
has not also a sufficient reason to act in a certain particular manner. As
often as a man has sufficient reason for a single action; he has also
sufficient reason for all its requisites. The overthrowing this great principle
of a sufficient reason to every event, would be overthrowing the best part of
all philosophy. (Papers between Mr. Leibnitz and Dr. Clark, p. 55, 169, 171,
399)

HUME. The conjunction between motives and voluntary actions is as regular and
uniform as that between the cause and effect in any part of nature. (Essays,
vol. iii. p. 137)

P. 146. It is pretended some causes are necessary, others not: Let any body
define a cause without a necessary connection with its effect.

SPINOZA. The will cannot be called a free, but a necessary cause. The will of
any voluntary agent must of necessity be determined by some external cause, and
not by any power of determining itself, inherent in itself. ( Clark's d^m. p.
89, 106)

CATO. The same. (Letters, vol. iv. p. 174, 195, 196) P. 190, 191, 193.
Something must determine the actions of men, or else they could not be
determined; and it is nothing to the purpose to say, that their choice
determines them, if something else must determine that choice; for let it be
what it will, the effect must be necessary, etc. etc.

COLLINS. Man is necessarily determined by particular moral causes, and cannot
possibly act contrary to what it does. ( Clark's remarks on Collins, p. 18, 28)
P. 13. To represent reasons to men -- would be of no use, if men had free
wills, or their wills were not moved by them.

HUME. Vol. iii. p. 149, 150. Actions not proceeding from a permanent, fixed
cause (that is, from necessity) are neither virtuous nor vicious.

LEIBNITZ. The mind acts by virtue of motives, which are its dispositions to
act. Motives comprehend all the dispositions, which the mind can have to act
voluntarily. They include, not only the reasons, but also the inclinations
arising from passions, or other preceding impressions. (Papers of Leibnitz and
Clarke, p. 166, 167)

LEIBNITZ. Motives have the same relation to the will of an intelligent agent,
as weights have to a balance; so that of two things absolutely indifferent an
intelligent agent can no more choose either than a balance can move itself when
the weights on both sides are equal. (P. 121 of papers, etc.)

HUME. Liberty a power of acting or not acting according to the determination
of the will -- that is, if we choose to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to
move, we may. Now this hypothetical liberty (as Mr. Hume justly styles it)
belongs (as he adds) to every body who is not a prisoner, and in chains. (Vol.
iii. p. 145)

COLLINS. I contend for liberty as signifies a power in man to do as he wills
or pleases. ( Clark's remarks on Collins, p. 14.)

HOBBS. Though the will be necessitated, yet the doing what we will is liberty.
He is free to do a thing, who may do it if he have a will to do it, and may
forbear, if he have the will to forbear, though the will to do the action be
necessary, or though there be a necessity that he shall have a will to forbear.
He who takes away the liberty of doing according to our wills, takes away the
nature of sin; but he that denies the liberty to will does not do so. The
necessity of an action does not make the law that prohibits it unjust; for it
is not the necessity, but the (...) to break the law, that (...) the action
unjust; and what necessary cause soever preceeds an action, yet if that action
be forbidden, he that does it willingly, may justly be punished. ( Whitby on
five points, p. 360, 361)

COLLINS. GOD cannot communicate free will to men, without being chargeable
with their abuse of it. To admit that any being can act in a manner contrary to
what it does, or fulfill any other end, is tantamount to allowing it to be
independent of the Deity; and consequently, to have it in its election and
power to thwart the schemes of the great author and superintendent of all
things. ( Jackson's vindication, p. 54 -- 56)

CATO. The notion of liberty of action reflects upon GOD's wisdom or power --
It intrenches upon his providence and government of the universe, by giving
part of his power out of his own hands and by leaving it to the discretion of
interior, weak beings to contradict himself, and disappoint his intentions.
(Vol. iv. p. 179)

LEIBNITZ's 'pre-established harmony,' answers to Cato's resembling the
creation (not excepting the intelligent part of it) to a machine; which if not
so framed at first as to answer its end without the continual interposal of the
Creator, is supposed to imply a defect of wisdom and power. (Vol. iv. p. 205,
206)

CATO. All causes must first or last center in the supreme cause. (Vol. iv. p.
174, 178, 195, 196)'

THE argument of the fatalists from prescience, is, either that all events are
known and foretold by the gods, and therefore necessary; or some things are
neither known nor taken care of by the gods. ( Jackson's answer to Cato, p. 72,
73. Compare Mr. Edwards, part ii. sect. ii. particularly p. 160 -- 166)

EDWARDS.
Neither the form, order, nor minutest circumstance or mode of existence of any
thing could possibly have been in any respect different. (Enquiry part iv,
sect. 8)

No event whatsoever, and particularly volition, can come to pass without a
cause. To supppose there is any event not NECESSARILY connected with its cause
is to suppose it has a cause; which is not its cause. If the effect be not
necessarily connected with the cause, then the cause may sometimes exert the
same influence, and the effect not follow. And if this actually happens in any
instance, the influence of the cause is not sufficient to produce the effect.
That which seems to be the cause can be no cause in the supposed case. (Part
ii. sect. 3, 4, 8. p. 102, -- 106.

MR. Edward's principle of a cause, ground, or reason of every event, he says
extends to things, and the manner and circumstances of things. There must be a
sufficient reason why an act of the will, or any other event, is rather than
not; or why it is as it is rather than otherwise. If this principle of common
sense be taken away, all arguing from effects to causes cease. (Part ii. sect
3, 4. and p. 83 -- 86, 102 -- 106)

THE acts of the will and material things have a like necessary dependence on a
cause without. Moral necessity may be as absolute as natural. Volition is as
passive with respect to the antecedent cause, as the motions of the body to the
volitions which determine them. (P. 183, 184 -- also p. 30, 40, 48, 58, 62, 66,
etc.) Moral habits are owing to the nature of things. (P. 31. 32 33) If the
acts of the will are excited by extrinsic motives, those motives are the causes
of those acts of the will; which makes them necessary, as effects necessarily
follow the efficiency of the cause. (P. 103, 118, 261, 262, 278)

THE will is necessarily determined in every one of its acts, from a man's
first existence, by a cause beside the will, and in no instance whatever its
own determiner. (P. 113, et passim) There is not, and never can be, either in
existence on idea, a freedom from moral necessity, or a power of
self-determination. (P. 404)

NATURAL tendency and influence supposes causality, and that supposes
necessity of events. (P. 315) Moral necessity as much ascertains and fixes the
event, as any. (P. 402)

LAWS and commands are of no use unless they turn the will that way which they
require (P. 226) There is an established connection between means and end. The
being of the effect is, on the one hand, connected with the means; and the want
of the effect, with the want of the means (P. 309, -- 315)

SIN and virtue come to pass by a necessity consisting in a sure, established
connection of causes and effects. (P. 309) Moral habits are owing to the nature
of things. (P. 31) The good or bad state of the moral world depends on the
improvement they make of their natural agency. (P. 162)

MORAL causes and moral motives and inducements, such as habits and
dispositions of the heart -- A moral habit, or motive. (P 29, 30) Every thing
that is properly called a motive has a tendency or advantage to move the will
previous to the effect, or to the act of the will excited. (P. 8, that is, a
motive, which is a moral habit, is yet previous to and excites the moral habit)

MR. Edwards's application of gravitation and the scale of a balance (p. 93)
to his subject, may serve to show the coincidence in this place; especially if
his general reasoning is also taken into consideration.

LIBERTY is a power, opportunity, or advantage that any one has, to do as he
pleases -- or power and opportunity to pursue and execute his choice -- without
taking into the meaning of the word any thing of the cause or original of that
choice. Two things are opposed to liberty, namely, constraint and restraint.
(P. 38, 39, 40, 300, et passim) To say that a man exercises liberty, not only
in external actions, but in the acts of the will themselves, is to say liberty
consists in willing what he wills. (P. 74, 75, 76, 286, 287) He cannot be said
to be unable to do a thing, who can do it if he will; though such a will may be
required by command as is forever impossible.

(Part iii, sect. 4) A freedom from coaction, but not from necessity, is
essential to virtue or vice, praise or dispraise, reward or punishment. (P.
194, 213, et passim) Commands and obligations to obedience are consistent with
moral inability to obey. (Part iii, sect. 4.)

THE will in every instance acts by moral necessity, (p. 230) and always has an
inability to act otherwise than it does; (p. 35) men are morally unable to will
otherwise than they do will, as really, truly, and properly in one instance as
another: yet the necessity of the will never renders any thing improperly the
subject of command. The opposition or defect of the will in that which is its
original and determining act, implies a moral inability. This inability alone
(which consists in disinclination) never can excuse any person. (Part iii,
sect. iv) In moral necessity, the connection between cause and effect is prior
and superior to will and endeavor. (P. 294) In a series of acts, if there are
five, ten, an hundred, or a thousand acts in the train, and the first not
determined by the will, none of them are. (P. 48, 224, 225, 256, 257) The
essence of virtue and vice is not in their cause, but in their nature.

PART iv, sect. ix, x. And p. 402, 408, Mr. Edwards charge the deniers of
necessity with virtually saying, that GOD's will and desire is infinitely
crossed in every act of sin, provided moral evil is not for the best -- that
liberty, as opposed to necessity, argues an inferiority and servitude unworthy
of the supreme Being; really subjects the will of the Most High to the will of
his creatures, and brings him into a dependence on them. (353)

UNLESS his scheme of necessity be admitted, Mr. Edwards says it will follow,
that GOD must be exposed to be constantly changing his mind and intentions as
to his future conduct; altering his measures, relinquishing his old designs,
and forming new schemes and projections -- continually putting his system to
rights, as it gets out of order, and liable to be wholly frustrated of his end
in the creation of the world. (P. 160 -- 166, 353)

ON the scheme of self-determination, the will of man is left to the guidance
of nothing but blind contingence: So that if it makes any difference between
men and machines, it is for the worse; for machines are guided by an
understanding cause, by the skilful hand of the workman or owner. (P. 318)

THINGS, which ever had or will have a beginning, are not necessary in their
own nature, but are necessary by a connection with what is from eternity. (P.
25)

GOD orders the volitions of moral agents, among other events, in such a
decisive manner, that the events are infallibly connected with his disposal.
His own immediate conduct is original, or first in the series of events -- and
sin comes to pass because he sees it needful and of importance that it should
come to pass. (Part iv, sect 9, 10, and p. 403, 405)

UPON the whole: One of the famous objections of the fatalists of old to the
liberty of human actions, and which is urged for necessity by modern infidels,
was, that every action results from a precedent motive or reason, which reason
or motive is out of our power. ( Jackson's answer to Cato, p. 100.) We need not
produce any passage from Mr. Edwards to show the coincidence. His whole scheme
is founded on this principle.

WE fear our quotations have already been too numerous, or it were easy to add
to them. We presume they have been sufficient to satisfy the attentive and
impartial in regard to the coincidence we proposed to exhibit. What presumption
of the falsehood of Mr. Edwards's scheme arises from it is agreement with the
doctrine of those who reject the evidence of the christian revelation, and even
believed not (some of them) in the perfections and moral government of GOD, we
shall not say; though the suspicion that it is fallacious, arising from the
comparison we have made, will not, we trust, be thought inconsiderable, whether
it can or cannot be distinctly perceived where the fallacy lies. After all, we
should not have troubled the reader with this appendix but for a reason already
assigned. For if his scheme has the tendency, and is reducible to the
consequences, we have attributed to it, all but infidels will allow this to be
a full demonstration of it is falsehood. Whether the fallacy of the reasoning of
his book can be distinctly traced, or with what class of writers it coincides,
is not the question -- But whether the consequences are justly drawn.

IF any, who may think the 'things which have been alleged worthy of being
read, or of so much notice as to say much about them, should have their
indignation or disdain raised,' we can truly say, that we meant to raise
neither. We sat down with a determination to avoid every thing personal. If we
have broken through this determination, it is an inadvertence we cannot
recollect. Whatever we think of Mr. Edwards's system, we doubt not the goodness
of his heart; and believe he is entered into the reward of a good and faithful
servant, where even great men see they knew but in part while they tabernacled
in flesh, and perhaps entertained some dangerous errors. For we have not so
learned Christ as to infer the badness of any man's heart from the falsehood of
his speculative opinions.

The Printer desires the reader to excuse some irregularity in numbering the
pages in the beginning of this examination, and some other typographical
errors. The most material that have been observed are here pointed out.

P. 57. l. 19 r. accepted -- l. 20, r. that -- p. 105. l. 16, for loose r. lose
-- p. 108, l. 15. r. was as -- p. 119, l. 15, for terms r. turns -- p. 124, l.
18, r. as if it were -- p. 125. l. 8. for faultless r. faithless.


