Dr. Dana's CENTURY DISCOURSE.

A CENTURY DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE FREEMEN OF
THE TOWN OF WALLINGFORD, APRIL 9, 1770.

BY JAMES DANA, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

MEN, BRETHREN, and FATHERS,
THE completion of a century of years since the incorporation of this town
determined me to bring you a discourse on this opportunity of the several
societies and denominations being assembled together. You will suffer me to
introduce the memorable occasion of the ensuing discourse, and my design of
giving a brief historical account of the town, with a few reflections on the
reality, extent, duration and morality of divine providence; grounded on the
following words of the psalmist, PSALM CXLVI.10. THE LORD SHALL REING FOR EVER,
EVEN THY GOD, O ZION, UNTO ALL GENERATIONS. PRAISE YE THE LORD.



I. FIRST, Of the reality and extent of divine providence -- the admission of
which is essential to natural religion, as on the supposition of it all
revelation proceeds.

FROM the things that are made we as clearly see, as we do that there is a GOD,
a supreme director at the head of the universe; sustaining every part of it,
every being in it, and working all things after the counsel of his own will.
That GOD is, and that he governs the world, are coincident principles,
proveable the same way, Consequently, the ancient Epicurians, who professed to
believe a GOD, while they denied a providence, were, in truth, atheists.

WE see, indeed, but few of GOD's works -- only parts of his ways: We are but
little acquainted with the nature and design, use and references, of many, of
most of those we do see: However, we know enough to beget an undoubting faith
in the unlimitted dominion of JEHOVAH -- that the LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNS
-- Reigns in heaven, on earth, in all worlds, celestial, terrestrial and
infernal. "The heavens declare the glory of GOD: The firmament shows his
handy work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard."
The air, earth and sea proclaim his being and providence. The rank of sensitive
creatures rises, by an imperceptible gradation, from the lowest degree to the
full perfection of animal life. Here, we perceive "inactive matter creeping
into life:" There, stronger appearances of life and sense; till we come to
those animals whose instincts approach so near rationality as to be scarce
distinguishable from it. Not to mention the various kinds of animals -- the
multitudes of each kind -- especially of some sorts.

In the next rank of beings, the human species, what countless numbers of these
are there, to whom the inspiration of the ALMIGHTY has given understanding, in
addition to the common instincts and appetites of animal creatures? whom the
creator has formed in his own image? How different and various also are the
capacities and advantages of the human kind?

FURTHER, we are pretty certain, that we are far from being the highest order
of finite creatures, however superior to the other inhabitants of this visible
world. Reason and philosophy fully acquiesce in the information given us in the
sacred oracles, of angels that excel in strength -- of "thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers, in heavenly places" -- of a "train which fills GOD's
temple" above, surrounding the throne of his glory. For although we are ignorant
"what varied beings people other worlds," yet the declarations of scripture are
credible; where we read, "Thousand thousands stand before him, ten thousand
times ten thousand minister unto him." -- With respect to whom the SUPREME is
described as ruling in the armies of heaven.

Now all the variety and harmony, grandeur and magnificence, visible in the
material creation; all this great family in heaven and earth; while they
evidence the infinite intelligence, the "eternal power and godhead," of the
former and disposer of 'em, witness alike the energy and extent of his
providence. Shall we ascribe to fate or chance the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies? the alternate return of "day and night, summer and winter," spring and
autumn; "seed-time and harvest?" material things adapted to the enjoyment of
sensitive and rational creatures? the various use of the ocean, and bounds
within which it is confined? There is no medium between ascribing the
continuance of the material world as it is to fate or chance, and the
acknowledgement of a superintending providence; through which things continue in
their original relations and subserviency to each other. -- The heavenly
luminaries according to his ordinance who first bid 'em shine -- the succession
of the seasons by his appointment, who "has set all the borders of the earth,
and made summer and winter" in virtue of whose promise "seed-time and harvest,
cold and heat, day and night, do not cease" -- who "renews the face of the
earth," and "cloths the grass of the field" -- The sea, according to the
"decree" he first gave it -- who, as he gave, continues the instincts in the
lower animals -- "hears the young ravens when they cry" -- without whom "a
sparrow does not fall to the ground" -- who "preserves man and beast. The eyes
of all wait on him," to receive from his liberal hand the supply of their
various and constantly returning wants. The subjection of the lower animals to
mankind, (many of which, did they know their own strength, were they laid under
no restraint, could easily destroy us) is one signal proof of that providence
we are considering.

THAT GOD actuates the powers of nature; that beings animate, rational and
angelic are necessarily dependent on the power that formed 'em, are indeed
truths, which, perhaps, no reasoning can make plainer than they are on the bare
proposal. The settled, uniform course of things, no less than particular,
striking interpositions, demonstrate the uncontrollable power and providence of
him, who "siteth on the circle of the earth, and counts the inhabitants of it
as grass-hoppers." Indeed, the design of special interpositions seems to be to
rouse the attention of unthinking mortals to those general evidences of his
being and providence, which they have every day before their eyes. Second
causes are sometimes suspended and over ruled, that the world may see they are
under the direction and control of the first cause; dependent on him for their
operations and effects. Sometimes we stand still, and see the salvation of GOD,
while the most probable means are unsuccessful: Tho, in a more general way, the
providence of GOD concurs to favor just means and endeavors. GOD is restricted
to no particular manner of working. And if in every common instance we may
trace his operation, how much more in those great events, which determine the
state of kingdoms? in "enlarging the nations, and straitning them again?" in
"setting up and putting down kings?" "For GOD is judge," and "rules in the
kingdoms of men." His power over the nations is resembled to that of the potter
over the clay. They "are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: Behold, he takes up the isles as a very little thing:
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt-offering. All nations are before him as nothing, and they are counted to
him less than nothing, and vanity."

As all power is of GOD, derived from him, and subject to him, and "the hearts
of all men in his hands," he can "turn them," without infringing the moral
agency of his creatures, and make them minister to his designs, beside their
own intention. Nothing can happen, in any part of the universe, among the
infinite variety of creatures, without his appointment or permission "Thine, O
Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty: For all that is in the heaven, and in the earth, is thine: Thine is
the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all."

II. IN regard to the duration, or perpetuity of divine providence, this seems
to be implied in the general doctrine already laid down. For in admitting that
GOD supports and governs all, we suppose his continual agency. If he withdraw
his sustaining power one moment, the frame of nature would be out of course,
and things at once fall into confusion. "The spirit would fail before him, and
the souls which he has made." They can as well subsist altogether without him,
and exist forever as they are, as be self preserved a single moment. No
positive exertion of the Deity is necessary to the destruction of all things.
Let the governor of the world suspend his influence and support, and instant
ruin must follow. What we are wont to ascribe to natural or second causes, is
more properly the agency of the Deity on material things; and his concurrence
with his creatures, at least so far as to uphold their powers of exertion.
GOD's kingdom has been set up ever since there have been any beings to govern.
"The watchmen of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps." "His kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom." Tho the heavens, and earth, and elements shall at length
be dissolved; yet he shall reign for ever. And hence "there is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord."

III. BUT let us, in the next place, make a few reflections on the particular
character of this extensive providence we have been taking a general survey of.
Though the present state is by no means the completion of it, and our world but
a small part of the dominions of the ALMIGHTY, whence we must needs be very
incompetent judges of his administration, and very much in the dark with regard
to many things in it; yet that it is of a moral kind, we cannot doubt. The
operations of our own minds, and what we may observe of it in this dark state,
fully evidence it to be so. From the natural notices GOD has given us of
himself, we clearly infer, that the scepter of his kingdom is a righteous
scepter that he loves righteousness, and hates wickedness. Conscience
witnesses this when ever it applauds or reproaches us. These sentiments are
also confirmed from what we see in the course of providence. Righteousness
evermore exalts a nation: But sin is the unfailing reproach of any people. We
moreover observe in particular persons, that "the eyes of the Lord run to and
fro through the earth, that he may show himself strong in behalf of 'em whose
hearts are perfect with him. His eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears open
to their cry. But the face of the Lord is against 'em that do evil, to cut off
the memory of them from the earth." While virtue tends to lengthen life, and
contributes to the ease and happiness of it -- while it procures esteem and
confidence from men, even from the vicious 'emselves; it appears, on the other
hand, that such as are "wicked overmuch die before their time" -- that "bloody
and deceitful men do not live out half their days." Besides the punishments
inflicted on profligate offenders by the hands of civil justice; poverty, shame
and misery are the natural tendency of many sorts of wickedness. This at least,
which the prophet declares, holds true of all wicked men, in an higher or lower
degree, that they "are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest -- There is
no peace to the wicked. They travel with pain all their days, and in the midst
of their sufficiency are in straits." This "wounded spirit" is more than all
the evils of life. "The good man," on the contrary, "is satisfied from
himself." The conscious approbation of the Deity, and hope of the celestial
kingdom, fixes his heart; so that instead of fearing any temporal sufferings,
he even "glories in tribulation. Having nothing, he possesses all things."

THESE things, which I can only hint at, without mentioning others, show what
sort of providence GOD exercises over the world. They verify the declaration
of the prophet, "I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth." Whatever instances may seem at present to militate
against the supposition of such an administration, we may be assured will be
found to comport here with, when we come into that world where they "see not
through a glass darkly." Let us patiently wait the issue of things for the
manifestation of GOD's righteousness. He is the rock, his work is perfect, and
all his ways are judgment: A GOD of truth, and without iniquity, just and right
is he.

BY taking a view of our text, we shall have a particular illustration of the
foregoing idea of divine providence. The Lord shall reign for ever, even THY
GOD, O ZION! While GOD is the father of all mankind, the professors of the true
religion are, in a distinguished sense, "his people, and children of the living
GOD." The Jews were "a peculiar people to him above all people. He showed his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel, and dealt not so with
any nation: The Lord has chosen ZION! He has desired it for his habitation.
This is my rest forever." And hence the children of ZION are stired up to "be
joyful" in him who is in a peculiar sense "THEIR king." To them especially are
those words applied, THIS GOD IS MY GOD FOR EVER AND EVER.

BUT is not this a partial distinction? Does it not prove, contrary to what is
above supposed, that "there is respect of persons with GOD?" To this we reply,
that what was heretofore the prerogative of the Jews, is now under the gospel
the privilege of all that call upon the name of the LORD. -- That tho the Jews'
advantage was, that "to 'em were committed the oracles of GOD, and that to them
pertained the promises;" yet the original promise to the father of that nation
expressly comprehended all nations and families of the earth. -- That when the
seed promised to Abraham, which was the hope of Israel, appeared, and gave
direction for the promulgation of his religion, it was in these terms: "Go
teach ALL NATIONS" -- Go into ALL THE WORLD, and preach the gospel to EVERY
CREATURE -- That the highest and most important sense, in which GOD declares
himself "the GOD of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob," is a privilege belonging to
those only who have the same spirit of faith -- are conformed to the divine
moral character. For "they are not all Israel, who are of Israel: Neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children." Yea, "many shall
come from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of GOD: But the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness." The reason is
plain: "For the kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost." He is a covenant GOD and portion to those
only who have the power as well as form of godliness. All to whom the gospel
kingdom is preached for a witness, have the necessary means of obtaining this
highest honor and happiness, that ZION's king will be their GOD, in the most
eminent sense -- their exceeding great and everlasting reward.

DOES it not hence follow, that happiness is the great end, and righteousness
the unalterable rule, of the divine administration? The provision and mission
of a SAVIOR to the redemption of all mankind, that GOD might be just, as well
as merciful, in the justification of penitent believers in JESUS -- His being
anointed king in ZION -- having the promise of "the heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession" -- the
assurance we have that his kingdom of truth, peace and righteousness shall
universally prevail, call upon us to rejoice in the divine government; and to
express our gratitude by our highest praises for the great things done for us,
and for all mankind. "Just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints! Who
shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy." The
scriptures instruct us, that the GOD and FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, (who
is " in him the father of mercies, and GOD of all grace") in consequence of his
humiliation and vicarious sufferings, "has highly exalted him;" "given him all
power in heaven and earth;" and "will judge the world in righteousness by him"
-- That "he must reign, till he has put down all rule, and all authority and
power, and subdued all enemies under his feet." In the hands of this mighty
Savior, having the promise of his guardianship, the children of ZION need not
doubt the security of the church, and safety of all their interests -- that the
kingdom of righteousness and peace will triumph over all opposition. Founded on
a rock, tho the rain descend, and the floods come, and winds blow, they cannot
overthrow it. For thy GOD, O ZION, shall reign for ever, and of his kingdom
there is no end.

THE kingdom of the Redeemer, small in it is beginnings, made a most rapid
progress under the ministry of the apostles and first disciples,
notwithstanding every possible obstruction. To the first preachers of it (whose
industry and zeal in spreading it is wonderful to think of) the apostle applies
what is said of the heavenly luminaries, "Their sound went into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world." And tho many nations have fallen
off from christianity, and others have not as yet had it preached to 'em; yet,
according to scripture prophecy, we expect the time when "the kingdoms of this
world shall all become the kingdoms of our LORD, who shall reign for ever and
ever." How distant this period is, belongs not to us to conjecture; "the Father
having reserved the times and seasons in his own power." Thus much is clear
from ST. PAUL, that as "the casting away of the Jews was the riches of the
world, the receiving of them will be life from the dead to the Gentiles." The
Jews are not yet restored. Consequently, the fullness of the Gentiles is an
event yet to be looked for. When these events shall take place, then there will
be no difference between the peculiar title of ZION's GOD, and his being the
GOD of all the families of the earth. For "all people, nations and languages
shall serve and obey him."

BUT while this universal prevalence of true religion is an event we cannot but
exult in the prospect of, and for which we daily pray when we use those words,
THY KINGDOM COME; it is, at the same time, a most melancholy reflection, which
we are obliged to make, on the amazing corruption of christianity, which has
been permitted. The cause the apostle assigns; "They received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause GOD shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned,
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." You readily
perceive I allude to the rise of "the man of sin, the son of perdition, who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called GOD, or that is
worshipped" -- and "whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders; and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness."
This remarkable prediction is so exactly adapted to the ROMISH HIERARCHY, that
no intelligent reader can fail to make the application. For near a thousand
years, all christendom was in the grossest ignorance, and most abject
submission to the grand usurper of divine prerogatives. During this long
period, the few servants of Christ, who "had not worshipped the beast, nor
received his mark in their foreheads," might be tempted to think, that the
promise of ZION's king, to defend his church, had failed; or at least to
enquire, "How long, O LORD, holy and true!"

AT length (tho so late as the beginning of the XVIth. century) the servants of
Christ were spirited to set forward the REFORMATION; and the glorious work was
marvellously succeeded in their hands. The fathers of the reformation, Among
whom MELANCTHON makes the first figure, for his excellent spirit.
those lights of the church and world, will be had in esteem as long as Christ
has a church on earth. The kingdom of Antichrist has been gradually weakening
ever since this memorable period. The PONTIFF is now compelled to take up with
an empty title, without the civil power the popes possessed for many hundred
years. The dissolution of the order of Jesuits, in one place and another, gives
us the prospect, that the empire of the beast may be hastening to it is end; as
this order of men is the great, if not only, support of the authority of the
Pontiff, and the religion of Rome.

IT is to be remembered, at the same time, ("tho to the opprobrium of humanity)
that, of all the errors of that antichristian church, from which the"
protestants "were, with derision, expelled, the most abominable of all,
PERSECUTION FOR OPINIONS, stuck the fastest, and in it is turn tarnished the
splendour of almost every protestant communion." It was this spirit, predominant
in our mother country, that drove our progenitors from thence hither --
prefering a desolate coast, an uncultivated desert, and constant wars with the
barbarians inhabiting it, to a sacrifice of the rights of conscience, a
submission to religious oppression. A dignitary of the episcopal church,
Warburton, sermon before the society, A. D. 1766. p. 8, 9.
(whose words I have just quoted) does the "colonies" the justice to say, that
they "were formed and first peopled by religious and conscientious men, who,
made uneasy at home by their intolerant brethren, left the old world, to enjoy,
in peace, that first and chief prerogative of man, the free worship of God
according to his own conscience." How many flourishing churches are there now
in this wilderness, where Satan's seat was! In New England only (containing but
four provinces) near 700 of the various denominations. About 500 of which are
on the congregational plan, properly so called.

I might touch at the hardships, distresses and dangers of our ancestors in the
beginning of this country, but it would detain me too long from my purpose,
which I cannot, without abusing the patience of my hearers, postpone.

THE reason, as before hinted, of my bringing you a discourse this day, is,
that we have completed 100 years since the incorporation of this town by the
General Assembly of the colony: On which occasion you will naturally expect
some historical account of it is settlement. This I promised to give you, when I
entered on my present discourse, and would now proceed to my proposed design.

I MUST begin with a few sketches of the town of New Haven to show the rise of
this; as our first settlers came from thence, and the greater part of our
present bounds were originally comprehended within that town.

THE Rev. Mr. John Davenport, first pastor of New Haven, with between 40 and 50
free planters who came with him, arrived at Boston in 1637, and came to
New Haven (then Quinaypiack) in 1638. Mr. Davenport had been a settled
conformist minister for many years in Coleman-Street, London. He died March 16.
1670. Aet. 73.
A civil constitution was agreed upon and solemnly come into, New Haven
(including the towns settled to the westward of it, and Branford and Guilford
eastward) was for 27 years a distinct government. On the appointment of Mr.
Winthrop governor of Connecticut by charter from Charles II. A. D. 1662.
New Haven for three years refused coming under the jurisdiction, and continued
separate till 1665, when it was united, by mutual consent, with Connecticut.
The New England planters settled what form of government they pleased. The
authority of the nation never interposed in this matter till upwards of forty
years after the first adventurers planted themselves at New-Plymouth.
and a church formed June 4. 1639. The church was gathered in the following
manner: It was proposed that all the free planters (who probably were christian
professors before) should make choice of 12 leading men, who should out of
themselves choose 7, to model the church; (grounded, as I am told, on that text,
"Wisdom has builded her house: She has hewn out her seven pillars.") and
having embodied themselves, they should admit the rest. The 7 were Mr.
Theophilus Eaton, Mr. John Davenport, Mr. Robert Newman, Mr. Matthew Gilbert,
Thomas Fugill, John Punderson, and Jeremiah Dixon.


FROM some records of discipline, etc. it appears, that the church, when
formed, chose a pastor, with a ruling elder, and a teaching elder, distinct.
Mr. Davenport removed to Boston 1667. And it does not appear that they had any
pastor till July 2. 1685, when the Rev. Mr. Pierpont was ordained; who died
Nov. 14. 1714. He was succeeded by the Rev. Joseph Noyes, who was ordained July
4. 1716. and continued sole pastor till March 1. 1758; when the Rev. Chauncy
Whittelsey (the present pastor of the first church) was ordained colleague with
Mr. Noyes, who died June 14. 1761.

MR. William Hook (who in 1644 appears to have been teaching elder in this
church) was the first in that office, chosen, no doubt, at the formation of the
church; tho no account of his ordination can yet be found. He was sent for by
Protector Cromwell, and returned to England about the year 1656. Mr. Nicholas
Street was ordained teacher, i. e. teaching elder, the 26th of the 9th month,
1659. The practice of a ruling elder and teaching elder, distinct from the
pastor, does not appear to have been retained after Mr. Pierpont's
introduction. Sundry towns in this colony were settled before New Haven.
Hartford, Windsor, Weathersfield and Say-Brook in 1636 Guilford, Stanford
Milford 1639, the year following New Haven. Milford church was formed at New
Haven, and then minister (Rev. Mr. Prudden) and people went and fixed at
Milford.


THE settlement of this town was projected 1669. A committee was appointed by
the town of New Haven, with full power to manage the whole affair of the
settlement, then called New Haven village. The New Haven committee were William
Jones, Matthew Gilbert, William Bradley, Jeremiah Osborn, John Herriman, John
Winston, Abraham Dickerman.
This committee appointed Samuel Street, John Moss, John Brocket and Abraham
Doolittle a committee of the village, to receive planters, etc. Among other
things particularly stipulating with regard to the ministry and church affairs
in the following form: For the safety and well-being of the church affairs,
ministry and maintenance, the committee [of New-Haven] do order, that the said
undertakers and successive planters, before admitted, shall subscribe to the
following engagement, viz. He or they, as aforesaid, shall not by any means
disturb the church, when settled there, in their choice of minister or
ministers, or other church officers; or in any of their other church rights,
liberties, or administrations: Nor shall refuse or withdraw due maintenance
from such ministry. And until such church be settled, shall submit to such
order as the said committee shall make for a godly minister to dispense the
word of God among them. The instrument from which this extract is made bears
date, "the 31st day of the 11th month, 1669;" subscribed by the New Haven
committee. To which regulation, the before-named committee of the village, with
34 more persons by 'em received as planters, subscribed their assent, in
another instrument of the same date. I shall have a further use for this
stipulation presently.

IN May following, at the meeting of the General Assembly at Hartford, these
subscribers Their names are, Samuel Street, John Moss, John Brocket, Nathanael
Merriman, Abraham Doolittle, Jeremiah How, Samuel Andrews, Daniel Sherman, John
Hall, Samuel Hall, Samuel Cook, Zachariah How, Nathanael How, Joseph Benham,
Samuel Potter, Joseph Ives, Eleazer Peck, Samuel Munson, John Peck, Samuel
Brown, John Miles, Nathan Andrews, John Ives, Simon Tuttle, Samuel Miles, John
He^^^^an, John Mix, William Johnson, Daniel Hooper, Benjamin Lewis, Thomas
Curtiss, Thomas Yale, Thomas Hall, John Beach, Eliasaph Preston, Jehiel
Preston, Eleazer Holt, Samuel Whitehead.
for the new plantation (38 in number) were incorporated into a town, by the
name of WALLINGFORD; The incorporation of this town was eight years after the
colony charter, and five years after the union of the governments of New Haven
and Connecticut. About fifteen towns were settled in this colony before
Wallingford.
the affairs of the village being still conducted by the committee, [of the
village] with such others as they judged competent persons to be sharers in the
trust, till May 27. 1672; when they resigned their trust into the hands of the
town.

THE undertakers covenanted to come and settle in the town the spring following
their incorporation, having begun the settlement some time before. The first
town-meeting was held April 6. 1671. How many of the first undertakers had
families when they came to reside here, we cannot ascertain. The number of
souls, in the spring of 1671, did not, probably, exceed 100. I don't find a
record of any one born in the town till September 19. 1671 Samuel, son of
Samuel Potter.
-- Or of any death till March 12. 1673 Samuel, son of Eleazer Peck.
-- And June 5th, following, one of the first planters [Thomas Hall] was
married.

ONE of their first acts was to make provision for the maintenance of public
worship. I am told, that Mr. Davenport of New Haven preached the first sermon
here, at the bottom of the hill on which the town stands, from those words,
ISAIAH v.i. My beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. But this
information, as to the gentleman that preached, is most probably a mistake,
since Mr. Davenport removed to Boston 1667.

BEFORE the Rev. Mr. Street, Mr. John Herriman (one of the New Haven committee)
preached to this people, and, I am told, some others. Mr. Street, [one of the
undertakers and committee for settlement] was first pastor, and near 40 years
of age when he first preached to this people, 1672. He was son to the aforesaid
Nicholas Street, teaching elder of New Haven church. He moved with his family
hither, April 1673, the town having agreed to build him an house. He had an
annual salary before any church was gathered here. The 3d day of the 2d month,
1674, was observed as a day of fasting and prayer, previous to the forming a
church of Christ in the place. And on the 15th of the same month, the following
year, the town voted, That as there had been consent about establishing a
church of Christ in the aforesaid town, and a solemn day set apart and observed
by the town unanimously to seek GOD's guidance in so great a work, they have
now also actually and unanimously concluded, if it be the will of GOD, that
there shall be a church gathered, and to walk according to the CONGREGATIONAL
WAY; and have also actually and unanimously left the management of the same in
the hands of Mr. Moss, Mr. Samuel Street, Mr. Brocket, Eliasaph Preston, John
Hall sen'r. John Hall jun'r. Thomas Yale, Nehemiah Royce, Nathan Andrews,
Benjamin Lewis, Lieut. Merriman, Sergt. Doolittle, John Beach; that, if it be
the will of GOD to incline their hearts, so many of them as may be a competent
number for that work may, in his time, lay the foundation.

NO doubt the church was formed soon after this, and under Mr. Street's
pastoral care: Tho no record is to be found of the precise time of either.

YOU see the church was formed on the congregational plan -- differing from the
model of New Haven church in this, that it had no teaching or ruling elder
distinct from the pastor -- Which distinction was probably laid aside in the
church of New Haven before the first planters of this town came and settled
here -- even immediately on Mr. Davenport's removal; as there are no
appearances of it afterward. Our first planters proceeded much according to
the method of New Haven in gathering a church. They chose 13 leading men, with
instructions to those, that "as many of them as might be a competent number for
that work, would lay the foundation" -- Very well comporting with the account
before given of the New Haven planters procedure in this matter.

THE idea our fathers had of a church of Christ appears from hence to have been
this: "The voluntary, explicit, solemn covenanting of a number of persons to
walk together in the profession and order of the gospel -- that their own act
and engagement with each other constitutes them a church of Christ -- that they
have, therefore, full power to form themselves into a church state, and declare
for themselves what form of worship and discipline they will maintain,
conformable to their own apprehensions of the mind of Christ; without
dependence on other churches, or their officers." This I take to be the
sentiment of all churches properly congregational.

THERE does not appear to have been the least deviation from, or alteration in,
this plan, but an entire conformity to it, in this church, at and after the
ordination of the Rev. Mr. Whittelsey, A. D. 1710, notwithstanding the
confederacy of the churches at Say-Brook, eighteen months before. At a
town-meeting previous to Mr. Whittelsey's ordination, among other things
relative thereto, I find the following words in their votes -- "And what
churches shall be sent to" [to attend the ordination] "is wholly left by the
town to the committee, with the advice of Mr. Street and Mr. Whittelsey, to
conclude of." In the original stipulation (before recited) between the
committee of New Haven and the first undertakers, it was expressly provided,
that none of the settlers and successive planters shall by any means disturb
the church, when settled there, in their choice of minister or ministers, or
other church officers; or in any of their other church rights, liberties, or
administrations: Nor shall refuse or withdraw due maintenance from such
ministry. The first church is still on it is original plan. It gives us pleasure
to find, that we are in the good old way of our progenitors: Especially as we
doubt not they were built on the foundation of the apostles. The first
consociation of this county, convened at Branford, April 1709, (a few months
after the Say-Brook agreement, at which were present some of the compilers of
the articles of discipline) on the request of some churches present, declared
it as their sense, that the articles were no more then a recognition of the
obligations which the gospel of Christ brings distinct societies of christians
under to afford each other mutual advice and assistance, when desired. Till
this explanation was made by the ministers* the delegates from the churches
would not consent to receive the platform. Such was the spirit of liberty then
in the churches!


IT was an usage in this church, for about 40 years, for persons who made a
christian profession, to give, at the same time, some relation of their
christian experience. Soon after Mr. Whittelsey's ordination, this matter was
left to the election of the persons concerned, and not long after entirely
discontinued. It is now practiced in but few New England churches.

TILL April, 1680, the first settlers assembled for religious worship in a
private house. Lieut. Nathanael Merriman's. The first vote of the town to build
an house of public worship was December 27. 1676, of 34 by 30 feet -- upon
which nothing appears to have been executed. Nov. 17. 1679, their former vote
was rescinded, and it was agreed to build an house of 28 by 24 feet, and 10
feet post. Sep. 5. 1681, a further rate was laid to finish the house, which,
however, was not completed. In 1690 an addition of 16 feet was made to the
breadth of it; and the following year concluded to seal the whole inside, from
sell to plate. Such was the deep poverty of the first inhabitants. A single
farmer among us now could build such an house with one year's profits of his
farm, besides supporting his family well.
The work of their small meeting house was then so far carried on, that they
assembled in it. They manifested a cheerfulness, according to their ability, in
supporting GOD's public worship, from the very first. But their poverty in this
world rendered them unable, for many years to do much more than provide mean
shelters for their families. Next to their timely care in regard to the
maintenance of public worship (the principal concern of a christian people) the
instruction of their children, in the first rudiments of knowledge, appears to
have been an object of attention with 'em, from their annual provision for the
support of schools -- esteeming the education of their children of more value
than outward possessions. An incident or two, which evidence the regard our
fathers had to justice and equity, I cannot pass without mentioning; since in
matters seemingly trivial a righteous principle may discover itself, as well as
in greater. Several persons, employed by the town in different ways, had
undertaken the business by the great, as we are wont to speak; but finding they
had an hard bargain, petitioned for an additional allowance, which was readily
made 'em.

THE inhabitants had repeated apprehensions of the incursions of the
barbarians. Aug. 27. 1675, two houses were ordered to be fortified; Mr.
Street's and Lieut. Merriman's.
the whole town to begin the work the day following this meeting, and continue
till effected. Every man also was required to bring arms and ammunition on the
sabbath. The following October, another fortification was added at the lower
end of the town, Sergeant Doolittle's house
and persons appointed to keep garrison at each place. But it does not appear,
that the inhabitants of this town were ever immediate sufferers by the
depredations of the savages. What gave occasion to the apprehensions of our
fathers at this time, no doubt was, the breaking out of Philip's war this
summer. Philip, youngest son of Massasoiet, succeeding his brother, took
unwearied pains to "engage the Indians, in all parts of New England, to unite
against the English.

[The Indians about Hadly confessed such a plot. The Narragansetts had engaged
to bring 4000 men. They did not expect to be prepared before the spring of
1676. But Philip precipitated his own nation and his allies into a war before
they were prepared. This was evident from the distraction of the Indians in all
parts of New England, upon the first news of the disturbance from Philip.]

He was a man of high spirit, and could never rest until he brought on the war,
which issued in his destruction. He was the object on whose life or death war
or peace, depended. First or last most of the Indians in New England joined
him. And it was a question with some whether the Indians would not prevail to a
total extirpation of the English inhabitants." The colonies of Plymouth,
Massachusetts, and Connecticut, uniting, attacked with 1000 men a strong
fortress of the Indians in Narragansett, and after a bloody battle took and
destroyed it, Dec. 19. 1675. Mr. Treat was a Major of this colony troops, and
soon after chosen governor of the colony.

By this single acquisition, and repeated successful encounters with the
savages in smaller parties the following year, they "were so reduced, that they
were continually coming in on promise of mercy. Philip fled from one swamp to
another, diverse times very narrowly escaping, loosing one chief counselor
after another. He was killed Aug. 12. 1676, as he was flying from his pursuers.
One of his own men, whom he had offended, and who had deserted to the English,
shot him through the heart." History of Massachusetts by Mr. Hutchinson, Vol. I.
275, 283, 284, 285, 306.


IN 1681, forts were renewed in this town. In 1690 February 26th, was an order
of the town to fort in the meeting house. In 1702 the apprehensions from the
savages were revived, and the inhabitants brought arms on Lord's Day. We may
take occasion to reflect on divine goodness in freeing us from the enemy of the
wilderness, and from an insidious foe ever ready to instigate 'em, to every
kind of barbarity. We have not to get our bread in jeopardy of life, as our
fathers did; but sit under our own vine and fig tree, having none to make us
afraid. The signal extirpation of the savages, together with the consideration
of their resisting all attempts to convert 'em to the Christian faith, renders
it not improbable, that they may be a devoted people. One of the more sensible
and serious natives is reported to have asked "For what wickedness of their
fathers GOD had abandoned 'em?" or to this effect. The use it behooves us to
make of the favor of heaven in driving out the heathen before our fathers, and
planting 'em in this land -- in making it at length "a quiet habitation," and
causing this "wilderness to blossom as the rose," is that being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, we serve GOD without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our lives.

HERE it may be proper to remind you, that the New Haven planters made a fair
purchase of any exclusive right the Indians might have to Quinnipiack, which
(as before said) contained the greater part of the bounds of this town. Their
deed of it is dated Dec. 1638 -- which was renewed 1645. But on pretense of the
Indians, that they had made a reserve of some appurtenances in former grants,
another purchase was made, and a valuable consideration given for an unreserved
deed of "12 large miles long, and 8 broad;" the breadth extending from
"Wharton's brook, to Pilgrim's harbor." The addition of 3 miles to the breadth,
from the last mentioned place; was made by the government. This Indian deed is
dated at Hartford, May 24. 1681, acknowledged before Mr. Treat, then governor
of the colony. The purchase was made by Samuel Street, John Moss, Nathanael
Merriman, John Brocket, Abraham Doolittle. John Brocket died March 12. 1690,
Aet. 80. -- Abraham Doolittle August 11. of the same year. Aet. 70. Nathanael
Merriman February 13. 1694, Aet. 80. John Moss 1707, being 103 years old. --
These with Mr. Street aged 82, (the five purchasers of the town) computing
their age together, make 415 years -- or 83 for each.


THE list of the town in 1690 was 3849, the families 73, souls 400. In 1699 a
second addition was made to their first meeting house, of 50 by 26 feet, being
larger than both the parts before built -- from which we may form a judgment of
their increase. In 1700, there had been 369 births in the town, and from that
time to 1723, when a new parish was made, 894 -- in all 1263, in 52 years. How
many were the natural increase of the first planters cannot be determined --
New settlers were constantly coming in for 30 or 40 years. The deaths were
about 400 from the beginning of the town to the formation of the first parish
out of it. The number of baptisms and admissions to communion during Mr.
Street's ministry cannot be ascertained, as he kept no record of 'em^

THE late Rev. Samuel Whittelsey, after preaching about a year, was ordained
colleague pastor with Mr. Street, in May 1710. Mr. Street died January 16.
1717, being 82 years old, having been settled pastor 42 years. He was esteemed
an heavenly man. His youngest son [Nicholas] moved and settled at Groton; the
eldest [Samuel] has three sons now living in the town, viz. Capt. Elnathan
Street, and Messrs. Samuel and John Street. The eldest daughter was married to
Deacon John Peck, and died before her father. One was married to Theophilus
Yale, Esquire another to Joshua Culver. The two last are still living. The widow of
the Rev. Mr. Street died July 19. 1730.
In 1709, the list of the whole town was 6000, and number of souls about 700.
This house of worship was completed 1720. The steeple added to it 1738. When
the first new parish was formed (1723) the number of souls was increased to
1100, and the list to as many thousands. Mr. Whittelsey died April 15. 1752,
having almost completed the 42nd year of his ministry, and in the 67th year of
his age. He has left no records from which the number of baptisms, etc. can be
collected. Mr. Whittelsey was one of the most eminent preachers in this colony
in his day, a laborious, faithful minister of Christ, applying his whole time
to his work. He shone with distinction in intellectual and moral seize.
He has left four discourses in print: An election sermon, a sermon on the
misery of the wicked in their separate state, a sermon on the death of the
honorable John Hall Esquire and another at the ordination of his son. His widow
died October 22. 1767, Aet. 84. Of eight children six survived him; four sons
and two daughters. The Rev. Samuel Whittelsey, his eldest son, was pastor of
the church in Milford almost thirty one years, and died October 22. 1768, Aet.
56. He was a man of an excellent spirit, a judicious divine and eminent
Christian. The second son, the Rev. Chauncy Whittelsey is the present worthy
and greatly esteemed pastor of the first church in New Haven. Mr. Elisha
Whittelsey, his third son, now lives in this town. Charles Whittelsey Esquire his
fourth son, died July 2. 1764, Aet. 41. His memory is still dear to this
people. The eldest daughter is the wife of Elihu Hall Esquire


NEW-CHESHIRE was made a society 1723, consisting then of about 35 families.
Their first meeting house was built in 1724. A church was gathered there the
same year, on a day of fasting previous to the ordination of the Rev. Samuel
Hall, it is first, and one of it is present pastors; who was ordained December 9.
1724, and is now in the 75th year of his age, and 46th of his ministry. The
number of male-members of the church at first was 11, and at present about ^00
males and females. The author has not been able to procure, although he has
repeatedly requested the exact number of communicants at New-Cheshire.
Mr. Hall has baptized 2013, (A larger number, I presume, than any minister in
the colony in the same term of time) besides 120 baptized by the Rev. Mr. Foot,
who was ordained colleague pastor with Mr. Hall, Thursday, March 11. 1767. Mr.
Hall has admitted to communion 670; Mr. Foot, 45. The number of births in
forty seven years has been about 2500, the exact number of deaths 700. They met
in their present meeting house 1739. The number of souls 1630. The first
deacons of the church were Stephen Hotchkiss and Joseph Ives. On the
resignation of the latter, Timothy Tuttle was chosen; and on the death of
Deacon Hotchkiss, (Deacon Tuttle resigning) Edward Parker and Stephen Hotchkiss
(son to the first of that name) succeeded. Deacon Stephen Hotchkiss removing a
few years since to another town, his brother Benjamin Hotchkiss and Samuel
Beach were elected, who with deacon Parker are the present deacons. Deacon
Joseph Ives died May 18. 1755, Aet. 81. Deicon Stephen Hotchkiss March 5. 175^.
Aet. 75. Deacon Tuttle, April 15. 1756, Aet. 75.


IN the month of March 1732, (a little more than eight years after the society
of New-Cheshire was formed) the smallpox "broke out in the center of the
society." How it came there is to this day a secret. Being an unusual disease,
and many opinions about it, people went upon the sabbath, and other public
days, to see the sick. After some time, when it began to spread, some were
afraid it was the smallpox, and sent for those who had had the distemper to
know whether it was the smallpox, who all agreed it was not; which made people
careless, till Dr. Harpin came and told 'em it was -- Thus the infection was
spread in many families, and they were brought into the greatest distress for
want of experienced nurses -- yea, had scarcely help to bury their dead. For a
further account, I refer you to a printed discourse of the Rev. Mr. Hall's on
the occasion -- by which it appears, that 124 persons had the distemper, (one
third, probably, of the souls then in the society) and, all things considered,
it is surprising, that of these but 17 died.

ANOTHER society was formed 1725, by the name of MERIDEN. It consisted at first
of between 30 and 40 families. They had preaching only in the winter season for
the three first years, and met in a private house two winters. Their first
meeting house was built 1727. The late Rev. Theophilus Hall went to preach to
'em December 1728. The 22nd of October, the year following, a church was
gathered on a fast day observed by the society; and the 29th of the same month
Mr. Hall was ordained their pastor. The number of communicants was then 51,
males 21, females 30. At present, the communicants are 185, and families 123.
In 45 years there have been 1100 births in the society, and 846 baptisms since
Mr. Hall's settlement; 288 admissions to communion (7 admitted, in their
vacancy, 21 by their present pastor, the rest by their first) and 368 deaths.
Their list in 1725 was 3000. Their second meeting house was built 1755. The
Rev. Theophilus Hall died March 25. 1767, in the 60th year of his age, and 38th
of his ministry. Mr. Hall was a gentleman of strong intellectual powers, much
esteemed as a preacher, of great firmness and stability, and a zealous advocate
for civil and religious liberty. He left a widow and seven children. His
youngest daughter died a few months after him. His eldest son, the Rev. Avery
Hall, is pastor of the church in Rochester, in the province of New Hampshire;
and the second daughter married to the Rev. Andrew Lee, of Norwich. Mr. Hall
printed two discourses on the death of the Rev. Isaac Styles, two on faith, and
one delivered at the ordination of the Rev. Matthew Meriam of Berwick^
The Rev. John Hubbard was ordained June 22. 1769. The deacons of this church
stand in the following order. Robert Rice, (father to the present Capt. Moses
Rice) and Samuel Rice (father to Ezekiel Rice Esquire lately deceased, and to Mr.
Samuel Rice of New-Cheshire.) On the resignation of deacon Samuel Rice,
Benjamin Whiting succeeded. On the resignation of deacon Robert Rice, Benjamin
Rice (son to deacon Samuel) was elected. At his death, the late Ezekiel Rice
Esquire succeeded. At his death, Ebenezer Cole. And on deacon Whiting's resigning,
(who still survives) the present Benjamin Rice (grandson to deacon Samuel) who
with deacon ^^le are the present officiating deacons of the church in Meriden.
Deacon Samuel Rice died May 1757, Aet. 84. -- Deacon Benjamin Rice January
1758, Aet. 53. -- Deacon Robert Rice 1759, Aet. 94. -- Deacon Ezekiel Rice
1765, Aet. 67.


ABOUT the year 1745, two or three families in the town joined the communion of
the church of England. The Rev. Ichabod Camp, first missionary to Wallingford
and Middletown, went for orders 1751, there being about 13 subscribers in the
town, (10 in the old society, and 3 in New-Cheshire) and 2 more in North-Haven.
Mr. Camp came to his mission 1752. A church house was raised here 1758, and
another in New-Cheshire 1760, in which last place a second is now raised. Mr.
Camp was removed to Louisburg in Virginia 1760. The Rev. Samuel Andrews
succeeded him 1762, as missionary to this town and North-Haven, Middletown
being left out of the mission. There are 63 families of Episcopalians within
the original limits of the first society, 86 communicants, and have been
baptized by Mr. Andrews 165. In New-Cheshire, the families are 47, These 47
families of Episcopalians are included in the 1630 souls belonging to
New-Cheshire.
communicants 64, baptisms 86. In Meriden, 6 families, 14 communicants, 20
baptisms. There have died belonging to the church of England, in the old
society, from October 1758 to this time, 56.

BETWEEN 30 and 40 years since, there sprang up a sect calling themselves
baptists, under an ignorant, whimsical, and confident leader. Timothy Waters,
who had for his second John Merriman of a like character.
There were 8 or 10 families of them. They built an house of worship, in which
they assembled for a number of years. But being entirely neglected, they soon
dispersed, or were convinced of their phrensy.

I suppose there is not a single person of that profession now in the town.

No town of the same bigness in the government has had fewer of the people
called seperates. In the large parish of New-Cheshire, there is not one family
of this denomination. In Meriden but 2 or 3. In the old society there are 8 or
9 families, who assemble for religious worship by themselves.

A number of families belonging to the first society had permission to worship
by themselves in 1759; a pastor The Rev. Simon Waterman.
was ordained over them October 7. 1761, and a meeting house built 1762. They
were made a distinct society, by the name of WELLS, in May 1763. The church
members at first were 50, and 61 at the ordination of their pastor; who has
admitted to communion 49, baptized in the town 125, (most of 'em in his own
parish) besides 10 baptized in his society by other ministers. The church at
present consists of 104 members. The number of souls was 473 in October 1761.
Deaths from October 12. 1758 till now 75.

To return to the first society and church. After the above removals, the
congregation consisted of 987 souls in October 1761. It Is present pastor was
ordained October 12. 1758. He has baptized 317 -- 22 more have been baptized
in his congregation by neighboring ministers -- in all 339. He has admitted to
communion 116, of which 11 have died, and 23 removed to settle in new towns.
The present communicants are 209. Deaths in this society since October 12.
1758, 186 -- [exclusive of 11 deaths in this time among the people called
seperates.] The first deacons of this ancient church were Eliasaph Preston,
(grandfather to the present Capt. Ephraim Preston) and John Hall senr. On
deacon Preston's death succeeded Samuel Hall, brother to deacon John, and
father to the late honorable John Hall Esquire and the present very aged Samuel
Hall Esquire -- John Peck (but lately deceased) was chosen on the death of deacon
John Hall. Samuel Moss (father to Messrs. Theophilus, Samuel, and Isaiah Moss)
succeeded deacon Samuel Hall. In a few years, deacon Moss being taken blind,
John Hall (son to the first of that name, and father to the captains Peter,
John and Asahel Hall, and to Messrs. Abel* Benjamin and Elisha Hall) was
chosen. On deacon Peck's resigning, Samuel Hall the 3d. grandson to the former
deacon of that name, was elected: And on the death of the late deacon John
Hall, Capt. Benjamin Atwater succeeded -- which two last are the present
deacons of the first church in the town. The two first pastors were each forty
two years in the ministry. But three deacons had died when the present pastor
was ordained. (1758.) Three have died since. The age of the six deceased
amounts to 501, or 83 for each. Deacon Preston died A. D. 1705, aged about 70.
Deacon John Hall, February 2. 1721, Aet. 82. -- Deacon Samuel Hall, March 5.
1725, Aet. 80. -- Deacon John Peck, June 29. 1768, Aet. 99. -- Deacon John
Hall, April 28. 1766, Aet. 86. -- Deacon Moss, July 30. 1765, Aet. 85. Adding
in the age of the two pastors, with the six deacons, deceased, the amount is
649, or near 81 for each pastor and deacon deceased of the first church.


THERE are 18 families within the limits of the town, annexed to Northford, (a
society in the town of Branford) and not included in the foregoing account. --
There have been for 30 years back constant removals from this town to new
settlements. These emigrations, with the increase on 'em within this term of
years, amount to as great a number of souls as now is in the whole town. The
migrations have been the greater part from the old society. There have been
about as many removals from the old society for a number of years as the
natural increase. The births for 100 years in the town may be computed at 7000
-- the deaths at 2500, or 2600. In the 4 societies in the town are 6 ordained
ministers, and the same number of houses for public worship, two (of the
houses) belonging to Episcopalians. Souls 4330. List 51034-90. viz.

I. Society L.11090-09 6. -- Episcopalians 3429. -- Seperates 462-10. II.
Society 15819-13-9. -- Episcopalians 2750-00-0. III. Society 9608 15-10. IV.
Society 6387-07 8. Families annexed to Northford 1486-12 ^. 51034-09-0.

Norwich and New Haven, are the only towns in the colony that are higher in the
list than Wallingford, if the author has been rightly informed.




THUS I have given you, my hearers, as succinct an history of the town as the
limits of a single discourse would admit. I take this opportunity to return my
thanks to any gentlemen who have favored me with their intelligence. The
calculation of births is founded on probable general principles. For the first
half century it is probable they were all (or nearly all) seasonably recorded.
The last 50 years, it appears that people have been more careless in getting
the births of their children recorded. I have given you the exact number of
deaths in the second and third societies since their formation; and in the
first and fourth societies, and church of England, since my settlement in the
town. Yet in suming up the whole number for the century now completed, I have
been able to proceed on probable principles only.

I must wave the matter (and, indeed, had no design) of giving any directions
relating to the particular business before you. Most of you, I presume, came
determined as to the distribution of your votes -- on just principles, I hope.
To attempt the conviction of any who may have determined on other principles,
would, I fear, be a fruitless labor. I would only remind you of the advice of
one, who knew how to assert and improve his freedom. "Brethren, ye have been
called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by
love serve one another."

NOR is there time left for those reflections, which the preceding discourse
and the occasion of it suggest: I must, however, beg your patience while I only
mention a number of uses and inferences, which a review of both brings to mind.

WE are cautioned against attributing to means and instruments, what is to be
ascribed to the energy of Almighty GOD, who works all in all.

FURTHER, we may not indulge to negligence and sloth under a nation that events
are so fixed and determined as to supersede human endeavors.

INSTEAD of prying into the secrets of divine government, we are taught to rest
content with what lies plain to our view, and concerns the regulation of our
hearts and lives.

WE are moreover taught to trust his providence, who rules supreme over all,
with our interests -- resigning ourselves to his disposal -- and walking with
GOD.

GOD's government being moral instructs us what constitutes the prosperity and
happiness of a people.

WE are also taught to view the reference, which the scheme of divine
providence at present has to a future state, and more complete manifestation
of GOD's righteousness.

THE particular recollection of the favors of heaven to the British nation, to
New England, to this colony, to our progenitors of this town, to ourselves, is
adapted to inspire us with gratitude and praise. Let us evidence such a temper
by imitating the piety of our ancestors, that GOD may be with us, as he was
with them. They came to this country on religious motives. They were signally
protected and prospered. From being "few in number," their latter end has
greatly increased. We deny not but they had mistakes -- such as the best of
frail mortals have been incident to. If in any respects we have a more improved
knowledge, yet have we not abated in christian zeal and purity of life?
Instances of the neglect of family worship could scarce be found in their days;
how numerous are such instances in ours? How are family government and good
order, and religious education of children, wherein they showed a laudable
care, now disregarded? How strict were they in their observation of the
Lord's Day? how careless and loose are we? And are not profaneness and
intemperance vices continually growing in the land* Let us "remember from
whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first works."

THE retrospect we have taken in this discourse reminds us of the brevity of
life, and should serve to quicken us in the work for which we were born, and
sent into the world. "One generation passes away, and another generation
comes. Our fathers where are they?" They have "told us what GOD did for them
in their day:" And the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him; and his righteousness unto childrens children: To such
as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do 'em. In
a little time we must "go to the generation of our fathers." Let us be
ambitious to act our part well on the stage -- to transmit the best of
blessings to those that come after us: That "instead of the fathers, there may
be the children," who shall "be to the LORD for a generation:" That when we
shall have done with all sublunary things, we may join the blessed inhabitants
of the world above, in "worshipping him that sits on the throne, and liv^
(...) ^ver;" who "cast their crowns (...) ^hrone, saying, Thou art worthy, O
(...), to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created."

Page 39 line 4 for 300 read 400.


