A NEW-YEAR's-GIFT. Being a sermon delivered at Philadelphia, on January 1,
1770; and published for rectifying some wrong reports, and preventing others of
the like sort; but chiefly for the sake of giving it another chance of doing
good to them who heard it.

By Morgan Edwards, A. M. Fellow of Rhode Island college, and minister of the
Baptist church in Philadelphia.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Second-street, two Doors below
Chesnut-street.

Jer. xxviii 16. -- This year thou shall die. --
WHAT is said of general rules may be applied to general maxims; for hardly any
one of either holds true in every case. What maxims more general than these
three -- All must die -- None knows the time of his death -- Ignorance of the
time is better than the knowledge of it? Yet each of these has many
exceptions. The text is an exception to the second maxim, and possibly to the
third; other texts there are which afford exceptions to the first, What I
intend to do is, To discourse on those exceptions; and then to address you in
such a manner as may be suitable to the time and the text.

I. The first maxim asserts that all must die, -- This is a decree of heaven,
and is expressed in general terms throughout the Bible. The reason of the
decree comports with the generality of its terms, for all have sinned, Romans v.
12; nevertheless the execution thereof will not seem adequate to either. Enoch
and Elijah sinned but died not, Heb. xi. 5.2 King. ii 11. The saints on Earth
at the coming of Christ will not be sinless, yet none of them shall die; and
they perhaps may amount to many thousands or millions. 1 Cor. xv. 51. But if
these exemptions of sinners from death be real, how can death be the wages of
sin? how will the veracity of God appear in saying, the soul that sins shall
die? I answer, Christ died for all the sinners who die not. And his death was
substituted in the room of theirs, and considered of God and of his law as
their own. But did not Christ die for others, even for all the elect? Why then
are not all exempted from dying? I answer, It is not because the death of
Christ was less proxical or less satisfactory in the case of the one party than
of the other; but for some good reasons or designs unknown to us. The death of
saints however differs not much from athanacy. It is no penal evil. A sting it
has not. Falling asleep is a just representation of it. Some have desired it as
an usher to glory, and lamented a recovery out of fits which, in their access,
they took to be death itself. I have met with an instance of this last, in my
own house the thirteenth of August past; and that from a person who was very
near and dear to me; which helped me much in the midst of my sorrows.

II. The second maxim is That no man knows the time of his death. This,
though it be not scriptural, obtains in the world as an universal truth. But it
has exceptions. And I intend under this head to show -- That some have known
the times of their death; and to mention the ways and means whereby they
obtained that knowledge.

1. I am to show that some have certainly known the time of their death. And
what has been may be again. Hananiah knew the year in which he should die, as
appears by the text. Hezekiah must have known as much. Isaiah xxxviii. 19. Saul
knew the day of his death. 1 Samuel xxviii. 19. Dives, the night in which his
Soul should be required of him. Luke xii. 20. Profane history abounds with
names of persons who have foretold, some the year, some the month, and some the
day of their decease; such as Justin Martyr, Cyprian, and others among the
ancients. Hale, Usher, Jewel, Tyro and Peden, among the moderns. To which I
could add some instances, which have fallen under my own observation. All these
died at the times predicted, and therefore must have known the times. Come we

2. To speak of the ways and means by which men have attained to that
knowledge. Hananiah and Hezekiah were informed of the fatal time by prophets.
Saul by a speaking apparation. Tyro by an audible voice which said 'Thou shall
not pass the thirty fourth year of thy age,' Polycarp, in a vision, saw his
martyrdom and the manner of it three days before it came. Cyprian and Usher
discovered the precise time of their death, by dreams. Hale, Jewel, and Peden
by an unaccountable premonition or boding that rose in their minds, by which
the first informed his acquaintance 'that on such a day or the same day month
he should be no more', which last brought the event to pass. The next told
several 'that within forty eight hours he should be in eternity'. The other
said 'this day is to be my last'; in all which cases events proved predictions.
A gentlewoman in town had something of this premonitive or foreboding
impression on her mind for a considerable time, and had been heard to say 'that
she should die with her eighth child'; and in her eighth pregnancy she died
August 16, 1769. I myself know a man who, on the ninth day of March, in the
year 1755, was seized with a persuasion, That at the end of full fifteen years,
from that time, he should be dead. The impression was sudden and strong; so
strong as not to leave a doubt respecting the issue, and has continued the same
to this day. About four years after he told a friend of it; that friend
endeavoring to rally him out of the notion made the thing known abroad, which
was presently spoken of in various ways. But the above is the state of the
case. Whether a premonition or a deception time will show, and that time is at
hand: if the first, the thing will claim no praise because involuntary; if the
last, others have been deceived the same way without blame, and that for the
same reason.

III. The other maxim is, That perfect ignorance of the time of death is better
than a knowledge of it. And I believe this, because God leaves most men in the
dark about the matter. Whatever is, is best. But as it is certain that God has
shown to some their times of dissolution, We must for the same reason believe
the opposite of the above maxim in their cases; otherwise neither God's
prophets nor God's providence would have disclosed the secret. The designs of
providence in concealing from most men the number of their days may be seen in
Drelincourt on death. But his designs in making known to some the periods of
their existence I can only guess at.

1. When God makes the discovery to a wicked man it may be to hasten his
amendment. The thing has a peculiar aptitude to answer the end; else why does a
physician inform a wicked patient, or a judge inform a criminal that he has but
so many hours to live? Ahaziah, Hananiah, and Saul were wicked men; and who
knows but God meant to pluck these sons of Abraham as brands out of the burning
by the discoveries he made touching the nearness of their deaths. Certain it is
that Saul fell to the ground, fasted, and sorrowed much when he heard the fatal
sentence to morrow shall thou be among the dead! Certain also, that the
sentence of a judge or a physician has made wretches think seriously and think
speedily of a preparation for death who could not be moved thereto by any other
means.

2. When God shows a good man the time of his death it may be, either for a
brighter display of his piety. How gloriously pious did the King of Israel
appear when he was told that he should die and not live. Isaiah xxxviii. Or,
for exciting him to greater diligence. Peter confesses that it had this effect
upon him. 2. Pet, I. 14. Or else to give him an opportunity of knowing his
state. Belshazzer knew not what a wretch he was till he saw on the wall how
soon he should die, Dan. v. But when Paul knew that the time of his departure
was at hand he felt more comfortable and happy than before. 2 Timothy iv. 8. But
whether the above be the reasons why God does discover the secret to some few
may be doubted; yet that he has made such discoveries, and that to both wicked
and good men, cannot be doubted at all.

IV. I proceed to the second thing I promised viz. to address you in a manner
that may suit the text, and the time; and that will, by the blessing of God, be
of benefit to each of you.

I. The time, you know, is the first day of the new year, and that which
connects it with the old; on which account it, like Janus, casts a double
aspect, the one on the year past; and the other on the year begun. It will be
suitable to the time therefore to say something of it both in its
retrospection, and prospect. If, with the day, we look back to the year it
pushes from us we shall see cause for thanksgiving; and sorrow; thanksgiving
for a year's bounties; and sorrow for a year's sins. Every day and every night
of the last year yielded us some favors. God's mercy was new every morning;
and his faithfulness repeated every night. He gave us food and raiment, and
health, and liberty. He gave us his sabbaths, his gospel, and his means of
grace. He gave us hope, and supported it by tokens of his love. He has borne
with us and spared us a year longer. He has crowned the year with goodness.
Thanks therefore be to his holy name. But these thanks are to be mingled with
sorrows. We have a year's sins to bewail. How many these have been God only
knows; but we easily know the number of them to have been great. Not a day nor
a night passed without producing some wants of conformity to, or or
transgressions of the law and gospel. O, Lord we look back with shame from the
beginning of this year; we judge and condemn ourselves, and most humbly ask
forgiveness of the past year's sins! But if with the day, we look forward to
the year commenced we have a prospect big with instructions. It meets us with
calls to resolve, to pray and to strive. To resolve that in the name and
strength of God we will spend this year better than the past. To pray that God
will be bountiful and kind to us as he has been the last year, and to strive
to offend him less, to please him better, and to love him more. Such
resolutions, prayers, and strivings suit the time well, but suit our own
character and interest much better.

2. Having said so much to the time I will add somewat that may be suitable to
the peculiar nature of the text. It is a very alarming one to wicked men; but
pleasing, highly pleasing to the righteous. This year thou shall die! What,
die? and that, this year? Alarming indeed! Every syllable sounds like the
ticking of a death-watch! Observe! Death is in the text! And a specification of
this year for the time of death to some one or other! But who is that one? I
answer, possibly every one here -- probably many a one -- and certainly some
one or other! It is possible that every one of us may be dead before the end of
this year; for the world is grown old. And where is the man or the angel that
will insure its continuance for a month, a week, or a day longer? Or if the end
of all things be not at hand who can say that neither the sword, nor famine,
nor pestilence, nor Indians, nor earthquake shall put an end to us all in three
hundred and sixty five days? May I not repeat my text therefore to express a
possibility of what may befall every one of us this year? But possibilities are
light things. Therefore I add, that the text will probably be verified this
year in the case of many a one here. This congregation consists now of an
hundred and forty nine communicants; and as many hearers besides as will
augment the number to about four hundred. If we suppose that five in a hundred
will die (and the bills of mortality for years past justify the supposition) a
score will never see another new year's day. Shall I then repeat the text to
express with probality that this year twenty of us shall die? and shall not
this affect us? I am sure the thought affects me; for some of the twenty may be
the best friends which the society has! But I may proceed to certainty in
applying the text. It is certain, morally certain that some one of us will die
this year. To suppose the contrary were to suppose such a thing as never
happened in any other society of equal number. There stands among you one who
firmly believes that he is the man. But let not that draw the attention of any
other from himself, for probably several more will never see the end of this
year.

I have just now said 'that my text is a word of fear to a wicked man, but a
word of consolation to the righteous'. And of one or the other character are
all present. Shall I suppose here be some of both, and as such address them on
the subject of dying this year?

I. Is there a graceless person in the place, whether young or old or of middle
age? -- If young, and entering on this new year in a condition unfit for death,
must I in thy hearing repeat a text which declares that this year thou shall
die? Can thou hear it without emotion; or be assured that thou art not the
object of the prediction? I trow not. Will thou not then begin to prepare for
dying in the beginning of this year of death? Will thou go on as heretofore?
Forgetting thy creator? Withholding thy neck from his yoke? Avoiding a
profession of his religion? Acting the child of disobedience toward the
duties, the ordinances and calls thereof? Pursuing pleasure and giddiness?
Putting off the care of the soul with reference to eternity, and so die? God
forbid! Thou comely youth! thou fair damsel it must not be! The thought will
distress thy friends and distract thy parents! Alas! alas! that so much
excellency should perish this year! that so much comeliness and beauty should
this year again go to sin and then to hell? I pray you, my young hearers, I
pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled to God this year. If ye seek
him early ye shall find him. Prove. viii. 17. -- If there be a graceless man or
a graceless woman in the assembly, and I should address him in the language of
the text, how will he bear it, or how gainsay it, This year thou shall die! I
hope thou will not bear so awful a denunciation as thou would a light thing?
nor defer a preparation for the event as if sure that thou art not the object
of the prophecy! God forbid! For if thou die this year, and art not born again
this year, thou will this year be in torments! O man! let this beginning of the
year be the beginning of the newness of life with thee, and the end of a
graceless and unconverted state! To be men grown and women grown and that in a
state of guilt and irreligion is to have run too great risques already. Dread
to do so this year also; for it may be the last, and you ruined forever! -- Or
is there an old sinner in this assembly? An ancient man or an ancient woman who
has borne the heat and burden of the day in laboring for all things except
the one thing needful? If there be, let him hear the word of the Lord, this
year thou shall die! Surely it is the eleventh hour with thee! thy gray hairs,
thy feeble and tottering frame and thy broken voice declare it. And will thou
stand idle in the market place till that hour expire with the rest? God forbid.
I have somewhere read this epitaph, HERE LIES AN OLD MAN AGED THREE YEARS; for
three years before his death he had been converted. But if thou die this year,
and art not converted what shall we write on thy tomb? Shall we write, 'Here is
buried an ancient man or an ancient woman aged nothing? Who had not as much as
a being in Christ before his gray hairs went down to the grave? Forbid it,
merciful God! Ancient of days, forbid it!

2. I shift the scene; for I see or believe I see in the assembly some youth,
some men and some women, some ancients and matrons who are ripe for glory. I
rejoice over you; for to each of you a repetition of the text will be the voice
of a charmer and a prophecy of smooth things! This year each may be in heaven!
How is it proved? Thus -- This year thou shall die! My good child! If thou die
this year thou shall be with him that loves little children and that was once
called, the child Jesus! What if thy tongue could but lisp his name while
rehearsing thy catechism the last year? This year may make thee as the babes
and sucklings in the temple, whose mouths uttered perfect praise, for this year
thou shall die? Comely youth and fair damsel! doubly fair and comely because
good! does the text say thou shall die this year? Thine heart replies, So be
it, that I may be in heaven this year, and so be young and fair and comely and
happy forever! Thou man or woman in Christ, Harken! This year thou shall die! O
how good to thee is this word of the Lord; for the desire of thine heart is to
be in heaven. Venerable father or mother in Israel! Ripe for glory art thou,
and desirous to enter upon it! Methinks I see thee in the meeting, like Simeon
or Anna in the (...), embracing thy Lord by faith and (...),ing to depart and
be in heaven. I will do thee a pleasure for the pleasure thou give, this year
thou shall die.

EPISTEYSA DIO ELALSA

