THE DEATH OF ABEL. IN FIVE BOOKS.

ATTEMPTED FROM THE GERMAN of Mr. GESSNER.

LONDON, Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted and Sold by (...) CRUKSHANK, and
ISAAC COLLINS, in (...), opposite the Workhouse, M,DCC,LXX.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
PERMIT me to lay at the foot of Your Throne this volume, which is an attempt
to translate from Your Native Language, a work deservedly admired. I am
sensible it is but a faint representation of the glowing beauties of the
excellent original; yet I flatter myself I have, in some measure, preserved the
ideas, especially those which fill and warm the heart with the love of Virtue.
On this account, and on this only, I presume to hope for your Majesty's
favorable acceptance of the work.

Placed, by the hand of Providence, at an humble distance from the Great, my
cares and pleasures are concentered within the narrow limits of my little
family, and it is in order to contribute to the support and education of my
children, I have taken up the pen. Your Majesty's Patronage will undoubtedly
insure my success: but I am far from hoping that you, Madam, will give Your
Royal Sanction to a performance that has no other merit to plead than the
ill-judg'd, though affectionate industry of a fond mother. If I have attempted a
task for which nature never designed me, it is just that disappointment should
teach me humility and wisdom, and I bow without repining to the stroke.

Confined as my situation is, I shared in the universal joy visible in every
countenance on your Majesty's safe arrival. This general satisfaction was a
most auspicious omen in the beginning of your happy reign. May you, Madam, ever
feel the delight of giving joy to a brave and lo^al People. May your exemplary
virtues, united with those of our bel^ved Sovereign, put wickedness to shame,
and force vice to hide its head. May all ranks, influenced by royal Precedent,
and the manners of Your Court, grow ashamed of licentiousness, inhumanity,
profaneness and dissipation. May the sincere gratitude and love of a reformed,
united and happy People render valuable the splendour of your public Station;
while domestic peace, conjugal felicity, and maternal love, fill with tranquil
delight Your more retired hours. May you see with transport the rising virtues
of a numerous Progeny. May You, Madam, to use the patriarchal language of my
author -- May You, full of days and glory, after having beheld Your Children's
Children flourish round You, late, very late resign an earthly crown, to
receive an everlasting diadem in the realms of bliss and immortality. These are
the ardent wishes of,

MADAM, Yours and His MAJESTY's most dutiful, most devoted, and most obedient
subject and servant, MARY COLLYER.

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
I NOW venture on a more sublime subject than has hitherto employed my pen,
from a desire of knowing whether my abilities will bear a farther trial. This
is a curiosity which ought to influence every man. The public are too apt to
discourage a young poet who has succeeded in one branch of poetry, and are for
confining him to that only in which he has been once successful, as his ne plus
ultra; as if that alone was the very thing in which he could show the whole
strength of his genius, when, perhaps, some external circumstance, or a mere
accident, rather than any particular impulse, determined his choice.

Though a poet who attempts the sublimer parts of poetry were not entitled to
regard from the public, he would find himself amply rewarded in the happy
execution of his voluntary task. To revolve a vast variety of things, to trace
the motives of actions to their original source, to draw characters, and
through intricate occurrences gradually to open interesting events, is attended
with a thousand pleasures Nature is to him an inexhaustible maganine, whence
true genius collects every material that can ornament or embellish his
favorite object: then is the whole mind in action, and talents are awakened
which would very probably have otherwise lain dormant and unknown.

But it will be said, At this rate, we shall have nothing to read but epic
poems and tragedies. They who are apprehensive of such a misfortune should
know, that when I say such compositions will give greater and more various
pleasures than little pieces to the poet, I mean, it will also be the same with
the reader. However, few have leisure or inclination for large performances:
most men are taken up with occupations of a different nature, many will choose
to pay their addresses to a less coy mistress than the epic muse; and I dare
prophecy, we shall never be without masterpieces in every branch of poetry.
Far be it from me to depreciate the light and sportive works of fancy: for
though I wish for more Homers, I yet think Aesop and Anacreon cannot be too
much admired.

Some will be astonished, and others offended, that I have taken for my subject
a Scripture history. The latter, I will suppose, are somewhat advanced in
years, and have, by being immersed in business, and the arduous task of growing
rich, been prevented from looking into new books: these have a zeal for the
honor of their religion, and retain all the prejudices they imbibed in their
youth against poetry, having drawn their knowledge of that divine art from
specimens, which, a very few excepted, were neither worthy to be known or
valued. A poet, in the times of their youth, was esteemed, even by sensible
Germans, only as a droll fellow, a kind of bussoon. But to those who have
perused the Bible with so little sense of its beauties, as to make a sin of
this undertaking, I have nothing to say. They must be void of taste; and to
reason with them would be as ridiculous as to carry a lantern before the blind.
It is to those who are capable of reflection, I would now address myself. I
would wish these to observe, that the works which made poets be considered in a
contemptible light, were wrote in an age when poetry was in its wretched
declension, and far from its original and genuine dignity. It has always been
in the retinue of religion, and is of no small service to it, being the most
energic method of conveying of virtue and devotion. It affords a noble delight
to the understanding, it improves the heart, and excites to whatever is
becoming and praiseworthy. But to answer these salutary purposes, even when it
relaxes and sports, its wit must be decent and pure, and have a tendency to
create a contempt for ribaldry and profaneness. Poetry of the loose kind I
despise and detest from my very soul.

Under the conduct of prudence, virtue and good manners, poetry may be allowed
to take its subject from the great truths of our holy religion. What can be
more proper for the exercise of genius than the sacred history? As Christians
we assent to its truths; as Christians we are all equally concerned in its
important events. The poet if he has the happy art of illustrating the
characters he draws from divine history, with what is probable and pleasing,
and placing them in an instructive view, will have an opportunity of conveying
in the clearest, and most striking manner, the salutary influences of religion
and piety into the hearts of all classes of men, and will be read with pleasure
by people in every situation. If this be attempted by a head unequal to the
task, such compositions, I allow, may do more harm than good: but is not this
equally the case, with all injudicious expositions?

This liberty with the sacred history has been used in all nations; and among
us, even at the time of the reformation, none took umbrage at the dramatic
pieces taken from the scriptures: these were publicly allowed, though their
principal merit was the good intention of their authors, the poetry being far
from elegant.

But a new objector starts up, and cries, at this rate the bible will become a
mere sable. I would ask him, if this has been the fate of profane history?
Homer and Virgil took the subject of their poems from ancient history; but who
ever thought of adjusting those histories by their poems? or who ever in
reading their works, imagined them to be historians, or considered them in any
other light than as poets?

There is yet another numerous class of people to whom I must pay my court:
these are they who are too excessively polite to relish heroes who have a sense
of piety, who talk of religion, who are serious, and affect neither raillery
nor wit. Characters drawn from those exhibited in the days of thinking, must
make a strange appearance to these sons of fashion. Such manners! such
conversation! to them my heroes will appear as odd creatures, as those of ^omer
did to the French, who were offended that they were not Frenchmen. To these
slaves of mode I would whisper it as a secret, that being myself young, and,
like them fond of applause, I will, in order to obtain their suffrages, which
are of mighty importance to my happiness, give this subject a new dress. I will
introduce an amorous intrigue, for what is an epic poem without a love
adventure? Abel shall be a languishing petit maitre; Cain, a rough captain of
the Cossacks, and nothing shall come from the lips of Adam, that is not in
character from an hoary Frenchman, hackney'd in the ways of the world.

THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE.
THE work from which this is attempted, is wrote by Mr. Gessner, of Zurich, in
Swisserland. The rapidity of the sale does honor to the taste of the Swiss and
the Germans, it having passed through three editions in one year.

The subject is the death of Abel, which is the most remarkable event recorded
in sacred history, from the fall to the deluge. The poet has had the art to
augment our interest in the distresses of our primaeval parents, and their
immediate defendants, by the lively and affecting manner in which he manages
the passions, and by the graces and truth he throws into his paintings, while
he describes the simple manners of the first inhabitants of the earth.

All our author's works, of which this is the first that has been translated
into English, are wrote in a kind of loose poetry, unshackled by the tagging of
rhimes, or counting of syllables. This method of writing seems perfectly suited
to the German language, and is of a middle species between verse and prose: it
has the beauties of the first, with the ease of the last. It is not however
peculiar to Mr. Gessner; for in this manner the great Fenelon wrote his
Telemachus, of which the public will soon be favored with an elegant
translation by the able hand of Dr. Hawkesworth.

Of this attempt I am not qualified to speak; were I to decry it, I should be
deemed guilty of affectation; if sincere, I should be certainly arrogant and
rude in offering it to the public, and to praise it would be presumption. But I
will venture to say, that I flatter myself my picture has escaped any glaring
deformity, though it may want many of the almost inimitable graces of the
charming original. That painter must indeed be a dauber who could make a
disagreeable picture, while he attempted to copy a Raphael or a Titian. Such as
it is I leave it to the candor of the reader, believing, that notwithstanding
the loud cry of universal depravity, no one will, without just cause, and in
mere wantonness of cruelty, condemn the assiduous efforts of a female pen.

THE DEATH OF ABEL.
BOOK I.
HENCEFORTH repose in silence, thou soft pipe, no more I render thee vocal, no
more I chant the simple manners of the rustic swain. I would raise my voice to
bolder strains, and in harmonious lays rehearse the adventures of our primaeval
parents after their dreadful fall. I would celebrate him, who sacrificed by a
brother's fury, his dust first mingled with the earth. Come thou noble
Enthusiasm that warm'st and fillest the mind of the wrapped poet, who during
(...) silent hours of night contemplates in the thick grove, or at the side of
a clear stream, enlightened by the moon's pale lamp; seized by a divine
transport, imagination takes her flight, and with bold wing, traversing the
regions of created substances, penetrates into the distant empire of
possibilities, discovering with clear view the marvelous that captivates, and
the beautiful that inchants. Loaded with treasure, she returns to arrange and
construct her various materials. Taught by reason to choose and reject, she,
with a wise economy, admits only what forms harmonious relations. Delightful
employment! Laudable constancy! I honor the bard, who, to excite sentiments of
virtue in the yielding heart, watches the nocturnal song of the grasshopper,
till the rising of the morning star. Posterity will crown the urn of a poet who
consecrates his talents to virtue and to innocence: his name shall not be
forgot: his reputation shall bloom with unfading verdure, while the trophies of
the proud conqueror shall moulder in the dust, and the superb mausoleum of the
tyrant shall stand unknown in the midst of a desert, where human feet have made
no path. Few, it is true, who have ventured on these noble subjects have
received from nature the gi^^ of singing well; but the attempt is laudable: to
it I consecrate my moments of leisure, and all my solitary walks.

The tranquil hours had just given to Aurora the tint of the rose, and
dispelled the vapors of night that had hovered over the shadowy earth, while
the sun beginning to dart his first rays behind the black cedars of the
mountain, tinged with radiant purple the half-enlighten'd clouds; when Abel and
his beloved Thirza left their leafy couch, and repaired to a neighboring bower
composed of interwoven jessamine and roses. The tenderest love and the purest
virtue shone with mildest beams in the fine blue eyes of Thirza, and gave
attractive graces to the carnation of her cheeks: while her fair locks waving
in ringlets on her snowy neck, and hanging with a becoming negligence down her
back, added to the beauty of her fine and delicate form. Thus she walked by the
side of Abel, whose high forehead was shaded with ringlets of the palest brown,
reaching no lower than his shoulders. An air of thought and reflection was
agreeably mixed with the sweet serenity of his looks, and he moved with the
easy grace of an angel, who charged with the gracious behests of the Most High,
becomes visible to the raptured saint in an human form; but the veil be assumes
is of such ravishing beauty, that through it shines the angel. Thirza, with a
look of affection, and a tender smile, cried, O my love now the birds awake,
and begin to chant their morning song, let me hear the hymn thou yesterday sung
in these smiling pastures, and let me join also in the rapturous employment of
praising the Lord. The melody of thy lips inspires my heart with an holy
transport, and nothing can charm me more than to hear thee utter in proper
terms the sensations I feel, but am unable to express. Abel tenderly embracing
her, replied, My lovely Thirza, thy request shall be immediately granted. I no
sooner read thy wishes in thine eyes, than with a lover's haste, I strive to
fulfill them. They then seated themselves in the fragrant bower, whose entrance
was gilded by the morning sun, and Abel thus began:

Retire, O sleep, from every eye. Fly ye hovering dreams: reason again resumes
her throne; again she illumines the mind, as the morning sun enlightens the
fertile earth. We hail thee, resplendent sun, who dartest thy beams from behind
the cedars; thy friendly rays give light and color to re-animated nature, and
every beauty smiles with newborn graces.

Retire, O sleep, from every eye. Fly ye hovering dreams to the shades of
night. Where are now the shades of night? They have fled to the caves of the
rocks; they wait us in the thick grove; we shall find them there, and be
refreshed by their coolness during the sultry heat of noon. See where the
newborn day first wakes the eagle; where, on the glittering summits of the
rocks and the shining sides of the mountains, the exhalations ascend and mix
with the pure air of the morning, as the smoke of burnt offerings arise from
the altar. Thus nature celebrates the returning light, and pays to nature's God
the sacrifice of grateful praise. Praise him all things that exist; praise him
whose wisdom and goodness produced and preserves all. Ye springing flowers
exhale the sweets he gave you in his praise. Ye winged inhabitants of the
grove, pour forth the warbling of your little throats to his praise, who gave
you voice and melody; while the majestic lion pays him honor with the terrors
of his mouth, and makes the caverns of the rocks re-echo his praise. Praise
God, O my soul! praise God, the Creator and Preserver. Let the voice of man
reach thy throne, O Lord, before that of thy other creatures: in the gray
twilight, at the dawn of the morning, while the birds and beasts yet sleep, ^ay
my solitary song find acceptance, and invite the reviving creation to praise
Thee, the Creator and Preserver. How magnificent are thy works, O God! wisdom
and goodness are stamped on all. Wherever I turn my eyes, I perceive the traces
of Thy bounty; each sense is transported and conveys their infinite beauties to
my ravished mind. O God! weak and frail as I am, fain would I attempt thy
praise. What induced Thee, Maker Omnipotent! for ever happy in Thyself, to call
from nothing this gay creation! what induced Thee, Thou Self existent, to form
man out of the dust, and to give him the breath of life? It was Thine infinite
goodness. Thou gave him being that Thou might confer on him happiness. O
smiling Morn! in thee I see a lively image of the work of the great Creator,
when the sun disperses the vapors of the earth, and drives night before his
steps, all nature revives with renewed luster. The Almighty spoke! Silence and
night heard his voice: he commanded, and miriads of living creatures emerg'd
from the teeming earth, fluttered in the air with variegated plumage, and
rendered the astonished woods vocal with the praises of the beneficent Creator.
Earth again hears the voice of her Almighty Maker: the heaving clods rise in
innumerable shapes and burst into life and motion. The new formed horse bounds
over the verdant turf, and neighing shakes his main, while the strong lion,
impatient to free himself from the cumbrous earth, attempts his first roaring.
A hill, teeming with life, appears in motion; it bursts, it sinks, and from it
stalks the huge unweildy elephant. -- These are thy works, O thou Omnipotent!
Each morn thou call thy creatures from sleep, the image of nonexistence;
they awake surrounded by thy bounties, and join unanimous to chant thy praise.
The time will come when thy praise shall resound from every corner of the
peopled earth; when thine altars shall blaze on every hill, and man shall
celebrate thy wondrous works from the rising to the setting day.

Thus sang Abel, seated by his beloved Thirza. He ceased; yet she, filled with
a divine transport, seemed still to hear. At length, encircling him in her
snowy arms, while her eyes beamed tenderness, she cried, O my love! the music
of thy lips raises my mind to God. Thy endearing care not only protects my
feebler body; but under thy direction my soul itself takes her flight: thou art
her guide amidst obscurity of doubt and darkness, thy wisdom dissipates the
clouds, and turns her astonishment into devout ecstasy. How often have I,
inspired by gratitude, rendered thanks to God Most High for having created me
for thee, and thee for me. O my love! unanimous in every wish we were formed to
bless each other.

While she spoke, conjugal tenderness diffused inexpressible graces on every
word and every gesture. Abel remained silent; but his softened look while he
snatched her to his bosom, and the tear just starting from his glistening eye,
spoke unutterable love. Thus happy was man, thus pure his delights. The
fruitful earth refreshed and fitted him for action by her bounties. Contented
with necessaries, he asks of Heaven only Virtue and Health. Luxury and
Discontent had not yet filled him with insatiable desires, which, inventive of
numberless wants, bury happiness under a load of splendid miseries. An union of
heart then formed the nuptial tie. No fear of wasting penury, or the frown of a
tyrannic parent; no low ambition, no want of lands or gold, then kept the soft
maid from the fond bosom of the youth she loved. These cares are thy gifts, O
Luxury!

Abel and Thirza were still seated, when Adam and Eve entered the bower. They
had listened with delight to the song of Abel, and had heard Thirza vent the
effusions of her fondness. They now tenderly embraced their children, while
their hearts expanded with parental affection, and a lively joy glowed on their
cheeks.

Mahala, Cain's spouse, had followed the footsteps of her mother, and had been
witness to the happiness of her brother and sister. Her pure mind was free from
envy, baleful passion! yet dejection sat on her countenance, a mild languor
appeared in her eyes, sorrow had faded the bloom once seen on her now palid
cheek. She had heard Thirza express her gratitude to Heaven, for having been
created for Abel, and he for her. Their mutual tenderness forced tears from her
eyes, and sighs from her pained bosom, while sad remembrance drew the
comparison between the two husbands. But soon she wiped away the pourly drops,
and with a graceful smile entered the bower, where with cordial affection she
saluted her brother and sister.

At the same time Cain passing by the fragrant shade, had heard Abel's
melodious voice, and had beheld his delighted father tenderly embrace him. At
this sight Envy fixed her envenomed sting in his heart, and he, giving a
furious look at the bower, cried, What signs of joy are here! What fond
caresses! I too might sing were my days, like his, spent in idly reclining in
the shade, while the flocks were sporting or cropping the green herbage: but I
am not made for singing. Rugged labor is my inheritance: though I turn the
glebe; though I break the stubborn earth, cursed for my father's sin with
barrenness, yet my fatigues meet with no such fond rewards: did my soft brother
but toil, like me, one day beneath the scorching sun, 'twould spoil his music;
he would trill no songs. -- What, more embraces! how I hate this effeminate
dalliance; but if that fair youth be pleased, no matter what I hate.

Cain then with hasty step walked on. He had been overheard, and his discontent
had filled the happy family in the bower with deep concern. Mahala became still
more pale, and dissolving in tears sunk down by the side of Thirza; while Eve,
reclining on her husband, lamented the obduracy of her firstborn. O, my much
loved parents, cried Abel, I will follow my unhappy brother. I will embrace
him, and say whatever fraternal love can dictate, to engage his affection. I Will
try every art of persuasion to make him forget his anger. I will not leave him
till he promises to love me. I have searched into the very bottom of my soul,
to know by what means I may regain him, and find a way to his heart. Sometimes
I have rekindled his extinguished love; but alas! too soon the gloom returns,
and sullen sadness damps the sacred flame.

With troubled look Adam answered, I myself, my beloved Abel, will go to your
brother. Reason and paternal love shall unite their force to combat his
obduracy; he will not, surely, resist the authority and tenderness of an
afflicted father. O Cain, Cain, with what torturing cares do thou fill my
heart! The tumult of tyrannic passions has chased from thy soul every sentiment
of benevolence and virtue. O sin! fatal sin! terrible is the desolation thou
spreadest in the human breast. What gloomy presages torture my sad bosom, when
I look through futurity, and behold thy ravages among my unhappy offspring.
Thus spoke the father of mankind. Grief sat heavy on his venerable brow. He
left the bower, and, with hasty step, sought his first born. Cain beheld him
coming, and, ceasing from his labor, thus began: What means this sternness in
my father's look? It was with no such air of severity thou came to embrace my
brother. -- Why do thine eyes reproach me?

Thou would not, my son, have read reproach in mine eyes, returned Adam,
were thou not conscious thou deserve it. Yes, Cain, thou deservest reproach,
and thy offended father is come to thee in all the bitterness of grief.

Without any love, interrupted Cain; that sensation is reserved for Abel.

With love also, resumed Adam, Heaven is my witness. I love thee with a
father's fondness. These tears, these inquietudes and anxious cares that
agitate me, and no less her who brought thee forth with pain, have their source
in the most affectionate love. It Is this tender love and concern for thy
happiness, that casts a gloom over our days. It Is this love that causes the
silence of the night to be interrupted by our sighs and lamentations. O Cain,
Cain! did thou love us, it would be thy most earnest care to dry up our
tears, and to dispel that cloud of grief which darkens our days and fills them
with horror. Ah! if thou still retainest in thy breast any respect for the
Omniscient Creator, to whom the inmost recesses of thine heart are open: if the
least spark of filial love to us, thy parents, still remains in thine obdurate
soul, I conjure thee by that respect, and that love, to restore us to our lost
peace. -- Restore, O my son, our extinguished joy. Nourish no longer against
thy brother, who loves thee with a sincere affection, this ruthless hatred. He
longs to embrace thee. Gladly would he clear thy mind from the tares of
discontent with which it is overrun. O Cain! thou were my firstborn, the
beginning of my strength. When thine infant eyes opened to the light, I beheld
thee with all the father in my heart. Wherefore then is thy soul disquieted?
why does Envy dwell in thy bosom, because I rejoice too in thy brother? His
refined and exalted piety drew from us tears of joy, and we in the sweet
transport caressed him. The angels who surround us, applaud every good action;
the Almighty himself looks down from heaven's high arch, and regards with
complacency the grateful offerings of a thankful heart. Would thou change the
invariable nature of beauty and goodness? This is not in our power, and if it
were, Cain, how must we be depraved before we could wish to withstand the noble
joy, the tender, the exquisite feelings, that high raised devotion and exalted
virtue create in the enraptured soul. Darkness, storms, and the thunders of
heaven call forth no gentle smile on the human countenance; as little do the
agitation of boisterous passions cause joy to spring up in the human heart.

Cain sternly answered: Is reproach then all that I am to hear from a father's
lips? If my face does not always wear a pleasing smile; if tears of tenderness
do not follow each other down my cheek, am I for this to be branded with
detestable vices? Born with more firmness, bold enterprises and severe toils
have ever been my choice. Nature has stamped on my forehead a manly gravity. I
cannot weep or smile at every trifle. Does the towering eagle coo like the
timorous dove?

Adam, with majestic gravity, returned: Thou deceivest thyself; thou harbourest
in thy bosom horrid sentiments, that will rankle in thine heart, and render
thee wretched if they are not stifled. O Cain! it is not manly gravity that is
stamped on thy brow; it is envy, sorrow, and gloomy discontent. These are seen
in thine eyes; the disturbance of thy mind is visible in thy whole deportment.
Thine inward dejection, O my son! has spread a dense cloud over all thy
prospects. Hence arise thy continual murmurs, thy peevishness and passion
during the labors of the day. Hence thy unsocial aversion to us: hence the
black melancholy to which thou art a prey. Tell, oh tell thine affectionate
father, what will give thee ease. It is his ardent wish that thy days may pass
serene as the vernal morn. What cause have thou, O Cain! to be disquieted? are
not all the springs of happiness open to thee? Indulgent nature offers to thee
all her beauties. The good, the useful, the agreeable, are they not thine as
well as ours? Why then do^^ thou leave the blessings of Heaven untasted, and
complainest of wretchedness? Is it because thou art dissatisfied with the
portion of happiness the divine bounty has been pleased to bestow on fallen
man? Is not every blessing the undeserved gift of infinite goodness? Do thou
envy the lot of angels? Know that the angels were susceptible of discontent,
and by aspiring to become gods, forfeited heaven. Would thou arraign the
dispensations of the Most High toward his sinful creatures? While the whole
creation in universal concert praise the Creator, shall guilty man, a worm,
sprung from the mud, dare to lift up the head, and carp at him whose infinite
wisdom regulates the wide expanse of heaven; to whom all futurity is present;
and who, by His unerring providence, can cause evil to be productive of good.
Be cheerful, O my son; cast far from thee this sadness and discontent: let it
no longer disturb thy thoughts; no longer throw a frightful gloom over the
natural serenity of thy countenance. Open thy heart to every social affection,
and look with a grateful complacency on all innocent pleasures which nature
displays before thee.

What need of all these exhortations? cried Cain. Do I not know, that was my
heart at ease, every thing around me would give me delight? but can I silence
the storm, or bid the impetuous torrent flow in a placid stream? I am born of
woman, and from my nativity sentenced to misery. On my unhappy head the
Almighty has poured forth the cup of malediction. It is not for me nature
displays her beauties, nor do the streams of bliss, of which you take such
plentiful draughts, flow for me.

Alas! my son, said Adam, with a voice rendered almost inarticulate by his
strong emotions and his tears; it is but too true, that the Divine malediction
was pronounced on all born of woman, but why, Oh why should thou believe that
God has poured on thee, our firstborn, more of his wrath, than on us the first
transgressors? No, this is not, this cannot be the case: sovereign goodness
contradicts it. No, my dear son, thou were not born for misery; the beneficent
Creator never called any of his creatures into being to render them unhappy.
Man may, indeed, by his own folly make himself wretched. If he suffers his
reason to yield to impetuous passions, ignorant of true felicity, he may render
his life a burden, and convert what is naturally good and salutary into a
destructive poison. Thou can not silence the storm, nor stop the rapidity of
the torrent; but thou cursed dispel the clouds of discontent that obscure thy
^eason, and restore to thy soul its original light. Thou can force into
subjection every impetuous passion, every irregular desire. Gain, O my son,
this noble victory over thyself, and it will refine thy sentiments: thy whole
^oul will be illumined: darkness and distress will vanish (...) the mist of the
dawn before the solar ray. There was a time, my dear son, when I have seen even
thee shed tears: when from the gratulations of conscience, joy has spread
itself through all thy powers; delightful fruit of virtuous actions! I refer it
to thyself, Cain, were thou not then happy? was not thy soul like the clear
azure of the heavens, unclouded, unspotted? Recover that beam of the Deity,
reason: let her clear light direct thy steps, and virtue, her inseparable
companion, will restore joy and permanent felicity to thy purified heart.
Listen, O Cain! and comply with the advice of thy father. The first injunction
that reason lays on thee is, to embrace thy brother. With what joy will he
receive thy endearments! with what tenderness will he return them!

Father, replied Cain, when at the heat of noon I rest from my labor, I will
embrace him. I cannot now leave the field. I promise I will obey thee and
embrace my brother: but -- while I breathe, my firm soul will never be
dissolved to that effeminate weakness, that so endears him to you, and makes
your eyes run over with transport. To a softness like this we all owe the curse
denounced against us, when in paradise you weakly suffered yourself to be
overcome by a woman's tears. -- But what do I say? dare I reproach my father?
No, my venerable parent, I reverence thee, and am silent. Thus spoke Cain, and
returned to his labor.

Adam remained motionless with his hands and eyes raised to heaven. At length
in a tone of deep distress, he cried, O Cain! Cain I have deserved these
cutting reproaches: but should thou not have spared thy father? Should thou
not have forborne this cruel charge; which, like a clap of thunder, shakes my
tortured soul? Ah me! thus will my latest posterity, when immersed in sin, they
feel the pangs in^^parable from guilt, rise up against my dust, and curse the
first sinner. Having thus spoke, Adam with pensive eyes fixed on the earth,
slowly withdrew. The groans that burst from the agitated bosom of the afflicted
father, now struck even this obdurate son with remorse, and he cried, gazing
after him, What a wretch am I! How could I reproach so good, so tender a
parent? How have I loaded him with grief! I still hear his groans. -- I see him
lift up his supplicating hands to heaven. -- Perhaps, vile as I am, he prays
even for me; for me who have torn his heart with keen distress! Oh that I too
could pray! but I am a monster, -- hell is in my bosom, and like a ravaging
whirlwind, I destroy the peace of all around me. Return, O Reason return!
Return, O Virtue! chase from my troubled soul these wild and darkening
passions. -- Still -- still he prays. O how his emotions reproach me! -- His
clasped hands are again raised in agony. -- He seems spent. -- I will at his
feet implore his pardon. -- O my rash tongue -- my rebellious heart!

Cain then ran toward Adam, who was leaning against a tree, with his weeping
eyes fixed on the ground. He threw himself on the earth, and cried, forgive me
-- forgive me, O my father! I deserve thou should turn from me with
abhorrence. I abhor myself; but while I am thus humbled before thee in the dust
-- while I thus grasp thy knees, despise not my repentance -- despise not my
tears. My hardened heart resisted thine exhortations with a sullen pride: but O
my injured father! thy distress and thy groans have melted my obdurate soul. A
beam from heaven has enlightened my benighted mind. With unfeigned sorrow and
deep contrition, I see my folly -- I see my guilt -- I know that I am unworthy
of thy love. Yet, O my dear and venerable parent! reject not these penitential
tears -- reject not the sincere submissions of my heart. O my father! I implore
pardon of God, of thee, and of my brother.

Rise, my son, rise, cried Adam, affectionately embracing him, and raising him
to his bosom; the Most High, who dwells in the heavens, beholds with
complacency these tears of repentance. Embrace me, my son, and receive thy
joyful father's forgiveness and cordial embrace. Blessed time! happy hour! in
which my son, my firstborn, res^ores our tranquillity. O my child! joy, excess
of joy has weakened all my powers. Support me my son, and let us hasten to thy
brother, that my satisfaction may be completed by beholding your mutual
endearments.

Adam leaning on Cain, walked toward the pastures. Abel with his mother and
sisters met them in the grove: they had followed Adam at a distance; they had
seen his emotions, and with delight had beheld the repentance and tears of
Cain. Abel, the moment he saw his brother, flew to him with open arms: he
clasped them around him with a strenuous grasp, unable for some time to give
vent, but from his eyes, to the sweet effusions of his heart. At length he
cried, O my brother -- my dear brother! thou then love me! -- love me with
fondness! let me hear thy lips pronounce that thou still love me, and my
happiness will be complete. Yes, my brother, answered Cain, while he pressed
him with a warm embrace, I do, indeed, sincerely love thee. May I hope thou will forgive my having so long embitter'd thy days by my unkindness, and the
fury of my boisterous passions. I too, my brother, was unhappy; but reason,
like the rapid flash of heaven, broke through the gloom, and has dispersed the
baleful tempest. Never, Abel, never may thou remember my former darkness.

The delighted Abel, with increased rapture replied, Never my dear Cain. Be the
past utterly forgotten: who would dwell on the distressful illusions of a
morning dream, when they might, like me, awake to real happiness, surrounded by
multiplied delights. O my dear brother! words have not power to express my
transports -- to express the sweet joy with which my soul is filled, while I
thus press thee, my brother! my friend! to my throbbing heart.

Eve, who had with tender delight beheld this moving scene, sprang to her sons,
and throwing her maternal arms around them both, while delicious tears of
joyful sympathy ran down h^^ cheeks, cried, O my sons! my dearly beloved
children, never did I, since I have borne the tender name of mother, feel such
exquisite, such rapturous sensations. The griefs, which like the weight of a
cumberous ^nountain oppressed my soul, are now removed. My heart will no more
be torn by the unhappy disagreement of those whom I carried in my womb, and
nourished with my breast. I shall now see -- transported I shall see peace and
harmony, joy and love dwell among my happy offspring. As the fruitful vine is
blessed by the thirsty labourer, when refreshed by its delicious fruit, so will
my now united children bless me as the instrument of their felicity. Let me, my
sons, join you in this sweet embrace. Let me too, my daughters, press you to my
bosom. With what joy do I participate in the unspeakable ecstasy visible in the
faces of my dear children, and on that of my much loved husband! She then
turned toward Adam; her matron lip met his, while conjugal tenderness and
parental love were seen blended in her still glistening eye.

The beauteous sisters, though silent, shared the general rapture. Mahala, Cain's
spouse, when disengaged from her mother's fond embrace, said, while vivacity
and joy sparkled in her altered features, Let us, my dearest Thirza, choose the
fairest flowers to deck our bower, delightful seat of peace and happiness!
We'll strip the bending branches of their luscious load to form the rich
repast. This day, this happy day we'll consecrate to mirth and innocent
festivity, indulging every virtuous transport, we'll, with united hearts,
welcome the newborn joy. She then with nimble feet, followed by Thirza, ran to
prepare the sweet refreshing banquet.

Adam and his spouse, attended by their so^s, walked flowly on. Ere they had
reached the bower, the active sisters had, with lavish hand, bespread the green
carpet: fruits of various sorts offered their juices, while variegated flowers
lent their odours, and cheered the eye with their bright tints. Their feast was
elegant; but it was the elegance of nature: no darts of death, hid in rich
sauces, struck, with inhospitable blow, the unthinking guest. Contentment sat
on every face; in every eye beamed sweet complacency. Social converse and
unmixed delight gave rapidity to the flight of time, while the unheeded hours
brought on mild evening.

BOOK II.
WHILE the first family of the world wore in (...) bower indulging domestic
bliss, the father of mankind thus spoke. It is now, my children, you experience
the delight of self-approbation. The recollection of a good action diffuses a
pleasing serenity through the soul. Nothing my sons, nothing but the practice
of virtue can render us truly happy. Virtue makes us capable of the enjoyments
of those pure spirits who surround the throne of God. While we follow the
dictates of reason, while we enjoy with gratitude and love the blessings of
nature, and have humble hope and confidence in God our Maker, we anticipate the
delights of heaven; but if we suffer our passions to degrade and subdue us,
inquietude, distress, and misery will darken our prospects: in vain will the
heavens smile, in vain will the fruitful earth pour forth her bounties. Believe
me, my dear children! believe a father made wise by his own fatal experience,
the joys of sin are followed by shame, sorrow, and bitter repentance. O Eve,
continued Adam, once the dear partner of my distress, as now of my happiness,
could we have thought, when with streaming eyes, and hearts torn with anguish,
we took leave of paradise, that so much felicity was to be found on earth.
Never will the horrors of that dreadful hour be effaced from my mind. My
father, returned Abel, if the recital of past griefs will not be displeasing,
if the recollection will not throw a gloom on this hour of reconcilement and
joy, gladly would I hear from thee the events of thy life, from that fatal
moment to the present time.

All looked on Adam with the eye of expectation: all seemed pleased with the
request of Abel, and the first of men replied, What, my children, can I refuse
in this day of joyful gratulation? I will relate to you the principal
occurrences of those times of affliction and grief, of consolation and mercy,
when God, even that God whom we had offended, deigned to cheer by his promises
fallen man. Where, O Eve, dear companion in every woe and in every delight!
shall I begin the interesting narative? shall it be from our first leaving the
garden of God? -- But I see thy tears already flow. My tears, returned our
general mother, are now those of devout thankfulness and humbre love, not the
bitter ones of shame, sorrow and sad regret. Begin, dear Adam, at my taking a
last look on the forfe^ted seat of bliss. In that dreadful moment shame and
remorse for the past, and agonizing fear for the future, raised such a conflict
in my wretched bosom, that I sunk into thine arms, wishing for the immediate
execution of a threatening, that was to confound me with my original dust. What
I then felt, permit me to des^ribe. Thy tenderness for me, will, I know, make
thee pass too lightly over the melting scene.

The angel of the Lord, on whose countenance shone benignity and soft
compassion, was commissioned to drive us out of paradise. He soothed us with
gentle words, cheered us with promises, and bid us hope and put our trust in
the clemency of our All-merciful creator: but the sword, in his hand flamed
terrible. At Eden's gate he stopped. I guard, said he, this passage, no more
must enter here aught that defiles. We were n^w travelers on the vast earth;
paradise was irretrievably lost: the country we crossed seemed one wide and
dreary desert; ^o fruitful trees, no flowery shrubs, no fertile spot cheered
our sad eyes. Adam held my hand, I frequently cast despairing looks toward the
seat of lost felicity, not presuming to raise my guilty eyes to the victim of
my folly, and compa^^on of my misery. Sorrow bent his head to the ground, and
we walked on distressed and silent. Adam surveyed with anxious eye the
uncultivated earth, then cast a pitying look at me, and, to sooth my
overflowing sorrows, gently pressed me to his breast.

We had ascended an high hill, and now going down the declivity, every step
diminished our view of Eden; my heart was rent with agony, and my grief
deprived me of motion. Now, now, cried I, sobbing, I behold for the last time
paradise, my natal soil: blessed seat of innocence and joy, for the last time I
behold thee! Ye flowers, once cultivated by my care^ul hand, who now enjoys
your sweets? What eye is charmed with your bright colors! Ye trees, who now
shall prop your loaded branches? who now shall taste your rich produce?
Delightful bowers, farewell, -- farewell dear shades, no more shall these sad
eyes behold your verdure, b^nish'd for ever from your sweet retreats! 'Twas
there, d^^r partner of my sin and shame! thou asked of Heaven an help-mate to
double and to share thy bliss. Alas! thy prayer was granted, and thine own side
produced thy ruin. Our maker formed us p^r^ and spotless; while innocent, the
happy spirits, who be^old the face of God, deigned with complacency to visit
our blessed abode: deigned to instruct us in our duty; to warn us of our danger.
What are we now? -- dreadful degradation! O Adam! thy perfidious wi^e ^as
involved thee, by her seductions in sin and sorrow. Yet dear accomplice, to
whom with awe I raise my pitying eye, do not hate me. Thou have a right to
curse me; -- But, O dear spouse! if I may still call thee by that tender name,
use it not; for thou art my sole support. By that God whom we have offended, by
the cheering promises of his indulgent goodness, I conjure thee not to forsake
me. All I request is, that I may follow and serve thee. -- I will watch thy
looks, -- I will anticipate thy commands; happy if my obedience, my weak
services gain from thee a pitying smile, a look of soft compassion.

Here my strength and voice failed, I was sinking to the earth; but my dear
husband caught me in his arms, and pressed me, with a look of affection, to his
heart. O Eve! he cried, whom I still, and always will tenderly love, let us not
heighten our keen distress by self-reproach. Our God, in the midst of
punishment, has remembered mercy. He has softened his chastisements by his
promises. Veiled as these promise are in a sacred obscurity, the Divine
Goodness appears with sensible radiance, and we will hope in his mercy. We will
not reproach ourselves -- we will not reproach each other. O my dearest! had
our God only consulted his just indignation, where should we both have been
now? We will praise him for his goodness, our lips shall bless his name. Our
voices shall only be heard in thanksgiving, humble supplications and
expressions of endearment and love. Our Judge is ^mniscient, with him there is
no darkness. He sees the humiliation of our souls; he beholds our gratitude,
our sincere contrition: He knows our weakness, and will accept of our feeble
efforts to regain perfection. Embrace me, my dearest wife! Let us, by mutual
tenderness, and acts of kindness, endeavor to alleviate our calamity.

Adam ceased (...). His words and tender (...) gave ease to my oppressed heart,
and strength and activity to my enfeebled limbs. We proceeded to the bottom of
(...) hill, where we found a grove of poplars, which extended to the foot of a
rock. Eve then giving her husband a look of affection, was silent, and Adam
thus continued:

We advanced, my children, through the grove, and found in the rock a cavity that
formed a grotto. See, dearest Eve, said I, see the convenience offered us by
nature: this grotto will afford us shelter, and this pure spring that murmuring
flows from its side, will slake our thirst. We'll here prepare our lodging:
but, my dearest wise, before we sleep I must secure the entrance, to keep us
from being surpised by nocturnal enemies: What enemies? returned Eve, with
emotion: What enemies have we to fear? Have thou not remarked, my love, said I,
that the curse of our sin has fallen on the whole creation: the bands of
friendship are broken between the animals, and the weak are now become the prey
of the strong. I have seen a young lion pursue with fatal rage a frighted roe.
I have beheld a war in the air among the birds. We can no longer claim a right
to command the animals: the spotted leopard, the brindled lion and fierce tiger
no more fawn on us, nor play their wanton gambols in our sight; but cast
against us frightful roarings, while their blazing eyes threaten destruction.
We will try to gain by our kindness those among the beasts that are most
tractable, and Providence has given us reason which will teach us to secure
ourselves from the most savage.

Eve, with timid looks, keeping me in her sight, went to gather flowers and
leaves to form our bed, and fruit for our repast. In the mean time I secured
the entrance of the grotto with entwined brambles. My spouse, hastened by fear,
quickly performed her task, and returning, rested herself before me on the
tender grass.

We soon after entered the grotto, and seating ourselves on our bed of
intermingled leaves and flowers, began our frugal meal; seasoned, however, with
mutual endearments, and grateful converse; when a gloomy cloud suddenly
obscured the declining sun. It spread over our heads with increasing darkness,
and the black veil which covered the earth seemed to presage the destruction of
all nature. A tempestuous wind arose: it bellowed in the mountains: it
overthrew the trees of the forest. Flames darted from the clouds, and loud
bursts of thunder augmented the horrors of this tremendous scene. Eve struck
with terror, threw herself, scarce breathing, into my arms, and clinging to my
breast, cried, He comes! -- he comes! in flames he comes to bring the
threatened death! -- How dreadful! -- For my sin he comes to give death to us
and to all nature! -- O Adam! -- O my love! -- Here her voice failed, and she
remained trembling and pale on my bosom. Be calm, my love! I cried: compose
thyself, we will with bended knees and contrite hearts adore our God, who in
terrible majesty comes riding on the clouds. His thunders proclaim his
approach: the darting fires mark his passage. O Thou Eternal, who with
benignity and goodness tempered the insupportable radiance of thy divinity,
when I first came from thy creating hand, Thou art terrible in judgment, yet
suffer us not to be consumed by thy wrath. Destroy us not, O God! in Thy hot
displeasure.

We then prost^^^ed ourselves at the entrance of the grotto, and with ^^^e
countenances and trembling lips, offered up our adorations, expecting when our
awful Judge would from the clouds, pronounce by his thunders, Die, ye
ungrateful! and let the earth that bore you be dissolved by the fire of my
indignation!

The clouds now poured forth their torrents: livid flames no longer flashed
from the heavens, and the thunder rolled at a distance. I raised my head from
the ground, saying, The Almighty, my dear Eve has passed by. He has not
destroyed the earth: we are yet permitted to live. He has remembered his
promises. Eternal Wisdom, Everlasting Truth repents not. He will fulfill the
designs of his mercy; and thy seed, O Eve! shall bruise the head of the serpent.

We arose and were comforted. The heavens resumed their brightness, and the
setting sun spread a mild radiance through the sky, like the luminous track we
used to behold in Eden, when legions of angels were carried above our heads on
the flying clouds. Silence reigned over the moist fields, the herbage and
flowers, still glittering with the drops of heaven, glowed with more than usual
beauty. The departing sun darted on us his last beams, while we celebrated with
reverential awe, and thankful love, the wisdom, power, and mercy of our Creator.

Thus passed the first day after our leaving Paradise. The ruddy evening gave
place to the gray twilight, and soon the earth was only enlightened by the
moon's feeble rays. We now for the first time were chilled by the cold of the
night, though a few hours before we had almost faintd under the ardent rays of
the scorching sun at noon. Our Beneficient Maker had condescended to gird our
loins with with the skins of beasts before our leaving Paradise, to show that
he had not withdrawn from us his succouring hand; in these we wrapped
ourselves, and lying down on our leafy bed, hand in hand, waited the approach
of sleep.

Sleep, the relief of the weary, at length came; but it was unaccompany'd with
that soft ease, that sweet delight which blessed our slumbers while innocent: our
imagination then presented none but smiling and agreeable images. Inquietude,
fear and remorse, did not then keep us waking the tedious hours of darkness,
nor mingle in our dreams with fantastic phantoms. The heavens were however
calm, and our rest was undisturbed: but Oh! how different from that delicious
night when I led thee, my spouse, for the first time, to the nuptial bower! The
flowers and odoriferous shrubs charmed with new sweetness. Never was the
warbling of the nightingale so harmonious; never did the pale moon shine with
such radiance: But why do I dwell on images that awaken my grief, now hushed to
silence?

We slept till the morning sun had exhaled the limpid dew. When we awoke we
found ourselves refreshed and fitted for labor, and enjoyed with delight and
gratitude the harmony of the birds, who were celebrating with their sweetest
notes the renewed light: their number yet was but small: for there were then no
other animals on earth but those who, instructed by divine instinct, had after
the fall, fled from Paradise, that the garden of the Lord might not be defiled
by death.

We offered up our adorations at the entrance of the grotto; after which, I
said to Eve, We will, my love, go farther and view this immense country: our
All-merciful God has given us liberty of choice. We may fix our abode where the
earth is most fertile; where Nature is most profuse of her beauties. See
thou, Eve, that river, which, like a ^uge serpent, winds in bright slopes
through the meadows. The hill on its bank, seems at this distance like a garden
full of trees, and its top is covered with verdure. My dear spouse, returned
Eve, pressing my hand to her bosom, I shall follow with delight the steps of
thee, my conductor and guard. We will pursue our walks toward the hill.

We were going on when we saw, just above our heads, a bird fly with feeble
wing: its feathers were rough and disordered: it cast forth plaintive cries,
and, having fluttered a little in the air, sunk down without strength among the
bushes. Eve went to seek it, and beheld another lie without motion on the
grass, which that we had before seen seemed to lament. My spouse stooping over
it, examined it with fixed attention, and in vain tried to rouse it from what
she believed to be sleep. It will not wake, said she to me, in a fearful voice,
laying the bird from her trembling hand. -- It will not wake. -- It will never
wake more! She then burst into tears, and speaking to the lifeless bird, said,
Alas! the poor bird who piere'd my ears with his cries, was perhaps thy mate.
It is I! -- It is I! unhappy that I am, who have brought misery and grief on
every creature! For my sin these pretty harmless animals are punished. Her
tears redoubled. What an event! said she, turning to me. How stiff and cold it
is! It has neither voice nor motion. Its joints no longer bend^ (...) limbs
refuse their office. Speak Adam, is this death. (...) it is. -- How I tremble!
An icy cold runs through my bones. If the death with which we are threatened is
like this, how terrible! -- What dearest Adam! would become of me, if, like the
feathered mate of this poor bird, I am left behind to mourn? Or what of thee,
if death tear me from thy fond arms? Should God create another Eve to fill my
forfeit place in thy loved bosom, she will not -- cannot love like me, thy
partner in distress and banishment. Unable to say more, she wept, she sobb'd,
and her expressive eyes tenderly fixed on mine, made my feeling heart partake
her anguish. I pressed her to my breast: I kissed her cheek, and mixed my tears
with hers. Cease, dearest Eve, I cried, these fond complaints. Dry up thy
tears. Have confidence in the Supreme Being, who governs all his creatures by
his infinite wisdom. Though we cannot penetrate into the designs of his
Providence: though his majestic tribunal is surrounded by darkness, we may rest
assured, that Mercy and Love remain near his throne. Why, my love, should we
anticipate misfortunes? Why should we, guided by a gloomy imagination, seek for
them in futurity? Was our reason given us only to make us wretched? Shall we
ungratefully turn our eyes from the repeated instances of the loving kindness
and tender mercy of our God, at the hazard of plunging ourselves in misery by
our blindness? It is his wisdom, and his goodness that regulate and appoint
what shall befall us. Let us with humble confidence proceed under his direction,
and devoutly acquiesce in his appointments, without seeking to know what he
has not condescended to reveal.

We now advanced to the eminence. Its gentle ascent was almost covered with
bushes and fertile shrubs. On the summit, in the midst of fruit trees, grew a
lofty cedar, whose thick branches formed an extensive shade, which was rendered
more cool and delightful by a limpid brook, that ran in various windings among
the flowers. This spot afforded a prospect so immense, that the sight was only
bounded by the dusky air; the sky forming a concave around us, that appeared,
wherever we turned, to touch the distant mountains. Here, said I, my dearest
love, we will fix our abode. This spot is a faint shadow of Paradise, whose
blissful bowers we must never more behold. Receive us, majestic cedar, under
thy shade. Ye trees of various taste and hue, refresh and sustain us with your
delicious fruits: never shall we gather the sweet produce without gratitude: It
shall be the reward of our attentive care and laborious cultivation. O God
Omnipotent, who reignest in Heaven! look with a propitious eye on this our
dwelling. Lend an ear of compassion to the supplications, receive with favor
the praises and thanksgivings which we, Thy frail offending creatures, shall
never cease to send up toward thy celessial throne, through the spreading
branches of these trees. Here, my dearest wife, we shall obtain, by the sweat
of our brows, our support. Under these shades, thou shall bring forth with
pain. From hence, will our offspring spread themselves over the wide earth.
Here too, death shall one day visit us, and we shall be confounded with our
original dust. O Lord God our Maker! shower down Thy blessings on the profane
abode of us sinners. While I thus uttered the devout breathings of my soul, Eve
was prostrate on the earth by my side: her hands were elevated: her eyes swam
in tears, and were raised toward Heaven in holy ecstasy.

I now began to construct our habitation under the shade of the spreading
cedar. I fixed in the earth a circle of strong stakes, and interwove them with
slexible twigs. While I was thus employed, Eve was conveying the stream among
the flowers; gathering ripe fruits; supporting, with small sticks, the bending
stalks of the variegated shrubs, and pruning their luxuriant branches. Then it
was that we began to eat our bread by the sweat of our brows.

I went to the river to fetch reeds to cover our cottage: there I saw five
ewes, white as the southern clouds, and with them a young ram, feeding by the
side of the water. I approached them without noise, fearing they would fly me,
like the tiger and the lion; who, before our fatal transgression, used to play
with the kid or the lamb at our seet. But, instead of endeavoring to escape
me, they suffered me to stroke their fleeces, and I drove them before me, with
a reed to our hill; where I intended they should, for the future, feed. Eve was
busied in erecting a bower, and did not immediately, on my return, observe my
little stock; but they soon discovered themselves by their bleating. She
started at the sound, and dropped the boughs from her hand through fear: but soon
recovering, she cried, with joy in her countenance, O Adam! they are gentle and
fond as in Paradise. Welcome, pretty animals, ye shall live with us. All you
want is here. Ye need not stray; for here are flowery pastures, fragrant
herbage, and a clear spring. Your innocent sporting will give us delight, while
we attend our trees and flowers. Yes, harmless creatures, she continued,
patting their woolly backs, ye shall be my flock, and I will be your indulgent
mistress.

Our little dwelling was now completed, and we were enjoying the cool breezes
at its entrance, and silently surveying the distant country, when Eve said, my
dearest love, how beautifully is the prospect before us variegated! How
fertile, how full of blessings is this earth, which we thought so barren! Let
us to the fruits and flowers, which the hill already yields, add those that
grow on its borders, and our abode will have a faint resemblance of Eden's
delightful shades. Ah! she added with a sigh, it will then bear but the same
proportion of likeness to Paradise, as that does to the blissful seats of the
angels, which the heavenly messengers, who, in our happy days of innocence,
condescended to visit us, described in such glowing colors. O thou garden of
the Lord, how delightful were thy sweet retreats! how did thy gay tints charm
the eye! how did thy luscious fruits* thy aromatic fragrance feast the senses;
whatever necessity required, all the useful, all the agreeable, were there in
rich profusion. O my spouse! compared with that luxuriant spot, what is all
about us but dry sterility and barrenness? This earth, under the Divine
malediction, seems unable to produce in the same lands that sweet variety, that
happy diversity that charmed us in Eden's bowers. We must now seek the
different productions in distant places. I have seen too, that not only animals
are the prey of death; he stretches his wide domain, he tyrannizes over the
whole earth, and makes rude havoc in the world of vegetation. O Adam! what
fruits have I beheld drop from their branches, spoilt, and full of black
rottenness! What flowers wither on their stalks! The trees are disrobed of
their verdure by the dispoiler, Death. I have observed too, that young leaves
supply the place of those that are fallen, and that the seeds of dead flowers
cast into the earth, produce new ones. We, Adam, must thus, one day, wither and
die, and our children shall successively grow up and flourish.

She ceased speaking, and I, deeply affected by her words, made answer. Dear
Eve, were our loss only the gay verdure, the fruits and flowers of Paradise, it
would scarce deserve a sigh; but, alas! we are expelled from the sacred spot
which our Maker blessed by his immediate presence. There, veiling his
insupportable radiance, he walked among the groves, while all nature celebrated
the approach of the Deity in reverential silence. Though formed of the dust, my
prostrations were accepted. The Almighty condescended to hear his creature, and
vouchsafed to answer, with benignity, a frail worm. Alas! we have, by our
disobedience, lost this privilege; guilty as we are, we can no more hope to
converse with infinite purity. This, this calls for our lamentations and our
tears. Will the God of Heaven visit a land under his curse? Will the Most Holy
dwell among sinners? He looks down from the seats of bliss: He regards with an
eye of compassion our penitence and tears, and his bounties exceed every hope
our wretchedness could form. Even the bright spirits of Heaven are his
Messengers; they execute his orders on this dark globe; but, alas! our polluted
eyes are now unworthy to behold them: They perform the task assigned, without
deigning to become visible to sinful man, and then soar, with hasty wing, from
this seat of corruption, now fit only to be the residence of beings under the
curse of their Sovereign.

Thus were we holding converse, and casting our melancholy eyes on the country
before us, when a resplendent cloud descending, glided toward us, and rested
on our hill; from it stepped a radiant form, wearing on his face a majestic
smile. We hastily arose; we bowed our heads, and the celestial messenger thus
spoke: He whose throne is in the highest Heaven, has heard your complaints. Go,
said he, and inform those children of assliction, that my presence is not
circumscribed by the circuit of Heaven, it extends to all the works of my hands.

Whence has the sun its invigorating heat? who teaches the stars to run their
courses? Why does the earth bring forth its fruits, and day and night regularly
succeed each other? Who preserves the various animals? In Me they live, move,
and have their being. What keeps thee, Adam, from sinking into corruption? I am
near thee: I sustain thee by my power. I guard thee by my providence; and know
the secret breathings of thy soul, and all the purposes of thine heart.

The luminous sphere, that encompassed the angel, reached even to me. Filled
with devout ecstasy, I lifted up to him my dazzl'd eyes. How great beyond
conception, said I, are the favors of the Lord! He beholds our wretchedness
with compassion: He sends his angels to give us comfort. O effulgent spirit! I
stand consounded and abashed before thee. How shall I, sinful man that I am,
dare to speak to thee, the unoffending messenger of Heaven, arrayed in light
and purity? Yet, O benevolent angel! permit me to mention the sad apprehensions
and fears that oppress my heart. That God is every where present, I readily
believe. I see him in his works. I feel him in his goodness and tender mercies.
That the Most High, a being perfect in purity, should more intimately
communicate Himself to a worm defiled with sin, I do not presume to expect.
What I dread is, that when man shall be multiplied on the earth, he will be
estranged from God his Maker. I have fallen, my children may also fall -- fall
into more horrid depths, and thus being more and more debased, their
wretchedness will increase. The time will come, when I shall be no longer with
them, to inform them, and give, in my own person, evident proofs of the
loving kindness and compassion of the Lord. It Is true, the smallest insect will
declare His beneficence: but if God continues to hide His face from man, will
not the voice of Nature be too weak to strike his mind? Will not the idea of
the Deity be totally lost, or at least, confounded in darkness and obscurity?
This thought gives my foreboding heart exquisite anguish. I tremble with
horror, when my gloomy imagination represents to my view millions of creatures
sunk in distress and guilt, who may execrate me as the cause of their blindness
and misery.

Father of men, replied the angel, with aspect benign, He in whom and by whom
all things exist, will not forsake thine offspring. Often will they, by their
transgressions, presumptuously affront the Majesty of Heaven. Often will their
sins cry aloud for vengeance. The Almighty will grasp his thunder, and display
the terrors of His judgments. The guilty shall tremble in the dust: the sinners
shall cry out in agony, Dreadful is the wrath of God, who can stand before it?
But more often will He make himself known in kindness: He will delight to show
favor to the repenting children of men. Mercy and compassion dwell always with
him, Judgment is his strange work. He will raise from among thy posterity men
whose minds he will enlighten. They, assisted by the Spirit of God, shall call
their brethren to repentance. Sinners shall hearken, and forsaking the ways of
sensuality and profaneness, shall worship a Being of spotless purity in spirit
and in truth. He will send among them prophets and holy persons, whose mission
he will evidence by miracles: these chosen of the Lord shall cure the diseased,
raise the dead, and do many wonderful works. These shall make known the
Judgments of the Most High: they shall declare his condescension and grace:
they shall foretell what will happen in distant periods of time, and the
accomplishment of their prophecies will teach men, that the Eternal overrules
and directs according to his good pleasure, and the merciful designs of his
providence, events that appear to short-sighted mortals, the work of a blind
chance. Often will he speak to the sons of men by his angels: frequently in
prodigies; and there will be some righteous persons to whom he will, with
infinite goodness, more intimately manifest Himself: to them he will speak face
to face; till at length shall be ushered in the great mystery of the salvation
of mankind, when the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head.

The angel was silent, and I, encouraged by the condescension and sweetness of
his look, replied, O celestial friend! if thou will yet allow me, frail as I
am, to call thee so; and why should I doubt it? since thou can not hate him
whom the Eternal does not hate -- him for whom the Divine clemency manifests
itself with such splendour as strikes the heavenly host with admiration, and
surpasses the power of words to express, when the adoring soul, humbled in the
dust, attempts to pour forth its gratitude: Tell me lucid spirit, if it be
permitted thee to draw from the obscurity, with which they are surrounded,
those august mysteries; tell me what is the import of the promise, the seed of
the woman shall bruise the serpent's head, and what is meant by the curse
denounced against man, thou shall die. Nothing that the Most High permits me to
reveal, answered the angel, will I hide from thee.

Know then, O Adam, on thy transgressing the Divine command, God said to the
happy spirits who worship before him, Man has disobeyed me; he shall die. A
dense cloud suddenly encompassed the eternal throne, and a deep silence reigned
through the whole expanse of Heaven; the celestial host were filled with
consternation; but soon the darkness dispersed, and the praises of the Highest
again resounded from the harps of angels. Never did God manifest himself with
such luster and magnificence, only in that memorable instant when his creative
voice called the stars from nonexistence, and His Almighty fiat went on
creating through the immensity of space. The adoring angels were in eager
expectation of what was to follow this unusual pomp, when the majestic voice of
God sounded through the arch of heaven, uttering these words of benignity and
grace; I will not withdraw my favor from the sinner. To my infinite mercy the
earth shall bear witness. Of the woman shall be born an Avenger, who shall
bruise the head of the serpent. Hell shall not rejoice in this victory. Death
shall lose its prey. Ye Heavens show forth your gladness! Thus spoke the
Eternal. The blaze of his glory would have been too strong for even the eyes of
archangels, had not a thin cloud tempered its insupportable radiance. The blessed
inhabitants of Heaven celebrated with joy this great mystery, and attun'd their
golden harps to the praises of the Father of Spirits, whose tender mercies are
over all his works. How God will pardon the sinner without offending his
justice, surpasses conprehension; but it is enough, Eternal Truth has said it.
We know, and thou may also rest assured, that Death, having lost his power,
can only disengage the soul from its bonds. The body, that vesture of earth,
shall return to the dust, of which it was formed, while the immortal spirit,
refined from all defilement, shall be raised to Heaven, to partake there with
angels, archangels, and all the celestial host, never ending selicity.

Hear, Adam, the order of thy God, I will be gracious to thee and to thy seed.
There shall be a sign between me and thee, as the seal of this great promise:
thou shall build an altar on this hill, and offer on it a young lamb. I will,
on my part, send down fire to consume the victim. This sacrifice thou shall
renew every year, and the flame shall annually descend to burn thine offering.

I have now told thee, first of men, continued the angel, all that the Most
High thinks proper to reveal of his inscrutable decrees. I am also allowed to
show thee, that ye are not so solitary on this globe as ye imagine. Cursed as
this earth is, ye are still surrounded by pure spirits, who are commissioned to
be your guard and defense, and ordered to preside with watchful care, over the
works of nature. The angel then touching our eyelids, we beheld beauties that I
shall not attempt to describe. No words could give ideas that would do justice
to the bright magnificence of the scene. All the country round us was peopled
with the children of Heaven, more beautiful than Eve when she first came from
the hands of her Creator, and with soft reluctance, and modest grace, received
her welcome in my arms.

Some were employed in collecting the light mists that issued from the moist
earth: they bore them upwards on their expanded wings, and converted them into
mild dews, and fertilizing showers. Others lay reclined, near purling brooks,
watching lest their sources should fail, and the plants they watered be
deprived of their humid aliment. Many were dispersed through the open country,
who presided over the growth of fruits, and spread on the opening flowers
azure, green and red, with every vivid hue, and, by breathing on them,
impregnated them with fragrance. Some peopled the groves, employed in various
offices: from the glittering wings of these were wafted gentle breezes, which,
passing through the foilage of the trees, hovered over the flowers, and skimm'd
along the surface of the brooks and lakes. Some among these celestial
laborers, having performed the task assigned them, were sitting in the shade,
joining in harmonious concert: the melody of their voices accompanied the
sounding strings of their golden harps, and they sang, to the praise of the
Most High, hymns, not to be heard by mortal ears. Not a few were walking on our
hill, and among our bowers: in their gentle looks I beheld commiseration of our
distress: but now our eyes again became unable to behold the heavenly
effulgence, and the rapturous scene disappeared.

These, which you have just beheld, said the angel, are spirits commissioned to
watch over the productions of the earth: they are the appointed assistants of
Nature, and help to promote and complete her various works, according to the
invariable and immutable laws of the great First Cause. The Creator has given
existence to innumerable orders of beings. Even this earth, though under the
curse of the Most High, is full of beauty, and the admiring angels behold on
this globe, objects too sublime for mortal sight. The delightful employment of
some of these children of Heaven, is to watch over thy safety, O Adam! to avert
from thee unforeseen misfortune. They accompany thee in all thy ways: they
assist thee in thy labors, and often turn even thy disappointments to thy
advantage; bringing from an apparent evil a real good. They, with pleasure,
behold thy domestic happiness. They are witnesses of thy most secret actions. A
smile of benevolence shows their joy when man, their charge, acts right: the
frown of disdain and sorrow sits on their brow, when he forgets himself and his
happiness. These, in future ages, the Lord will employ to distribute plenty
through the countries he will delight to bless, or to carry famine and
desolation among rebellious nations, when it shall please him to recall them by
his chastisements.

The angel ceased speaking. He cast on us a look of mild condescension, and was
lost, to our eyes, in a shining cloud. We prostrated ourselves on the earth,
with devout ecstasy, and humbly offered up our thanksgivings to our Beneficent
and All-merciful Creator.

I immediately set up the altar, as the Lord had commanded, on the summit of
the hill; Eve employed herself in constructing around it a little paradise. She
brought from the neighboring plain the most beautiful and odoriferous flowers:
these she planted on all sides of the altar, and, with cheerful labor, watered
them, each morning and evening, from the clear stream that flowed near our
dwelling. O tutelar angels! said she, in the midst of her labor, complete the
work of my hands; for without your aid, in vain shall I plant, in vain shall I
water! May your kind cares, bright spirits, give these flowers more life, more
beauty, more fragrance, than they had in their native soil, for to the Lord of
All this enclosure is consecrated! I planted a spacious circle of trees around
the holy altar, and their thick branches spread an awful shade, that disposed
the mind to devout contemplation.

In these occupations we passed the summer, exposed each lay to the scorching
sun. Autumn arrived, and repaid our ^bour with its various fruits. It drew near
its close; the loud blasts of the north began to be heard, and the tops of the
mountains were covered with an hoar frost. Not then knowing, that the weak
earth, which was exhausted by the profuse liberality of summer and autumn,
wanted to recover her strength by the Rest of Winter, we saw, with grief, the
sadden'd face of Nature. In Eden we kn^w no change of seasons: mild spring, gay
summer, and plenteous Autumn, charmed there together. As the winter advanced,
the face of nature wore increasing gloom: the flowers withered on their stalks,
and, if any yet survived around the altar, they seemed, with drooping head, to
mourn their approaching fall. The latest fruits fell from the trees, and the
sapless branches cast their leaves. The clouds poured down torrents of rain,
and the highest peaks of the mountains were covered with snow. We beheld this
scene of desolation with fear and anxiety. Should this, my dearest Eve, said I,
be only the first effects of the curse pronounced against this earth, and God
continues to punish, she will be stripped of the small remains of utility and
beauty, which her degradation has left her: small were they in comparison of
the delights of Paradise; yet they were sufficient to soften our toil, and
afforded us many of the conveniences and blessings of life; but if the Divine
malediction continues to spread destruction on this earth, how gloomy will be
our days? What will become of our promised offspring? Thus we mourned our
melancholy situation; but, encouraged by the promises of our God, we placed in
him an humble confidence. We endeavored to console each other, and to drive
from our minds every thought of murmuring or discontent, and thankfully adored
the Lord, in the midst of the dreary horrors, by which we were surrounded.

We laid up for our winter support those fruits that had escaped corruption and
rottenness, and, that they might be still preserved, we dried them by fire. I
covered our cottage anew, and made a closer fence around, to keep ou^ the cold
and the rain. In the mean time our little flock languidly wandered on the
eminence, gaining a scanty support by nipping the short grass that still
remained, or her^ and there sprung up afresh; and I, for their farther reli^^
ranged the country to seek them fodder, which I careful^^ preserved, lest they
should perish, if the rigours of winter increased.

Sad and slow passed our days, while the clouded sky poured forth rain, and the
bleak winds chilled us with cold. But at length the genial sun re-animated the
earth, and brightened the heavens, while gentle winds chased the moist fogs
from the summits of the mountains. Reviving Nature smiled at the return of
youth: the fields were again clothed in cheerful green: innumerable flowers
decked the pastures, and seemed to vie with the sun in luster: the trees again
began to shoot out their buds, and all nature was full of new born joy. Thus,
crowned with leaves and flowers, came amiable Spring, that delightful morning
of the year.

The trees with which I had surrounded the altar were pre-eminent in beauty.
Eve saw, with inexpressible rapture, the flowers she had planted on the holy
spot, recovered their bloom. In vain, my children, should I attempt to give you
an idea of our joyful ecstasy. We ran to the consecrated circle, filled with
devout gratitude. The sun illumined the sacred spot with his purest radiance.
Every creature seemed to join in our praises of the Creator. The flowers
exhaled their sweetest odours; the trees extended the shade of their blossoming
branches over the holy altar; the winged insects, that inhabited the tender
grass, chirp'd forth their joy: while the birds, on the spreading boughs of the
trees, enlivened our devotion by their mellifluous harmony. We cast ourselves
on our knees: tears of gratitude and joy burst from our eyes, fell on the
grassy turf, and mingled with the dew of the morning. Our fervid prayer
ascended toward the Lord of Nature, toward the God of Grace and Goodness, who
had mercifully turned, even the effects of his just displeasure, to our
advantage.

I now began to cultivate a little field upon the hill. I ^ast into the fercile
earth some grains which I had preserved from the produce of autumn. I even
enriched the land with seeds I had gathered in the distant country. Nature,
^^^ance, or reflection, often discovered to me means to fa^^tate my labor.
Often too, ignorance of the seasons, and of the proper soils for the different
productions, led me into errors. Frequently my imagination deceived me, and I
was disappointed when I had high hopes that I had found the art of contracting
my labors. I should sometimes have been without resource, had not the gentle
spirits, who watched over my happiness, condescended to enlighten me.

One morning as I cast my eyes toward the altar, I beheld, with awe, the flame
of the Lord burning over it. The rising sun gilded with his beams the ascending
smoke. Enraptured, I called to my beloved; See, dearest Eve, I cried; see the
accomplishment of the promise. Behold, the sacred flame is come down on our
altar. Let us go to it immediately. Every labor must now cease. I will, as the
Almighty has commanded, kill a young lamb. Haste, my love, and choose the
finest flowers to strew the sacrifice. I took the best of my flock: but, my
children, it is impossible to give you a description of what I felt, when I
went to deprive the innocent animal of life. A trembling seized my hand; I was
scarce able to hold the struggling victim, and never could I have brought
myself to give it death, had not my resolution been animated by the express
command of the author of Life. The very remembrance of its endeavors to escape
gives me pain. When I beheld its quivering limbs in the last moments of its
existence, an universal tremor shook my own; and when it lay before me, without
sense or motion, dreadful forebodings invaded my troubled soul. In obedience to
the divine command, I laid the bleeding lamb on the altar, and Eve scattered on
it odoriferous flowers. We then prostrated ourselves on the earth before it,
with reverence and fear, and offered up our humble praises to the God of Truth,
who had thus solemnly verified his promises. An awful silence reigned around
us, as if Nature celebrated the presence of her God. In this perfect calm our
ravished ears were charmed with the minstrelsy of Heaven. The angels that
hovered over us, joined in our devout praises. The flames soon consumed the
sacrifice, and on its extinction, which was sudden, an aromatic odor diffused
itself through the far extended country.

A little after this solemn day of reconciliation, I was going, at sunset, to
rest myself, after the fatigue of the day, near my beloved. I ascended the
hill. I sought for her in vain, in our cottage. I looked for her, with anxiety
in the shady bower. At length I found her, pale, and without strength, at the
side of the spring, and thee, Cain, my firstborn, lying on her bosom. The
pains of childbirth had seized her, while she was employed in her ordinary
labors, near the brook. She was bedewing thine infant face with tears of joy.
At sight of me she cried, with a smile, I salute thee, father of men. The Lord
has assisted me in the hour of distress: I have brought forth this son, to
whom I have given the name of Cain. O thou dear firstborn! said she, the Lord
has favorably regarded the hour of thy birth; may all thy days be consecrated
to his praise! how weak, how helpless is he that is born of woman? May thou,
dear infant, rise as a young flower in the spring! May thy life be a sweet
presume offered up to heaven! I then took thee, my firstborn, in my arms. I
salute thee, said I to Eve, I salute thee, mother of men. The Lord be praised,
who has assisted thee in thy distress. I salute thee, Cain, first of human
beings who gave pain to thy mother: first of human race, who entered into life
to leave it by death. O God, continued I, look down from thy throne, and
regard, with compassion, this thy feeble creature. Shed thy gracious
benediction on the morning of his life. It shall be my delightful task to
instruct his young mind: I will show him the miracles of thy grace: I will
teach him the wonders of thy love. Morning and evening his infant lips shall be
taught to sound forth thy praise. O dearest Eve, mother of men, I cried, in the
transport of my heart, a race, without number, shall flourish around thee. This
myrtle was, like thee, solitary, till the tender succors sprang from the
maternal root. When mild springs shall clothe it with new ve^^ure, the first
shoots will produce others, and, in time, this single myrtle shall form an
arromatic grove. In the same manner, (let this prospect console thee in thy
present weakness) in the same manner shall our offspring multiply around this
eminence. We shall, from its summit, see their peaceful dwellings adorn the
plain: we shall see them, if death delays its approach long enough to permit us
-- we shall see them lend each other mutual assistance, to gain the proviflous,
the conveniences, and the sweets of life. Often will we descend from this hill
to visit our children's children, and under their fertile shades will we
recount the wonders of the Lord, and exhort them to piety and gratitude. When
they taste of joy, we will share it with them: We will sympathize in their
griefs, and give them consolation and advice. From the top of this ascent we
shall see -- with gratitude and joy, we shall see, a thousand altars smoke
around. Their burnt offerings shall envelope us in sacred clouds, through which
our fervent prayer shall ascend to the Great Creator, in behalf of the human
race. And when the solemn day shall come, when the flame of Heaven shall
descend upon the first and most holy altar, they shall assemble on this hill.
We will lead them to sacrifice, and, in holy transport, we shall behold the
fruit of our loins form around us a vast circle of prostrate worshippers.

Thus, O Cain! did I utter the sweet effussions of my heart. I kissed thine
infant lips with the most tender joy. Thy mother then took thee in her
enfeebled arms, when, having assisted her to rise, I led her to our dwelling.

Strength and vigor soon began to animate thy little members. Laughter and
gaiety sparkled in thine eyes, and mirth played upon thy cheeks. Already were
thou able to run, with thy tender feet, on the soft grass, and among the
flowers: already thy little lips began to lisp forth thine infant thoughts,
when Eve brought into the world Mahala, thy spouse. Full of joy thou skipp'd
about the newborn, kissed her, and covered her with flowers. Eve, at length,
brought forth thee, O Abel! and afterward Thirza, thy companion. With
inexpressible joy we beheld your innocent pleasures. Our delight increased as
we saw your young minds unfold themselves, and arrive, by little and little, at
maturity. We employed our most a^^pttive care to cultivate your mental powers,
to direct your thoughts to worthy objects, that your lives might diffuse the
agreeable odor of virtue. Thus a variety of flowers, combined by art, form the
fragrant nosegay. While you, my children, yet prattled on my knee, or chased
each other through the grove in wanto^ play, I discovered that man, born in sin,
needs cultivation like the stubborn earth, cursed for our transgression; and
that vigilence, and watchful care, were necessary in the arduous task of
forming the mind, "To teach the young idea how to shoot," to guard the pliant
heart from the turbulence of the passions, to make the powers and noble
inclinations of the soul bring forth their genuine fruits, virtue and piety,
require all the teachers art -- all the parents love.

I have now, my beloved children, the happiness to see you arrived at your full
growth, as the tender plants are by the hand of time transformed into lofty and
wide spreading trees. Praised be the God of Heaven for his innumerable mercies!
adored for ever be his name for his unmerited goodness! May you, my dear
offspring, by your filial love, humble gratitude, and devout reverence,
continue faithful to Him; and may the grace and benediction of the Most High
always rest on your dwellings.

Adam here finished his recital. A nymph united by the soft bands of hymen to
her favorite swain, wanders with him in the early dawn. They hear the sweet
notes of the nightingale, while all is silence around. Her voice seems the echo
of their own fond thoughts, and through their souls is diffused a tender
transport. The bird ceases her melody; but they still listen, with the ear of
expectation turned toward the branches from whence she chanted her nocturnal
song. Thus, though our general father ceased to speak, his children remained
fixed in mute attention. The different scenes he had represented gave them
various emotions: sometimes the gushing tear dropped from their eyes, at others
a lively joy spread itself over their features. They all returned their thanks
to the father of men; Cain rendered his as well as the others; but he alone had
neither smiled nor wept.

BOOK III.
ADAM having finished his relation, Abel, again, tenderly embraced his brother,
and they all left the bower, each pair taking their way to their separate
dwellings, while the moon's mild rays enlightened their steps. O my Thirza,
cried Abel, to his beloved, pressing her hand, what exquisite joy diffuses
itself through my soul! my brother is no longer estranged from me, he loves me:
his moistened cheek spoke his tenderness, while he gave me the fraternal
embrace. How did my heart rejoice in the sweet effusion of his returned
affection! less delightful, less refreshing, is the evening dew that falls on
the parched earth, after it has been scorched by the sun's burning rays. The
furious tempest of his soul is calmed, peace and love are returned; they will
again take up their abode in our humble cottages, and give new sweets to every
enjoyment. O Thou Beneficent Being! who have, with infinite goodness, watched
over our parents, when they were the sole inhabitants of this spacious earth,
keep far from the heart of my beloved brother, every baleful and tormenting
passion. May the storm never return; but may tranquillity, gratitude and joy,
render every day delightful, like the past!

Thirza, with delight in her countenance, said, Our parents, my love, felt not
more joy at the return of spring, after the rigours of the first winter, than
they experienced when they saw the tears of reconciliation drop from the
softened eyes of our brother. Our affectionate father, our fond mother, seemed,
in their transport, to have recovered all the gaity of youth, and every Thing
around us smiled with new joy. Thus did this amiable and virtuous pair express
the sweet sensations that filled their hearts.

Mahala, Cain's spouse, observing that his brow still wore the gloom of
discontent, pressed his hand to her lips, and, in a soft and tender accent,
said, Why, my love, do thou seem so cold, so insensible, in the midst of such
happiness? Is ^^e calm that is restored to thy soul incapable of enlivening
thine eyes with tender joy? Cannot thy heartfelt satisfaction render thy
countenance serene? I should fear the cloud of grief, that has so long darkened
thy days, had rendered thee unable to taste of joy, had I not beheld, beheld
with ecstatic delight, content and transport animate ^hin^ eyes, when thou
gave our brother the fraternal embrace. O my beloved! the Eternal from His
throne on high, and the benevolent angels, who surround us, saw, with
approbation, the soft sensations that then filled thine heart. Suffer me, my
dearest spouse, to press thee to my bosom: let my fondness again light up joy
in thy countenance; may thou lose all thy cares in this sweet embrace.

Cain resisted not the tender caresses of his spouse; but replied, your joy,
your excessive joy, gives me offense. Yes, I am displeased: Does not your
transports say, Cain is corrected? he was before a man vicious and wicked -- he
hated his brother! I was not wicked. -- Whence arose so strange an idea? Must I
hate my brother, because I was not always weeping over him, or persecuting him
with my embraces? -- I never hated my brother -- No, never. I saw indeed with
pain, that he, by his softness and effeminacy, stole from me the affection of
Adam and Eve. -- could I be insensible of this? But* Mahala, it is not without
cause, that sorrow hangs on my brow. What imprudence in our father to recount
to us the history of his shameful fall, and all the disasters of which he and
Eve are the cause! What need was there for us to know, and be so often told,
that it was their fault that lost us all the delights of Paradise, and rendered
us unhappy? Were we ignorant of this, our miseries would be more supportable,
and we should not deplore the want of enjoyments of which we could then have no
idea.

Mahala stifled in her heart remonstrances and complaints, and carefully read
her husband's eyes, to see if she might venture a reply. Then mildly answered,
Suffer me, I conj^re thee, my beloved, to weep; for I cannot restrain my tears.
Suffer me to implore thee for thyself. I beseech th^e to drive far from thee
this gloomy melancholy, that is again beginning to over-cloud thy soul. Thou
can, I know, my love, thou can disperse it, and restore to thy heart peace
and serenity. Let not thy troubled imagination always present to thy view
subjects of misery and grief, where thou ought to behold divine benignity
and grace. O Cain! why should we blame our affectionate parents for relating to
us the wonders God has done for fallen man! They should excite in our souls a
lively gratitude and firm confidence. They are keenly sensible of every thing
that can be a subject of pain and grief to us, and it is barbarity to reproach
them with our misery. Rise, my love, I entreat thee, rise superior to the
vexations that would again intrude themselves into thine heart, and obsc^^^ our
days with gloomy sadness. She said no more, but gave her husband a tender
glance, while her eyes swam in tears.

The smile of affection now tempered the austerity of Cain's countenance, and
he replied, as he embraced Mahala, I will, my dear, surmount the vexations that
would gain an empire over me. I will not obscure thy days or mine with
unavailing sorrow.

Anamelech, one of the inferior spirits of Hell, had observed the behavior and
discourse of Cain. He had seen, with malicious joy, the signs of envy and wrath
in his ruffled features. This malignant demon, though of the lowest order
among the rebel angels, did not yield in pride and ambition to Satan, the
archapostate. Often while in Hell, he retired from his companions, whom he
despised: Often he remained in solitude among the infected rivers of sulphur
that flowed through the burning land, or strayed alone on the enormous rocks,
whose summits were hid in stormy clouds. There in secret he repined at his
ignoble indolence, while the blue flames, reflected from the tops of the
mountains, cast an obsure and horrid light on the path made by his wandering
feet. But when Hell, with tumultuous roar, celebrated the praises and triumphs
of her king, who, on his return from the terrestrial globe, elate with pride,
recounted how he had seduced our general ancestors, and boasted his having
forced the Eternal to pronounce against them the decree of death and
wretchedness, then the black venom of Envy swelled the ran^ourous breast of
Anamelech. Must Satan, he cried to himself, though accursed, enjoy in Hell
triumphs and praise; while I, unnotic'd, rove in obscurity, through the dark
corners of these gloomy regions, or am confounded among the vile crowd who,
with servile shouts, aggrandize him, and hail him victor? No: I feel myself
equally capable of noble daring: I will astonish my compeers. I will force
Hell's fierce monarch to pronounce my name with respect. Actuated by the
prospect of rising to distingush'd greatness among the infernals, he meditated
baleful projects, and nourished in solitude inveterate hatred to the human
race. His black m^nd formed various schemes for their destruction, and his
horrid designs succeeded but too well. The miseries of Adam's offspring
^ender'd the name of this vile demon great among the diabolical powers of the
fiery deep. He it was who, after (...) succession of ages, incited a cruel king
to massacre the infants of Bethlehem. He saw with a malignant smile, men,
barbarous as the outcasts of Heaven, display a savage rage against those
innocents. He received an horrid pleasure, while he beheld their little limbs
dashed against the stones, which their spouting veins stained with blood. He
was delighted to see them stabbed and dismembered in the arms of their
distracted mothers. He hovered, with cruel satisfaction, over that unfortunate
city. The cries of these tender victims were, to him, agreeable melody. He fed,
with eager joy, on the heart-rending complaints of their inconsolable mothers.
The mangled limbs of infants, trampled under the feet of their savage
murderers, was to him a pleasing sight; and he felt an hellish transport, when
he beheld their fond parents prostrate on the earth, in all the bitterness of
anguish, tearing their hair, and beating their breasts, distained with the
blood of their guiltless offspring.

This relentless fiend, revolving in his gloomy breast the actions of Hell's
fell monarch, disdained ignoble sloth. I will ascend, said he; I will ascend to
earth. I Will know the import of the sentence. Man shall die. I will accelerate
his doom -- I will kill. He then, with hasty stride, passed through the gate of
Hell. He marked and trod the footsteps the arthfiend had traced through ancient
Night, and the tumultuous empire of Chaos. Thus a brigantine, equipped for
theft, steers with full sail, through the immense sea, and stopping on the
coast of Hesperia, surprises the tranquil inhabitants of some peaceful village;
seizes the active youth, while fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and
inconsolable wives, lament on the shore, pursuing, with their weeping eyes, the
ravishers, who, with out-spreading sails, soon escape from sight.

The detestable Anamelech long flew, with rapidity, through the gloomy empire of
Night, till at length he perceived a faint light on the frontiers of the
created universe. As a malefactor meditating some horrid murder in the shade
and silence of the night, proceeds to execute his bloody purpose, through the
gloom toward the city, and finds it on all sides illuminated, is struck with
fear, and would gladly hide himself from every eye: thus the impure spirit was
agitated with terror, while ^e traversed the immense sphere which surrounded
the earth. On his arrival on this globe, his piercing eye soon discovered the
abode of man, and he alighted in the shady grove.

Here then, said he, dwells man, Heaven's new favorite. This earth is cursed,
and far unlike the smiling garden where he first was placed! Delightful spot!
now guarded by the flaming sword: for I beheld it while I hovered over the
earth: This they have lost; but what is left them is not Hell. Perhaps, by
plaintive supplications, they have softened the anger of their God: For did not
Hell still follow me from place to place: did I not bear within myself an Hell,
I might, for ought I see, be happy here; but possibly their grosser bodies may
be subject to pains, to griefs unknown to etherial substances. Ah! I see some
of the heavenly host placed as guardians over man, though under malediction. I
must elude their care, escape their attention, or all my designs will be
rendered abortive, and I shall become the sport, rather than the admiration of
Satan, and the sycophants who surround his throne. Yonder is the family of
sinners: but I see no signs of misery: their evils, perhaps, commence not till
death. I Will know. If their hearts are open to seduction, I will, by my wiles,
engage them in new crimes that may accelerate their punishment. Satan
succeeded, by an easy artifice, with the chiefs of this family, while they were
yet perfect. Now they are degraded by sin, and the curse of their God, can it
be harder to subvert them? No, I shall induce them to commit actions so black,
that their heavenly guardians shall quit the earth with horror, and he who
created them shall, by his thunder, exterminate the ungrateful race, or
precipitate them into the burning lake; then, on our scorching ban^ we shall
taste of joy; shall triumph, while we behold these worthy inhabitants of this
new world rolling in flames of sulphur, cursing their existence and their
Almighty Maker. Ah! -- I see one of them bears on his brow the marks of sullen
discontent. He has a ferocity in his looks that gives me hopes. My first effort
shall be on him. His companion weeps -- I will learn the cause of her tears.

The malevolent spirit, invisible to human sight, followed Cain and his spouse,
meditating seduction and murder. When they were retired to their dwelling, the
impure demon repeated after them, in malicious mockery: Rise superior to the
vexations that intrude themselves into thine heart! Drive far from thee these
clouds of melancholy, that would obscure thy days! Then quitting irony to give
utterance to the infernal malice by which he was agitated; No, said he, what is
good, shall never take root in thine ungrateful heart: I will destroy it. Those
clouds of melancholy thou would disperse, shall be re-assembled over thine
head, thick and black as those which surround with eternal darkness, the
summits of the infernal mountains. My task will be no hard one. Thou thyse^
labourest to assemble them. I have only to assist thee: it will be to me a
pleasing task to second thine own efforts. Yes, I will accumulate them on thy
brow: desolation and misery, yet unknown to the human race, shall find entrance
among mortals: thy days shall be filled with horror and darkness, and these
darlings of heaven shall taste the cup of wrath poured forth for angels.

Cheerful dawn again began to gild the horizon, inspiring songs and gaiety,
when Cain, with his instruments of husbandry, was going to the field. Abel had
already given him the salute of the morning, and was conducting his flocks to
pastures, still moist with the dew of the night. Mahala and Thirza were
advancing hand-in-hand, toward the garden which surrounded the altar. They
stopped to salute their brothers, when Eve came to them, from her cabin, with
gestures of desperation. -- Both were seized with inquietude and concern, and
approaching her, cried out, with emotion, O my mother! You weep. -- Why weep
you? Eve, at this question, redoubled her tears, then endeavoring to stifle
her grief, she, giving them a look of affection, said, while her words were
interrupted by sighs, Alas! my children, have you not heard, dreadful groans
come from our dwelling? The sharpest pains this night have seized your father,
and he now struggles with some disease that seems to penetrate even to his
bones. He endeavors to conceal his anguish. He would prevent the sighs that
escape from my heart. He suppresses his complaints, and strives to console me.
But O my children! the most poignant grief has taken possession of my soul, and
my tortured heart refuses all consolation. When he reposes in most
tranquillity, he seems lost in reflection: an instant after he groans with
agony: a cold sweat covers his face, and the tears he had restrained, burst, in
a torrent, from his eyes. O my dear children! dreadful apprehensions oppress my
heart. Support me, my daughters; support your unhappy mother, sinking under the
weight of affliction. Let us go to your father. Eve followed by her lamenting
children, returned to her spouse, weeping, and leaning on the shoulder of
Mahala.

Filled with sorrow, they surrounded the bed of the sick. Adam then lay
tranquil. His countenance and gestures discovered, that, in spite of suffering
and pain, his soul (...) master of itself. He cast on his afflicted children a
look of parental tenderness. He even gave them a smile of affection, and said,
The hand the Almighty, my beloved ^^^springs is on me. My intrails are torn
with anguish: but, praised be the Lord, who regulates all by unerring wisdom!
perhaps he has ordained these pains to unloose the bands that unite my soul to
this trail body. If it is now to return to the dust of which it is formed, I
submit. I adore the dispensations of my Maker, and wait, with resignation and
love, the fatal hour. I will praise Thee, the Sovereign of Life and Death, till
this union is dissolved: my soul shall then, delivered from its vesture of
earth, offer Thee more elevated praise. O God of Consolation! deign to be my
support. Teach me to endure, with patience, my present pain, in firm hope of
future happiness. But above all, forsake me not, O my Maker! forsake not an
expiring sinner in the distressful hour of death! Abandon me not, when my soul
is dismayed by the last tremblings of nature!

He then cast his languid eyes on our general mother, who was weeping at his
side. And thou Eve, said he, whom I love as myself, and you, my dear children,
add not to my griefs by your sorrow and tears. How cruelly does your affliction
distress me! Cease, my beloved, cease these sighs, and these lamentations.
Perhaps the Lord may remove the terrors of his hand, and death may yet be at a
distance. Perhaps I may again, even on earth, taste joy and gladness. I wait
the good pleasure of my God, and resign myself to his will. Do you also, my
dear children, and you, my tender spouse, acquiesce with submission and devout
gratitude, in the Divine appointments. Accustom yourselves beforehand to
reflect with holy resignation, on the instant when it shall please the Almighty
to strip off this garment of earth, and take me from you. The father of mankind
ceased to speak. Sharp pangs again seized him, and he could only utter sighs
and groans.

When his agonies were abated, he regarded all about him with silent attention;
but his looks were more particularly fixed on Eve, who seemed overwhelmed by
her deep distress: her sorrows augmented those of her husband, and, to console
her, he again resumed his discourse: Alas! said he, the death experienced by
the first sinner, will doubtless have something frightful in it, to those who
shall behold it: but it will be more terrible still to him who shall be the
victim. May that Merciful God, who has never abandoned us in our distress,
succor me in that dreadful hour! -- He will do it -- his past mercies are
pledges that he will. As for you, my children, added he, go -- leave me --
resign me to the will of the Lord. Pray for me with fervor. This dreadful
crisis may perhaps end in a sweet sleep, that may restore vigor to my
enfeebled members.

Adam was silent, his children stooped to kiss his trembling hand. Yes, my
father, they cried, we will prostrate ourselves before the Lord. We will
supplicate, that sweet ^epose may repair thy strength exhausted by suffering. O
may our prayer be accepted! may the Lord remove from thee these pains by which
thou art now tormented.

With hearts pierced with grief, they left the cottage. Eve only remained. I
would sleep, said Adam, addressing himself to his wife, who sat near his bed
suffus'd in tears. Why, my beloved do thou give way to thy grief? thy
tenderness, by increasing my pain, may chase repose far from me. At length he
wrapped his face in the skins which covered him, to conceal from his companion
the distress and inquietude of his mind. Is this, said he, to himself -- is
this that hour so full of horror? I fear it is. Great God how terrible! --
Abandon me not, O my Maker! forsake not, in the last agony, an expiring sinner.
How sweet would be my consolations, even in death, if these sufferings, these
fears, would exempt my unhappy offspring from the consequences of the curse
pronounced on them for my sin! -- But no -- the same horrors will terrify, the
same veil of darkness will extend over all born of woman. From a trunk
empoison'd by sin, what can be produced but sinners? sinners subject to death!
-- I have killed all my posterity. All, like me, must be torn from those they
love -- from those whose tenderness softened and endeard'd life, and gave it
all its delights. O Eve! O spouse tender and dear! what anguish will rend thine
heart! What tears will thou shed over my senseless dust! Frightful prospect!
Will not my inanimate clay tremble, when the orphan, left without support,
shall lament the loss of its father, snatched away by Death in the midst of his
course? or when decripid parents shall be deprived of their sons, who were the
comfort and support of their declining age. When sisters shall water with their
tears the dead bodies of their brothers: The wife that of the husband: the
lover that of the object beloved. Spare then my memory, O my children! Curse
not my peaceful dust. It is just that the weight of the curse should fall on
the last hour; the hour that tears us from this life of sin. Death, when he
divides the soul from its covering of clay, will also draw it from a state of
malediction. If, notwithstanding the little power its degradation has left it,
it has struggled against vice, and endeavored to raise itself to virtue, it
shall enjoy never ending happiness in the regions of immortality. Ye ought not
then, O mine offspring! to execrate my ashes. Our abode on earth is not
properly life: it is but the dawn of life: a troublesome dream. Oppress me not
then, ye mountains of gries! It Is by dying I shall revive. I wait for that
instant, firmly relying on the mercies of my God! Such were the thoughts of
Adam, when a sweet sleep overpowered his senses.

Eve sat drowned in sorrow, by the bed of her sleeping husband, and, in a low
voice, fearing to disturb his repose, vented the anguish of her heart. What
evils do I experience? said she. O curse, the consequence of sin! let thy
burden rest on me; I was the first sinner. Let a double weight of woe fall on
my wretched head. It is just, I was the first offender. Ah! it is already on me.
All the griefs, all the distresses of my husband, of my unhappy offspring, flow
from me. Their pains, their sorrows are so many gnawing worms that prey on me.
O my spouse! if thou die -- How I tremble at the idea! a general shivering
seizes me; the cold sweat (...) down my face. Can the horrors of death be more
dreadful? If thou art going to die for my fault, O Adam! If these agonies are
to unloose the bands of life! hate me not. Add not to my insupportable
miseries, thine anger. And ye, my children, curse not your unhappy mother.
Guilty as I am, I deserve your pity. Ye upbraid me not, it is true; but, alas!
every sigh, every tear awakens my keen remorse, and is to me a cutting
reproach. O God Almighty! lend an ear to my plantive supplications, and remove
his sufferings: or, if they are the forerunners of death; if his body must now
return to the dust, terrifying thought! separate us not: Let me die with him.
Suffer my soul to retire first. that I may not behold his last pangs. I was the
first sinner. Eve ceased to speak, and remained inconsolable, weeping by the
side of her husband.

Cain, in spite of the roughness of his temper, had shed tears at the groans
and discourse of his father. He went into the fields when he left the cottage,
and thus expressed his concern: I could not help weeping when I was near the
bed of my father; yet I hope he will not die. God grant that this good parent,
whom I love, may not die. Yes, I could not help weeping: but yet I am not
drowned in sorrow like my brother. Before I shed tears, on all occasions, I
must lose my natural firmness and become, like him, soft and effeminate. Will
they still say, that I am of a savage disposition? at least they will imagine
that Abel loves Adam better than I, because I cannot weep like him. I love my
father: he is as dear to me as to my brother; but I cannot command my tears to
flow.

Abel, penetrated with sorrow, went into his pastures. He prostra^ed himself on
the earth; he bent his head on the grass, which he moistened with his tears,
and addressed this prayer to the (...).

With the most profound humility, I would praise Thee, O my God! Thou
conductest the affairs of mortals with unerring (...), an ^^^fini^e goodness.
Though depressed by grief, (...) sum to offer up to Thee my supplications; for
(...) the sinner to implore thy mercy. (...) allowed us this sweet (...) of the
evils which surround us. (...) Thou will change the (...) with the desires of a
plaintive (...) ways O Gracious God! are wise and good. To thy will I resign
myself, supplicating only for strength to suffer, and for consolation in our
pain. Thou know, O Omniscient God! Thou know the desires, the ardent
wishes of my soul. If these desires, if these wishes are not contrary to the
designs of thine infinite wisdom, restore us our common parent; restore to our
afflicted mother, the husband for whom she supplicates Thee -- restore her him
in whom her life is bound up, and whose loss would render her wretched --
restore to us his sorrowing children, a father tenderly beloved. Defer, O God
Merciful and Gracious! defer, if it be thy will, his death to a more distant
period. Speak, O God! and it is done: command, and it is accomplished. At thy
nod our evils will disappear, and joy and gladness, thanksgivings and praise
will resound from the humble habitations of sinners. Permit him who gave us
life, to remain yet longer with us. Spare him, that he may still declare to us
Thine infinite bounties, and teach our infant children to lisp forth thy
praise. But if Thine unerring wisdom has appointed this the time of his
dissolution; be not offended, O my Maker! with this excess of our grief. Pardon
the disorder of my words. If he must now die, Iend him, O God of Compassion! --
lend him thine assistance in the terrible hour of death, and mercifully forgive
our cries and groans. Moderate, by Thy divine consolations, our affliction,
that we may not offend Thee by our despair.

Such was the prayer of Abel. He was still prostrate on the earth, from which
he was roused by a distant sound. Sweet odours were wafted around, and before
him stood a guardian angel, resplendent in beauty. On his serene brow he wore a
coronet of roses, and his smile was gracious as the opening day. He said, with
a voice mild as the breath of the zephyrs, The Lord has lent a gracious ear, O
Abel! to the voice of thy supplications. He has granted thee the desires of
thine heart. He has commanded me to assume a body, and to bring thee
consolation and succor. The Eternal, who incessantly watches over his
creatures; who regards with the eye of beneficence the crawling insect, as well
as the archangel arrayed in glory, has ordered this earth to produce, in its
bosom, salutary remedies for the diseases of its inhabitants, whose bodies, by
the fall, are exposed to pain and sickness, which shall by degrees lead them to
death and to corruption, the sad consequences of having disobeyed their Maker.
Friend, take these plants, and these flowers: they are specifies to restore
health to thy father: boil them in the clear water of the fountain; let him
drink, and be whole.

The angel, having given him the salutary herbs, disappeared. Struck with
inexpressible astonishment, he remained some time immovable; then breathed the
devout gratitude of his soul, in this short ejaculation: What am I, O God? what
am I? that Thou should thus graciously regard my prayer. I am but sinful
dust and ashes. I would praise, Thee, O my God! but thy bounties exceed all
praise. The triumphant archangel cannot sufficiently exalt thy name, yet thou
have deigned to accept the supplications of a worm.

His lively joy lent him wings. He ran to his cottage, and with eager
impatience prepared the odoriferous dilution. This performed, he flew to his
father. Eve was still bathed in tears, and her daughters sat pensive by her
side. They saw with surprise his eagerness, the joy which sparkled in his eyes,
and the smile which sat on his lips. Dry up your tears, my beloved, said he, as
he entered. Weep no more, O my mother! the Lord has heard our prayers, he has
sent us succor. An angel has appeared to me in the pastures. He has given me
aromatic herbs and flowers, gathered by his celestial hand. Boil these, said
he, in clear water, and restore health to thy father. They heard his words with
astonishment, and rendered thanks to the Lord, with gratitude and humble
confidence. The sick drank the healing draught, and soon experienced its
salutary effects. Adam now raised himself on his bed, and with ardent piety
offered up his adorations; then taking the hand of Abel, he pressed it to his
cheek, and wetted it with tears of joy, saying, O my son! blessed be thou!
thou, by whom God has sent me succor: thou, whose virtue pleases the Lord:
thou, whose prayer he accepts, and has vouchsafed to answer. I again bless
thee, my son! my beloved son! Eve and her daughters then embraced him by whom
the Lord had sent them succor.

Cain at this instant entered the dwelling of his father. While in the field,
he had been tormented with care and anxiety: I will return, said he to himself;
I will return to my father: perhaps he needs my assistance. -- Perhaps he is
already dead, and I have not received a last blessing from his lips. I will
hasten to him. -- I love my father.

On his entering, he saw, with amazement, their joy. He heard Adam bless his
brother. Mahala, his wise, ran to him, and embracing him, said, The Lord, my
beloved, has sent us succor by the hand of Abel. Cain approached the bed of
Adam, and, kissing his hand, said, I salute thee, O my father! Praised be God,
who restores thee to our tears; but, O my father, have you no blessing for me?
You have blessed, my brother, by whom the Lord sent you help: bless me also --
me your firstborn. Adam, giving him a look of affection, and pressing his hand
between both his, said, I give thee my blessing, O Cain! Be blessed of God, O my
firstborn! May the favor of the Lord rest always on thee! May thine heart
enjoy tranquillity and peace, and thy soul uninterrupted repose! Cain then
embraced his brother. How could he avoid it? all had embraced him.

Cain left his father's dwelling; but it was to retire into the gloomy recesses
of a thick grove, where, oppressed with melancholy, he repeated after Adam,
Peace and tranquillity -- an uninterrupted repose -- How can I enjoy this
tranquillity? -- Where shall I find this repose? Was I not forced to petition
for a blessing, while his affection made him, unasked, pour forth his soul in
blessings on my happy brother? He has allowed me my rank of firstborn: What
advantage to me is this superiority? Misery is my inheritance; disdain my
portion. It is by the hand of Abel, the Lord has restored health to our
father. I am rejected. The bright messengers of Heaven appear not to me: they
pass me with contempt: they honor me not with their regards. While I spend my
strength in the labors of the field; while the sweat drops from my face,
embrown'd by the scorching sun, the angels hold converse with him, whose
delicate hands are unsoil'd by labor; who lies idle near his flocks, or, with
unmanly softness, is shedding tears, because the shining dew glitters on the
grass and herbage, or the setting sun tinges the clouds with purple. Happy
favorite! All nature smiles on thee. I only feel the curse: I only eat my
bread by the sweat of my brow. The whole weight of the divine malediction falls
on my wretched head. I am, in every thing, unhappy. Thus revolving in his
melancholy brain gloomy ideas, the offspring of hatred and envy, he wandered in
the thick shade.

The sun was retiring behind the azure mountains, and reflected on the clouds a
glowing red, when Adam said to his wife, I will, my beloved, before the day is
closed, render thanks to God, who has restored my health. He left his bed,
full of strength and vigor, and repaired, accompanied by his daughters, to the
entrance of his cottage. The departing sun diffused a mild light over the
fields: Adam cast himself on his knees, and viewed, with transport, the country
thus enlightened. Here am I, said he, with fervent effusion of heart -- here am
I, my Sovereign Master, prostrate before thy face, penetrated with a lively
sense of thine infinite goodness. Ye agonizing pains! what are become of you?
Ye pierced my bones, ye scorched my vitals; yet in the midst of anguish, my
soul lost not her hope; she placed her confidence in God, and was not
disappointed. The Almighty lent a gracious ear to the groans and cries of a
sinner: he regarded the voice of a worm. Health returned: pain and sorrow were
no more. Death shall not yet triumph over my dust: I shall still praise my
Maker, in this habitation of clay, this house of corruption. I will praise
Thee, O my God! I will praise Thee from the early dawn to the rising of the
evening star. While my soul is confined in this body of earth, it shall stammer
forth its gratitude; but it will praise Thee in more exalted strains, when,
disengaged from this obstructing dust, it shall rise triumphant and refined; it
shall then behold Thee face to face, arrayed in all the luster of Thy
manificence. O ye angels, replendent in light! cast your eyes on this dwelling
of sinners, this abode of death. The earth shook from its foundations when it
became defiled by sin, and its Almighty Maker turned from it his regards. Yet,
on this earth he now displays the wonders of his love. Attune your golden harps
to his praise. Exalt his name in seraphic strains, while man, weak man, can
only lisp his rapture. I salute thee, O sun! I salute thy retiring beams. When
thy morning rays enlightened these fields, I groaned, oppressed by pain: when
they illumined my dwelling, I saluted them with my sighs: ere they have given
place to the gray twilight, I am returning thanks to the Lord of Life who has
removed my grie^s. I salute you, ye losty mountains, and ye hills scattered
over the plain; mine eyes shall still behold, reflected from your summits, the
glowing brightness of the rising and the setting-sun. I salute you, O ye birds,
who chant the praise of the Eternal; your songs shall still recreate mine ear.
Ye limpid streams, I shall again repose my weary limbs on your flowery banks;
again be lulled to rest by your soft murmurs; and ye groves, ye bowers, ye
woods, I shall still walk under your refreshing shades: ye shall again shield
me from the sun's too ardent ray, when wrapped in profound meditation, I shall
wander in your fragrant retreats. I salute thee, O nature entire; but I worship
and adore only nature's God, who supported my vile clay, when ready to crumble
into dust.

The father of men thus praised the Lord, while the whole creation appeared
attentive to his prayer, and seemed to felicitate his return ^o life. The
glorious orb of the day darted on him in its last rays. The young zephyrs
wafted on their ambrosial wings the aromatic perfumes of the groves and
gardens, as if charged by the flowers to exhale their sweets to him. The
feathered inhabitants of the woods saluted him with their softest notes,
actuated by a lively joy.

Cain and Abel came under the shade, while Adam was yet on his knees. They saw
with delight, their father restored to health. The prayer ended, Adam, arose
from the earth, he embraced, and received the embraces of his transported
children: he kissed, with fond affection, the moistened cheek of our general
mother; after which, he, Eve and their daughters, returned to their dwelling.
Abel then addressing himself to Cain, said, Let us also, my dear brother,
render thanks to God Most High, who have restored to our tears our affectionate
father. I will, by the light of the moon, which is now rising, offer on mine
altar a young lamb: Wilt not thou also, on thine altar, make an offering.

Cain, giving him a gloomy and angry look, said, Yes, I will present an
offering to the Lord of what my barren fields afford. Abel, with graceful
sweetness, replied, O my brother! the Lord our God counts as nothing the lamb
which burns before him, neither does he regard the fruits of the field which
the fire consumes. It Is the ardent piety that flames in the heart of the
worshipper, that gives the offering all its value.

Cain returned, The fire of Heaven, will perhaps consume thy victim; for by
thee the Lord sent health to our father -- I am disdained. However, I will make
my offering. I am, as well as thee, penetrated with gratitude. Our father, who
is restored to our wishes, is equally dear to me, as to thee. Let the Lord do
with me, miserable worm! according to His good pleasure.

Abel tenderly threw himself on the neck of Cain, saying, Ah my brother, my
dear brother! do thou make the Lord's having sent by my hand, relief to our
father, a new subject of discontent? I was charged with this commission for us
all. All prayed to the Lord: the prayers of all were answered. Banish from thy
bosom, my dear brother! -- let me entreat thee, to banish for ever, these
gloomy ideas. The Lord, who sees into the inmost recesses of our souls, can
discover there unjust thoughts, and secret murmurs. Love me, as I love thee.
Offer thine offering; but suffer it not to be defiled by any impure
dispositions. May the Lord, O my brother! favorably accept thy praises, and
graciously shed his blessings on thee.

Cain answer^d not; but walked toward his field, and Abel, looking after him
with a pitying eye, repaired to his pastures. Each advanced to his altar. Abel
slew a young lamb; laid it on his altar; scattered on it odoriferous herbs and
slowers, and put fire to the offering, then, warmed with servent piety,
prostrated himself before it, and with humble gratitude praised the Lord. The
flame rose on high through the gloom of night, and enlightened the fields and
pastures. The Lord forbad the winds to blow, because the sacrifice was
acceptable.

Cain laid on his altar the fruits of the field; put fire to the offering, and
also prostrated himself before it. Instantly a terrific sound was heard among
the bushes. A furious whirlwind advanced toward the altar; dispersed the
offering of Cain, and covered him with flame and smoke. He retired trembling,
when a majestic voice, proceeding from the darkness, uttered these awful words,
Why tremblest thou? Why is pale fear seen on thy visage? There is yet time:
correct thyself: repent, and I will pardon thy sin: if thou do not, thy crime
and its chastisement shall pursue thee for ever. Why hate thou thy brother?
He loves thee: he honors thee, with true affection.

Cain, seized with horror, quitted the place of sacrifice, a tempestuous wind
driving after him the infected smoke of the offering. Appalled with terror, he
wandered through the darkness. His heart trembled within him: and a cold sweat
ran down his face. Casting his eyes around, he beheld the bright flame of his
brother's sacrifice rising in the air in spi^y waves. At (...) view, he turned
aside his head, and gnashing his ^eeth, cried, Ah! there is the sacrifice of the
favorite! Fly, mine eyes, this hateful sight. Another look would (...) my soul
with all the rage of the infernals. I cannot help cursing in mine heart, this
darling of Heaven and of all Nature. -- I cannot help cursing him with
trembling lips. -- But turn, unhappy wretch, turn thy fury on thyself. Come O
death; O destruction come, and put a period to my miseries, and my life! Why, O
my father, did thou suffer thyself to be seduced? Why, O my mother, did
thou intail miseries on thy wretched offspring? Shall I present myself before
you, in the horrors of my despair? Shall my agonies, my terrors, my
insupportable wretchedness, show you the distresses your fatal lapse prepared
for your descendants? Ah! no. Revenge not, unhappy man -- revenge not thyself
on a father, by bringing before his eyes a spectacle of such horror. Seized
with terror, he would expire in my sight, and I should, if possible, be still
more wretched. The wrath of the Lord lies heavy on me. He ba^curs'd me. He
disdains mine offering. I am the most desolate creature on the face of the
earth. The animals of the field, the reptiles of the ground compared with me,
are worthy of envy. O merciful God! it be possible, extend thine indulgence to
me. Turn from me, O God! thy fierce anger; or again reduce me to nothing. --
But what do I say? Oh hard obdurate heart! Correct thyself, he has said, and I
will pardon thy past offenses! Choose pardon or misery! -- misery eternal! --
^^sery inexpressible! Yes, I have sinned: mine iniquities rise above my head:
they cry for vengeance. Thou art just, O God! Thy vengeance is also just. The
farther we stray from the path of perfection and wisdom, the farther we stray
from happiness. I must then be guilty, since I am unhappy. I will forsake these
ways of perverseness. Turn Thine eyes, O God, from my past offenses: Preserve
me from committing new ones. Take pity on me, O my God! or -- reduce me to
nothing.

BOOK IV.
THE air was yet moist with the dew of night; the birds still slept in silence;
the sun had not begun to gild the tops of the hills, or the (...) fogs of the
morning; yet Cain distressed and melancholy, had left his cottage. Mahala,
unknowing she was overheard, had wept and prayed for him during the tedious
^ight. The black traces of despair were too visible in his ^^^ntenance to
escape the observation of this affectionate wife. She raised to Heaven her
supplicating hands. She begged for him mercy and forgiveness. She entreated
that the Divine consolations and grace might sooth and soften the heart of ^e^
wretched husband. Her lively grief, her intense devotions as she feared
disturbing the partner of her bed, were uttered only in sighs and tears. Yet
the inarticulate expressions of her sorrow had reached the ears of Cain, who,
unable to bear her grief, wandered in the early dawn. His murmuring voice
resounded through the profound calm of the fields like distant thunder. Night
odious! night horrible! said he. What black clouds surround me? What fears!
What terrors! When my imagination began to be calmed, when gentle sleep had
hushed my griefs, the voice of lamentation awoke me. Alas! I only wake to be
r^plung'd in wretchedness. Shall I never more enjoy repose? Why did she pray
and weep for me? She yet knows not that my offering was rejected. -- Her tears
increase my distress. -- I cannot bear her groans -- they add to my griefs --
They chase peace from my heart. This day, like the last, must be passed in
sorrow and bitterness. While a smile of approbation rewards every action of my
brother, while he enjoys every soothing delight, terror and sadness pursue me.
I love thee, Mahala -- I love thee tenderly. Thou art dearer to me, than
myself. Why then should thou, by thy lamentations, fill with anguish the few
hours of rest my miseries have left me.

He stopped under a bush that grew on the side of a rock: O soft sleep! said he,
restore me here thy balmy blessings. Unhappy that I am, weakened by fatigue and
terror, I invoked thee in my cottage. Scarce had thou spread over me thy
downy pinions, when the voice of sorrow chased thee from mine eyes. Here is
none to trouble my repose, except beings inanimate, influenced by the wrath of
heaven, can drive quiet from me, even in this distant retreat. O Earth, which
by a c^^se too severe, requirest such painful labor. -- Alas! I only labor to
prolong a lise of wretchedness: -- now, at least, let me on thy bosom find some
moments of (...), to repair my exhausted strength. I expect no other happiness.
I know no greater. He was silent. He laid himself on the fragrant grass, and
the power he had invoked wrapped him in his sable wing.

An^melech secretly followed the steps of Cain. He was now at his side. A
profound sleep, said the malicious spi^^it, has closed his eyes. I will
continue near him, to accomplish my purpose, and accelerate his destruction.
Come, assist me, ye hovering dreams; disturb his soul with fantastic visions;
assemble each image that can inspire him with fury and distraction. Come envy
with corrosive tooth, hot Rage, and every tumultuous passion. Thus spoke the
spirit impure, and with intent malign laid him near Cain. A furious wind arose:
it howled in the caverns of the rocks: it shook with dreadful roar the bushes,
and rudely agitated the hair of Cain. But in vain it howled in the caverns of
the rocks: in vain it shook with dreadful roar the bushes: in vain it rudely
agitated the hair of Cain: sleep sat heavy on his wearied eyelids, and he
still kept them closed.

He beheld in a dream a vast field, on which were sentter'd a number of mean
cottages. He saw his sons and his grandsons dispersed over the plain; where
they resolutely exposed themselves to the midday sun, which darted h^^
scorching rays on their heads. Assiduous at their painful labors, sometimes
they gathered fruits for their subsistence at others prepared the earth to
receive fresh seeds; or stooping, wounded their hands with pulling up the
thorny brambles, lest they should choke the rising grain, and lessen the
utility of their former industry. He saw also their wives busied in domestic
labor. He beheld them preparing a frugal refreshment against the return of
their husbands. Eliel, his eldest son, then appeared before him. He saw him
lift with difficulty a heavy burden from the earth; he bore it on his
shoulders, tottering under the load: the sweat str^^m'd from his embrown'd
face, and sorrow and discontent appeared in his eyes. What a life of misery!
said Eliel. How well is the prediction fulfilled which said, Man shall eat his
bread by the sweat of his brow! Did the Creator banish from his presence all
the offspring of Adam? or did the curse affect only the children of the
firstborn? too severely it is felt by us, the sons of Cain: our portion is
labor and indigence. While in yonder fields inhabited by the children of Abel,
from which our unnatural kinsmen have banished us to these barren deserts, is
concentered all that can give delight to man. There the earth spontaneously
pours forth her bounties. Those sons of luxury recline in fragrant bowers.
Nature herself seems subservient to their ease and sloth. Every comfort, every
pl^^sure, if pleasure is to found on earth, is the portion of these voluptuous
idlers. Thus murmuring, Eliel slowly staggered toward the cottages.

Cain was now carried, on Imagination's sportive wing, to a plain enameled
with a variety of flowers, watered by limpid brooks, which, meandring, ran with
soft murmurs near aromatic bowers, under the shade of tusted groves. The banks
were decorated with lofty trees, and the clear water, reflecting the vivid
colors of their several fruits, formed a new landscape. The streams, after
thus roving through the flowery turf, finished their wandering course in an
ample lake, whose glassy surface was smooth and unruffled. He saw at a distance
a citron grove where played the wanton Zephyrs, sanning with their ambrosial
wings the sweets around. The prospect was terminated by a range of lofty
fig trees, which spread their extensive shade over the tender flowers. In this
delightful spot were accumulated all the beauties with which imaginative sable
has decorated the charming vale of Tempe, or Cnidus's luxuriant land; where
rose, consecrated to Venus, a magnificent temple on lucid columns.

Cain saw in his dream flocks white as the falling snow, sporting in the
meadows, or cropping the plenteous herbage, while the indolent shepherd, whose
head was encircled with a wreath of flowers, lay reclined under the spreading
palm, chanting to the sympathizing object of his passion an amorous lay. There
boys blooming as the Loves, and girls sweet as the Graces, assembled (...) of
interwoven honey-suckles and myrtle, where with ag^^^ feet they formed the
festive dance. The bright juice of the grape sparkled in golden goblets, and
delicious fruits were spread on tables covered with flowers; while the ambient
air resounded with (...) and instrumental harmony. Cain with regret beheld
these children of dissipation. He saw a young man rise in (...) midst of the
sportive assembly, and heard him thus address his brethren: I rejoice with you,
my jocund friends: I rejoice in our present felicity. Natures smiles on us: she
has united in this delightful spot all that can charm the (...), or ravish the
heart; but to conserve her bounties, we must again return to labor; and labor
is troublesome and fatiguing. Shall our hands, formed to touch the soft ^ute,
and sounding lyre, be rendered callous by the drudg^ry of the field? Shall our
heads, which so well become these encircling roses, be again exposed to the
sun's fierce rays? No: we will recline on beds of violets under the myrtle,
while the hardy sons of earth, the brawny inhabitants of yonder plains, shall
for us endure the toil of labor. The men shall till our grounds, their wives
and daughters shall be the servants of our's. What say ye, my gay companions,
is the prospect pleasing? You smile approbation. Lend me your assistance, my
dear brethren, and ere tomorrow's dawn, we will make it a joyful reality. When
the Sun has withdrawn his rays from the earth, and Night has spread over her
mantle of darkness, we will march in silence to the cottages of those rustics.
We shall doubtless find them, after the rugged toil of the day, buried in the
arms of sleep, and shall easily take them captive. It Is true our number is
superior to theirs, and you may wonder that I recommend silence, and choose
night for our expedition: but, my friends, the men are strong: hardship and
fatigue have braced their nerves, and despair may render them desperate. Let us
then avoid a battle, in which, if victors, we must suffer some loss, and choose
the least dangerous method of effecting our purpose. The young man was silent.
The whole assembly were unanimous in his praises, and showed their readiness to
join in the infernal scheme by loud shouts of applause.

A new scene now struck the eyes of Cain. It was night, and the in human
artifice was in execution. He heard the cries of ^^solation and terror,
intermingled with shouts of insult and triumph. He beheld the fields and rocks
illumined by the flames of the burning cottages; by this dreadful light, he saw
his sous and grandsons bound, and with their wives and infants, tamely marching
before the children of Abel, like a flock of bleating sheep.

Such was the dream of Cain, he was distressed, though asleep, when Abel,
having perceived him under the bushes at the foot of the rock, approached, and
with looks of affection, and in a voice of tenderness, said, Ah my brother,
soon may thou awake. I long to embrace thee, and to express the sweet
sensations by which my heart is engrass'd. I love thee, my brother. I see with
pain thy uneasiness, and gladly would remove from thy soul the fatal jealou^^
that imbitters thy days. Awake, O Cain, awake, that my heart may again know the
pleasures of reconciliation. But soft, ye impatient wishes. Breathe gently ye
winds: ye birds cease your untimely melody, lest ye disturb the precious repose
of my brother. Perhaps his fatigued limbs require yet longer the restorative
influences of sleep -- but how he lies! how pale! -- how wan! His features seem
distorted by sury. Why do you distress him ye visions of terror? leave his soul
to enjoy tranquillity, ye imaginary horrors. Take possession of it, ye pleasing
images. Present to his mind the sweet occupations of domestic life; the ^ender
delights of the husband and the father: May every thing most lovely in the
creation fill his imagination, and sooth his soul! May he awake calm and
smiling as the vernal morn! May joy expand his countenance, and his delighted
heart utter its gratitude to the Great Giver of every good, in devout praise!
He spoke no more, but stood steadfastly looking at Cain, while astonishment,
inquietude, and tender love, were visible in his eyes.

As a fierce lion couching at the foot of a rock, (who though asleep, freezes
with terror the trembling traveller, and obliges him to take a wide circuit to
avoid the dreadful beast) if the murderous arrow, in its rapid flight, pierces
his side, suddenly starts, and with dreadful roar, seeks his enemy. He foams.
He rages. His blazing eyes menace destruction. The first object he meets is the
victim of his fury; perhaps an innocent child playing on the grass with the
variegated flowers. Not less terrible rose Cain. His eyes were inflamed, and
rancour sat on his pollid cheek. A storm of wrath was gathering. The cloud
burst. He stamped his foot on the ground. Open, O earth! he cried, Open, (...)!
and hide me -- hide me from my miseries in thy (...) abyss. My life is one
continued round of di^^^ess and torture, and, as if this was not enough, I see
-- insupportable prospect! -- I see that my children shall one ^^y inherit my
miseries. But I implore in vain; thou will not open. The Almighty Avenger
restrains thee. I must, such is his will, I must be wretched. And that future
evils may disturb my scanty enjoyment of present good, he himself draws aside
the veil. Cursed be the hour when my mother, by my birth, gave the first proof
of her sad fertility! Cursed be the place where she first felt the pangs of
childbirth! May all its product perish! May he that shall sow it, lose his
grain and his labor! May sudden terror strike even to the bones, all who shall
pass over it!

These were the imprecations of Cain. When Abel, pale as the sculptured marble,
ventured to approach him with flow and unsteady step. My brother! said he, in a
trembling voice: No -- O my God! Horror freezes my blood -- One of the
seditious spirits, whom the eternal precipitated from heaven, has surely taken
his form, under which he utters his blasphemies! Where art thou, my brother? --
I fly to seek thee -- to bless thee. -- Where art thou, my brother?

Here I am, cried Cain? in a voice of thunder: here am I, thou soft favorite
-- thou dear minion of the vengeful Eternal, and of all Nature -- thou, whose
viperous race are one day solely to engross all the felicity of this world.
Yes, so it must be. It is fit there should be a tribe of slaves, as beasts of
burden to the favorite lineage. Their delicate limbs must not endure the
hardships of labor. Formed only for voluptuous idleness, these sons of sloth
must recline in shady bowers, while -- The rage of hell is in my heart --
Cannot I --

Cain! -- my brother! said Abel, interrupting him, with a voice and look that
at once expressed his horror, affection and astonishment: What terrifying dream
has troubled thy soul? I sought thee in the early dawn. I came to embrace thee
at the springing day. But how do I find thee agitated? How do thou return my
tender love? When, oh when, my dearest brother! shall peace, shall amity bless
our dwellings? When will come the happy day -- a day after which our indulgent
parents so ardently long, when fraternal affection and social joy shall be
firmly reestablished? O Cain! Cain! can thou so soon forget the pleasures of
reconciliation, of which thou seem'dst so sensible, when in a rapture of joy
and friendship I flew into thine arms. Have I offended thee, my brother? --
Unknowing^ have I offended thee? then -- But, why do thou cast on (...) such
furious looks? By all that is sacred I conjure thee to forget my involuntary
fault, and receive my embraces. As Abel pronounced the last words, he stooped
to clasp the knees of his brother; but Cain started back, crying Ah, thou
serpent? Would thou twine thyself about me? At the same instant, with an arm
strengthened by rage, he swung a massy club, and smote the head of his brother.
The innocent victim of his fury fell at his feet. The bones of his head were
crushed. He once raised his dying eyes to his unnatural brother, and giving him
a look of pardon and pity, expired. His blood distained the waving curls of his
fair hair, and ran in a stream to the feet of his murderer.

Cain stood motionless, stiffen'd with horror. The cold sweat ran from his
trembling members, while he beheld with agony the last convulsions of his
expiring brother. The smoke of the blood he had shed ascended even to him.
Cursed blow! he cried. My brother -- Awake -- awake, O my brother! -- How pale!
-- His eyes are fixed -- The blood streams from his head! -- Miserable that I
was -- Ah! what am I now? Inscrnal horrors! --

Thus he cried aloud, and furiously threw from him the bloody club: then with
violence struck his temples. He stooped to the dead body, and endeavored to
raise it from the earth, crying Abel! -- my brother! -- awake! Ah! what
tortures do I feel! -- How his head hangs! -- how it bleeds! -- how helpless!
-- Dead! -- O anguish insupportable! -- he is dead. My crime is without remedy!
-- I fly -- whither fly? My tottering knees will scarce bear me. Having thus
spoke, trembling, he hid himself among the bushes.

The seducer, with triumph in his look, remained near the dead. Elate with
pride, he stretched his gigantic form to its full height, and his countenance
was not less dreadful than the black pillar of smoke, arising from the
halfconsumed lumber of a ^^nely cottage is to the inhabitants, who, returning
from their peaceful labors, find all their conveniences, all their riches, the
prey of the devouring flames. An^^^elech followed the criminal with his eyes,
while a ru^^^ess smile spoke his exultation. He then cast on the blee^^ing body
a look of complacency. Pleasing sight! said he: I see for the first time this
earth wet with human blood. The flow of the sacred springs of Heaven, before
the fatal hour when the Master of the universe precipitated us from those seats
of bliss, never gave me half this pleasure. Never did the harmonious harps of
the archangels give me such delight, as the last sighs of a brother murdered by
his brother. And thou, the noblest of thy Maker's works; thou last, best effort
of his creating hand, what a despicable figure do thou now make? Rise
beautiful youth! Rise thou friend of angels! This indolence in thine orisons
ill becomes the worship of thy God! But he stirs not. His own brother has left
him weltering in his blood. No: that honor is mine. I guided the arm of the
fratricide. It is by actions, such as Satan himself would boast, I shall rise
above the vile populace of Hell. I hasten to the foot of the infernal throne.
The vast concave of the fiery gulf will reverberate my praises. I shall move
in triumph through crowds of ignoble spirits, whom no hardy achievement has
dignisy'd, and look down with scorn on those, who till now were accounted my
equals. Inflated with arrogance, he turned once more to glut his eyes with a
last view of the victim: but the hedious traces of despair instantaneously
dissipated his ironic smile, and effaced the triumphant pride which sat on his
expanded brow. The Lord commanded, and he was seized by infernal horrors: he
was overwhelmed by a deluge of torture. He now cursed his existence: he cursed
eternity, replete with torments, and yelling fled.

The last sighs of the dying ascended to the throne of God, and demanded of
Eternal Justice vengeance on the murderer. Thunder was heard from the holy
sanctuary. The golden (...) ^eas'd to sound. The eternal hallelujahs were (...)
Three times the thunder echoed through the lofty arch of heaven. This awful
sound was succeeded by the majestic ^^tice of God issuing from the argentine
cloud that encompassed his ^^^one. It summoned an archangel. The lucid spirit
advanced toward the seat of the Most High, veiling his face with his, ^^^ulgent
wings; and God said, Death has made his first prey ^^^^an. Henceforth be it thy
function to assemble the souls (...) the just. I myself spoke to that of Abel
when he fell. When the righteous man is langushing in the cold sweat of death,
(...) thou at his side. By assuring him of eternal felicity, supp^^ him in
those moments of anxiety, when his soul, trembling at the view of his past
life, dreads a separation from its dust. Th^^ shall then calm his fears, and
inspire him with confidence. Thou shall turn his eyes from my rigorous justice,
and six them on my long suffering and tender mercies. Hasten now toward the
earth to meet the soul of Abel. Thou Michael go with him, and declare to the
murderer the sentence pronounced against him. Thus spoke the Eternal, and again
the the thunder thrice echoed through the lofty arch of Heaven. The archangels,
with rapid wing, (...) through the celestial ranks. The gates of the divine
abode spontaneously opening to the heavenly messengers, the^ traversed the
boundless expanse, on all sides resplendent, amidst suns without number, and
alighted on the earth.

The angel of death called forth the soul of Abel from the ensanguin'd dust. It
advanced with a smile of joy. The more pure and spirituous parts of the body
flew off, and mixing with the balsamic exhalations, wafted by the zephyrs from
the flowers which sprung up within the compass irradiated by the angel,
environed the soul, forming for it an etherial body. It saw with a transport,
till then unknown, the bright messenger coming toward it.

I salute thee, said the celestial spirit, while benignity and joy beamed in
his eyes: I salute thee, O happy soul, now disengaged from thy encumbering
dust. Receive my embraces. It is to me an increase of felicity, that I am
chosen by the Most High to introduce thee into the realms of light and bliss,
where miriads of angels wait to hail thee. Conceive, if thou can, beloved
soul! conceive what it is to behold God face to face -- to have communion with
him for ever. Thou art going to experience the riches of his grace, the wonders
of his love. Thou will soon know the immense rewards with which he recompenses
virtue. O thou, who have first laid down thy covering of dust, to be clothed
in light. I once more embrace thee.

Permit me also to embrace thee, celestial friend, replied the soul; and over
power'd by the estatic sense of its beatitude, it reclined on the angel.
Delight extreme! bliss inexpressible! While my soul was imprisoned in the
perishing clay from which it is now released, I meditated in solitude, by ^^e
mild and soft light of the unclouded moon, on the c^^arms of virtue, on the
glories of my God. These sublime objects even then elevated me above myself,
and I experienced, without knowing it, a faint dawn of the felicity I at
present taste. But how much more attractive now are the charms of virtue! how
are my ideas of the Divine attributes exalted and enlarged? What new thoughts!
-- What are now the beauties of spring! O sun! where is now thy dazzling
luster? the enraptured soul again embraced the angel, and continued to utter
its transports. Eternity now is mine. All sublunary cares are at an end. I
shall for ever be employed in praising my God, who, with unbounded beneficence
bestows never ending felicity on the soul that pants after virtue, and delights
in the beauty of goodness. For ever shall I exalt his name; for ever shall I
enjoy ineffable bliss: for I shall see him as he is.

Thus did these two happy spirits interchange reciprocal endearments, and the
sweet embrace. Follow me my friend, said the archangel; sollow my flight. Let
us quit this earth: nothing here can now be dear to thee, but the virtuous.
Regret not to leave them behind; for after a few more ris^ and setting suns,
they too will partake of thy felicity. At present the celestial choir waits
with ardent expectation thy coming. Haste to embrace your new friends, and join
with them in incessent hallelujahs to the Eternal.

I follow thee, replied the righteous soul. Into what a torrent of delight and
felicity art thou conveying me! Dear and respectable friend, whose nature is so
far superior to mine! O my beloved kindred, whom I leave still embodied in
dust; who must still remain in this vale of tears; when the days of your lives
are fulfilled, when the hour of your dissolution is at hand, and the celestial
introducer of souls shall descend to meet you, I will accompany him; for at the
foot of the Almighty's throne I will beg this grace. With what joy shall I see
your pure and holy souls rise from this seat of corruption, from this region of
death! And thou too, Thirza, my dear and tender companion! when thou have yet a
little longer wept over my mouldering dust, and have reared to virtue the
infant that but now begins to prattle forth its thoughts, thou must be the prey
of death. What rapture! when thy soul, quitting the cold clay, shall fly into
mine arms.

Thus spoke Abel, and, rising in the air, began to lose sight of the earth. As
his eyes were taking a last look on the dwellings, whose inhabitants were still
dear to him, he beheld his brother: remorse was imprinted on his countenance:
his clench'd hands were held over his head: he suddenly listed up his eyes to
Heaven, then, frantic with despair, struck, with repeated blows, his throbbing
breast: he cast himself in agony on the earth, and rolled in the dust. Tears of
compassion dropped from the eyes of the happy, and he turned aside from the
frightful scene. His heavenly conductor was now joined by multitudes of angels:
the tutelar spirits of the earth surrounded the celestial travelers: they
congratulated the soul of Abel, on its deliverance from sin and death: they
embraced him in holy rapture; and, having escorted him to the confines of the
terrestrial atmosphere, they reclined on a crimson cloud, and to the soft lute
and silver harp, joined the melody of their celestial voices, chanting in
chorus.

He rises! the new inhabitant of Heaven rises to his native land. Render him
homage, ye brilliant constellations, which roll in the immensity of space:
render homage, with gladness, to the earth, your companion. What glory to that
opaque sphere, to have nourished in its dust a being prepared for the joys of
immortality! Glow, ye fields, with brighter verdure; reflect, ye hills, a purer
light!

He rises! the new inhabitant of Heaven rises to his native land. Legions of
angels await his arrival at the celestial portals. With what rapture will they
welcome their new companion to the seats of bliss! They will crown him with
unfading roses. What will be his transport, when he traverses the flowery
fields of Heaven! when, under aromatic bowers of eternal verdure, he jo^^s the
angelic choir in their song of praise; ascribing, glory, honor, power and
dominion, to the Source of happiness, the sole Principle of all good!

Already have we celebrated the day when his soul descended from the hands of
its Creator, and entered into its body of earth. Already, O festive day! have
thou been celebrated, and we will still celebrate thee. We saw his young mind
improve in every virtue. It hasted to maturity and strength, like the lily in
the spring. We have seen, with joy, his aspirations after perfection.
Invisible, we have beheld the uniformity of his life, the consistency of his
actions. We have joined in his devout praises, we have sympathized in his
tender sorrow. His virtuous tears have given joy to the angels. Virtue was his
motive and guide. For ever shall he enjoy the rewards of virtue.

He rises! the new inhabitant of Heaven rises to his native land. Receive him
ye sons of light! crown him wit^ celestial roses! Honor him, whom the Most
High deligh^eth to honor. Yonder, like a faded flower, lies the du^ he has
abandoned. Parent earth receive it in thy boson Again receive the precious
dust. Each spring it shall pr^duce odoriferous flowers. Each year we will
solemnize the day in which his righteous soul quitted the earth.

Thus they sung, then borne on their lucid cloud, descended to the earth.

Cain wandered in despair among the bushes. He (...) from place to place; but
change of situation decreased (...) the horror that had lodged itself in his
convulsed (...). Thus the traveller in vain quickens his pace; in vain exer^
his skill and strength to avoid an irritated serpent; the reptile pursues him
with its poisonous breath; it encircles his limbs; it fixes its sting. Where
shall he fly from torture? already convulsions seize his wounded breast, the
mortal poison flows to his heart. So Cain vainly strove to fly his pain. Oh
that I could no more see the streaming blood! he cried: I fly, but the blood
follows me still -- still it runs to my feet. Where shall I fly? -- Where? --
Miserable that I am -- His last look! -- What have I done? the dreadful deed is
the work of Hell -- I already feel its tortures! I have, with him, murdered his
unborn offspring -- Ah, what noise is that among the bushes? -- Why sighs the
dead? -- Away, haste feet far away from the pursuing blood -- far away from the
dreadful sight of death! -- Drag me away, ye trembling knees, sprinkled with a
brother's blood, to -- Hell. At these words he walked with fast and unequal
steps.

A black cloud alighted at his feet, from the midst of which issued an awful
voice, saying, Cain where is thy brother? -- I know not -- me miserable! -- am
I my brother's keeper? answered he, stammering and retreating back, pale as the
lifeless corpse of Abel. Loud thunders now burst from the cloud, the grass and
bushes blazed around him, and Michael, the archangel, stood before him, arrayed
in terror. On his majestic brow were imprinted the menaces of the Lord. In his
right hand he held the sorked lightning, and extended his left over the
appalled sinner. He spoke, and it again thundered. Stop, trembler! Hear thy
sentence. Thus says the Lord, What have thou done? the voice of thy brother's
blood cries to me. Thou art cursed on the earth, which has drank the blood of
thy brother, shed by thy hand. To thee it shall be for ever barren, and thou
shall be a vagaboud on its surface. The terrified sinner was mute and
immovable: his head bent, and his eyes fixed on the ground, while his heart
was torn with anguish, like that of the impious atheist, when God, terrible in
judgment, shakes the earth, and he sees the profaned temples and the sumptuous
palaces of sinners fall into ruins, and shake to their foundations; while his
ears are terrified with the groans of the dying, the sobs of grief, and the
strieks of despair. In this convulsion of nature, thick ^^oke and flames burst
from the cleft earth. Wild with horror he attempts to fly. He staggers on the
tremulous ground. He reels. He falls. Equal terror shook the fratricide. He
attempted to speak^ but only inarticulate stammerings came from his trembling
lips, while dread still kept his eyes fixed on the earth. At length he cried,
in a voice which spoke his anguish, My crime is to great -- ah much too great,
ever to be forgiven! Now, O inexorable God! Thou have cursed me on the earth,
and -- Where can I hide myself from thy presence? -- Banished from Society a
vagabond -- the first who meets me will slay me, and rid the earth of an
infamous murderer.

A vengeance seven fold more dreadful than thine, shall fall on him who sheds
thy blood, said the angel, speaking again in thunder. Dark disquietude and
gnawing remorse are strongly imprinted on thy brow. By these marks shall thou
be known, and all, on seeing thee, shall quit the path made by thy wandering
feet, crying, There goes Cain the murderer. The angel, having announc'd the
divine anathema, disappeared. Thunder again issued from the rising cloud: a
dreadful whirlwind tore up by the roots the trees and bushes, with a noise that
resembled the howlings of a malefactor suffering under the agonies of penal
torture.

Cain stood motionless. Despair glared in his eyes: yes flerceness was still
seen on his bushy brows. The furious winds shook his erect hair, wild fear, at
length, forced from his livid and quivering lips these horrid accents. Why has
he not annihilated me? -- Wherefore not annihilated me? that no traces of me
might remain in the creation. Why was I not blasted by his lightnings? Why did
not his thunder strike me to the depths of the earth? -- But his ire reserves
me for perpetual sufferings -- torments without end -- Detested by my fellow
creatures -- all nature abhors me -- I abhor myself -- Already the attendants
on guilt haunt me; shame, remorse, despair. -- Shut out from human society,
banished from God, I shall, while on earth, feel the torments of Hell -- I feel
them now. Cursed be thou, O arm, which so hastily executed the impulses of
passion, may thou wither on my body like the blighted limb of a tree! Cursed
be the hour when a dream from Hell deceived me! -- and thou infernal fiend, who
suggestedst it. Where art thou now? that I may curse thee! Art thou returned to
Hell? may thou there suffer incessantly what I now feel! Nothing worse can I
wish thee. This is your triumph, ye spirits of darkness! Gaze on ye devils, and
wonder at my misery! -- Spent with agony, he sat down on the trunk of a fallen
tree, and remained without strength or voice, motionless as the dead. Then
starting, he cried, Ha! what noise is that? it is the voice of murdered Abel!
-- he groans -- I see his streaming blood! O my brother, my brother! in pity to
(...) ^ressible anguish, cease to haunt me! He now contin^'d (...) in
speechless agony, sighs only bursting from his tortured (...).

In the mean time the father of mankind, with his amiable spouse, having left
their ^ttage, came forth to enjoy the fragrance and beauty of the (...) day.
With what majesty does the sun dart his first (...) ^cry'd Eve. How they gild
the ^limsey mist that hove^^ (...) yonder field! How charming the appearance of
the ^^^ntry! Let us walk on, Adam, amid the dew till the hou^ of labor calls
thee to the field, and me to our dwelling. O my beloved! this earth is still
lovely! See, Adam, how all the creatures rejoice: each bush, each eminence
pours forth their melody! The beasts too, how they frisk and bound, and chase
each other! with what gaiety and life they welcome the morning rays!

Adam answered, Yes, my love, the earth is still beautiful. It still bears
visible marks of the presence of God, and of his infinite goodness, which our
folly and ingratitude have not yet been able to exhaust. Yes, his mercy, his
munificence, exceed the power of words to express, are too great for the
rejoiced heart to conceive. Let us hasten, Eve, through these flowery fields,
to the smiling pastures where Abel feeds his flock. Perhaps we may ^^d that
amiable, that dutiful son, chanting his morning (...), and, in devout melody,
praising his Creator.

Dear Adam, returned Eve, let us first go to the field of Cain. I have in this
ba^ket brought a little present for my firstborn. I have culled out some of
the best of my figs, and a sew bunches of my finest dried grapes. They will be
an agreeable refreshment for him, when at midday he retires to the shade,
saint and fatigued with labor. Let us go to him first, my spouse; for fain
would I erase from his mind, the idea, that he is not beloved by us with the
same affection that we love his brother.

How attentive, my dearest, is thy tenderness! replied Adam; I will accompany
thee with joy to the field of Cain. Let us carry him thy present, that he may
not say, all our concern and love are lavished on Abel. May the serenity of
this delightful morning dispose his heart to the impressions of tenderness!
they now redoubled their pace, and walked toward the open country. (...)
happy, said Eve, as she was going on; how (...) think myself, if, when nature
thus smiles and awakens every ^^^timent of tenderness and joy, our firstborn
receives us with affection! If his heart is (...) to the soft sensations of
filial love!

They now ca^ ^^om behind some bushes, Eve walking a little before, (...)
suddenly stepping back, she cried, with a tremulous ^oice, Who lies there? --
Adam, who is that lies there? -- He lies not like one asleep -- His face is on
the ground -- Those golden locks are Abel's! -- Adam, why do I tremble? --
Abel, Abel, awake -- awake, my son -- turn to me thy face -- turn to me thy
face -- Awake, ah awake, dear son, from a sleep that freezes me with terror!
They approach nearer. What do I see! cried Adam, trembling and retiring back.
Blood! blood trickling from his temples! His head is covered with blood! -- O
Abel! O my son -- my son -- my dear son! cried Eve, lifting up his arm
stiffen'd by death, then sunk pale as the object she lamented, on Adam's
throbbing breast. Horror and grief deprived them both of voice, when Cain,
frantic with despair, came without design to the place where lay the dead body
of his brother, and seeing near the corpse, his father motionless, and his
mother pale and lifeless in his arms, he cried out, trembling, He is dead! -- I
killed him! -- Cursed be the hour, O father of men! when thou begattest me! And
thou woman! cursed be the instant when thou broughtest me forth. -- He is dead!
-- I killed him! repeated he, and fled.

Two lovers united by a sense of their mutual perfections, enjoying sweet
converse, sit near each other. A tempest suddenly rises: the subtle lightnings
dart, the blue flame qui^^rs over their heads. Each strives to succor each --
alas! in vain -- embracing still, they living seem, though void of life. Thus
our first parents sat pale and silent, without sign of life, except an
universal trembling. Adam first recovered from his lethargy of stupid grief.
Where am I? he cried in broken accents. How I tremble -- My God! my God! -- Ah
there he lies! -- wretched father! -- What horrors shake my soul! -- How can I
support the dreadful thought -- His brother killed him! -- he has cursed us! O
Abel, O my son! my (...) are chilled; my blood runs cold. Ah miserable (...)
One son has cursed thee, the other lies before (...) in his own blood. What
evils, what ^^^ments, have I (...) on myself, and my wretched offspring! -- Ah
fatal sin! -- (...) thou too, Eve, thou awakest not? -- How my terrors (...)
Art thou dead too? -- Am I left alone a prey to (...), O God, in the midst of
desolation, I adore thy (...) revere thy justice -- I am a sinner. -- An icy
coldness (...) ^ates itself into my beating heart. My eyes fail. O (...)
delayest thou? -- O Abel! O my dear son! He the^ (...) in cast a look on the
body: the tears flowed down his (...) face, and with them ran the cold sweat.
Thou at last ^akest, dear Eve, he continued: but alas! to what in^^^^ssible
tortures do thou awake! Ah what distress is seen (...) weeping eyes, dear
companion of my misery!

Adam, replied Eve, in a fear^ul accent, is the murde^^ gone? the voice of
cursing thunders no more -- I no longer hear the voice of his cursing. Curse me
-- me alone, barbarous fratricide, I was the first sinner. O my child! -- my
child! -- O Abel, my dearest son! -- she now sunk from the arms of Adam on the
dead. My son! my son, she cried -- speaking to the insensible clay: thine eyes
are fixed, no more they turn on me. -- Awake! awake -- Alas! I call in vain: he
is dead! -- That is death -- the death with which we were threatened, when
cu^^'d by God after the fall. O insufferable torment! I was the first sinner! O
my husband! spouse beloved and dear! thy tears rend my heart. It was I that
seduced thee. Of me -- of me, O weeping father! demand thy son's blood! Of me
your mother, my wretched children! -- me -- me curse, murderer of brothers! but
spare thy father! -- I was the first sinner! O my son! my son! thy blood rises
against me -- it accuses me, unhappy parent! Thus lamented the mother of the
human race, while her tears streamed on the congealing blood.

Adam cast on his wife looks full of tenderness and grief: Dear Eve, said he,
what exqusite pangs thou giv'st my bursting heart! Cease, I entreat thee, cease
thus to torment me! I conjure thee, by our miseries, by our tender love I
conjure thee, to cease thus reproaching thyself! We both have ^nn'd, we both
are guilty. The bitter consequences of our crimes are but too sad (...) ^ances
of our ingratitude and folly. But the (...) we have offended, the God who
chasti^^ us, still regards us with a pitying eye. -- Yes, my God! we are yet
allowed to supplicate thee in our distr^^^. Thou have not utterly destroyed the
sinner. We (...), Eve, and our souls are out of the reach of death (...) only
strip us of this body, subject to pain and (...). Our immortal souls will, if
we are virtuous, tri^ph over death, and enjoy permanent selicity in the rea^ of
happiness and glory, where we shall behold the li^^^ of God's count^nance, and
ince^^antly praise him to a^ternity. This, my beloved, ought to be our
consola^^^; our great consolation; but -- his murderer is his (...) other. Ah!
my firstborn killed his brother.

Yes, dear son! cried Eve, her tears still flowing; death has delivered thee
from solicitude, pain and grief. Thou art no more exposed to suffer. We should
wish to follow thee. Alas! we must still endure tribulations and inquietudes
from which thou art now exempt. But, can I cease to weep, while I remember thy
virtue, thy piety, thy filial love? O Adam, what a sight of horror is now that
precious body! Where are those smiles, the sweet emanations of filial
tenderness, that used to be seen on his countenance? how faded, how livid are
his bloody cheeks? we shall no more hear from those lips sera^^^^ harmony! no
more have our souls raised to God by his angelic co^^erse! no more will they
express the endearing sensations of his (...)! -- Those eyes, now fixed in
death, with what delight and transport have I seen them shed tears of joy, when
I have given him signs of the love -- the inexpress^le love that warmed my
heart, charmed with his spotless virtue. (...) my son! thy weeping mother must
for ever d^plore thy death. O sin, sin, dreadful are thy inroad^! what hideous
forms do thou assume? Abel! -- dear Abel! I thy mother, thine unhappy mother
-- exquisite woe! -- am also the mother of thy murderer! -- Here, her speech
again failing, she remained motionless on the cold corpse, void of sensation.
When Adam, with a deep sigh, cried, How am I abandoned? All arround me is a
gloomy desert. Nature seems to have changed her face. No longer she smiles on
me. Alas! he is dead! -- he who filled my life with soft consolation, sweet
pleasure, and gladdening hope, is no more! Dear Abe^^ (...) it true that thou
art dead? is it -- can it be true th^^ at (...) Cain -- that horror of nature!
-- who -- O God! thou beholdest our extreme desolation! Oh pardon, pardon our
lamentations! forgive us, that we lie mourning in the dust like a worm (and
what are we more in thy sight?) pardon us, though we mourn in the dust like the
trampled worm, half crushed by the ^^edless foot of the passenger.

Adam now stood pale and silent as the sta^^e of Grief on a mossy tomb
surrounded with funeral cypress. At length he turned to the body of his
murdered son, and ^ooping to Eve, gently withdrew her feeble hand from the
corpse, and pressed it with ardor to his breast. Eve, my dear companion, awake,
said he, hanging over her. awake, ^^ea^ spouse, awake. Turn thy looks on me:
Cease to wash (...) thy tears the insensible dust. Sink not thus under (...)
weight of thy grief. Has thy sorrow for thy son stifled all tenderness, all
concern for me, thine husband? Turn dear spou^e, turn thy looks on me! It is
just that we should feel, keenly feel our loss: that the horrors of death
should terrify us: that we should mourn the fatal consequences of our sin; but
to be thus overcome by grief; thus overpowered by dejection, is criminal. It is
as if we reproached eternal Justice, as punishing with too much severity. O
Eve, give not way to this culpable despair, lest Divine Mercy, irritated by our
obstinacy, should deem us unworthy of consolation. Eve immediately turned her
^^ce from the body toward Adam, and, raising her humid eyes to Heaven, said,
forgive, O God sorgive my grief, pardon my tears! D^ you, my dearest spouse, my
love, my life, forgive my sorrow! My distress is beyond all words; yet thou
still love me -- me who seduced thee to commit the crime we now deplore. Thou
hate me not, though this frightful murder of one of thy sons by the other, is
the result of my transgression. Ah Adam! let me weep in thine arms, let me once
more weep on my child's body, and mingle my tears with his blood. She then
pressed her face, bedewed with tears, on Adam's hand.

Thus grieved and lamented the parents of the human race over the first dead;
when Adam, casting his dejected eyes around, beheld at a distance one of the
celestial messengers: the fragrant flowers, which sprung up at each step,
indicated the light vestiges of his feet. His serene brow announc'd peace:
consolation, (...) and affection smiled on his lips and cheeks; and the
sweetness of his eyes spoke sympathizing complacency. A white vesture, brighter
than the clouds which surround the nocturnal planet, fluttered in waving (...)
on his beauteous form. The angel advanced toward them, while his presence
seemed to enliven with fre^^er verdure the smiling country: Eve, said the
father of (...), raise thine eyes, dry thy tears, suppress thy sighs: behold!
one of the children of Heaven is coming to comfort us. See with what graceful
benignity he approaches! Already a ray of divine consolation has dart(...) to
my benighted soul. Already my heart has lost part of (...) oppressive load
under which it groaned. I acquiesce, O (...) God! in thine appointments: I
adore thy judgments; with gratitude and love I acknowledge thy mercies. Weep no
more, Eve. Rise, let us meet the friendly angel.

Eve, supported by her spouse, arose, and the bright spirit stood before them.
He regarded with attention the first prey of death; but soon turned his eyes on
Adam and Eve, whose faces now reflected the luminous brightness of the angel;
and in a sweet and harmonious voice said, Be blessed, O ye who are weeping over
the spoils of death in your son! May ye be blessed! The Most High has permitted
me to visit you in your affliction. Among the angels who are commissioned to
watch over and guard the inhabitants of this earth, none loved Abel more than
I. I was constantly near him, when the orders of the Eternal did not oblige me
to be absent. When his exalted soul, inflamed with the love of virtue, vented
its rapturous sensations in tears of holy joy, or in devout hymns, which the
tutelar spirits disdained not to repeat in their concerts, I inspired him with
such ideas of his future felicity, as it was possible he could be susceptible
of, while united to his dust. Weep not for him; mourn not for him, like the
children of despair. He is happy. His immortal soul survives. Let this soften
your grief. Death has only detached it from a weak and fral body. Without
interruption or encumbrance, he now enjoys whatever can delight a wise and good
being. His happiness far exceeds all (...) can imagine, while you only see
through the dark medium of the senses. He is with the angels and archangels
before the throne of God! Yet weep, my friends; he well deserved your love.
Lament your loss; but let his unspeakable gain soon dry your tears. You are not
separated for ever. Soon shall the angel of Death visit you also -- soon will
you be united to your beloved son, to part no more. The pale King of Terrors,
will (...), to each of you, a different form; but you will receive (...) as
becomes the candidates for future happiness, and welcome him as a friend long
expected. Listen, O Adam! to the order of thy God. Restore this corruptible
body to its origin the dust: dig a pit, and cover it with earth. Thus spak^ the
angel, while benevolence and pity appeared in every look, and every gesture.
Desolation fled. Despair was no more. Thus the pure water of a limpid spring
refreshes the spent traveller, who, having long trod the scorching sands of the
desert, pants with thirst, and fainting under the sun's too ardent rays, is
sinking to the earth: but no sooner has he drank the crystaline draught, than
he rests his fatigued limbs in peace on the brink, and feels a fresh recruit of
strength. He rises with new vigor, and following the stream's murmuring course
through a fertile country, at length arrives at some hospitable mansion, whose
friendly proprietor entertains him with generous munificence, under embowering
shades.

Adam, whose soul was calmed and revived by noble and elevated sentiments,
viewing the dazzling luster of the angel, as he withdrew, said, Accept of our
grateful thanks, celestial friend! Praised, praised for ever be Thy name, O God
Most High Thy loving kindness, Thy tender mercies are not withdrawn from the
sinner. Thou with compassion do behold our distress: Thou command Thine
angels to enlighten our souls, and bring us comfort. No longer will we mourn in
the dust -- no longer will we despair, like the spirits of darkness, who are
banished from Thine all-enlivening presence. We are still surrounded by Thy
bounties: still permitted to praise Thee, to supplicate Thy favor, to adore thy
wisdom, to celebrate Thy goodness. Thus ennobled, shall we repine and murmur at
Thy dispensations, if the thorns and briars of affliction are scattered in the
way of our pilgrimage, to the bosom of our Father, the dwelling of our God? We
cannot indeed, entirely restrain our tears for the happy deceased: we must
regret his being thus suddenly snatched from our embraces: but alas! the
unhappy criminal ought rather to be the object of our grief, the subject of our
most earnest prayers. O God! what an alleviation would it be to our sorrows, if
we dared to hope that Thy mercy had not cast him off for ever, O my maker! he
unhappy -- he miserable, is the first ^^it of my loins -- the first whom Eve
brought forth with pain. Let us not cease, my dearest spouse, to implore the
tender mercies of our God for him. We will not doubt his loving kindness. We
ourselves were sinners: we were unworthy of his infinite grace: yet he has
encouraged us to confide in his promises. When all trembling we expected
eternal chastisement, little did we hope for mercy. But let us not defer to
execute the command of the Lord. I will carry this dear body to our dwelling,
and there commit the precious dust to the earth.

O Adam! O my love! returned Eve, my soul emerges from overwhelming sorrow^
conscious of my own weakness, I support myself by thy strength, as the flexible
ivy clings to the firm oak.

Adam, now, by the assistance of his weeping spouse, lifted the corpse on his
shoulders, and sighing under the sad burden, slowly moved toward his dwelling,
while Eve walked weeping by his side.

BOOK V.
NOW Thirza, whose sleep had been disturbed by terrifying visions, opened her
eyes to the bright luminary of day, and precipitately quitted her bed. So leaps
up the affrighted traveller, who, spent with fatigue, had laid himself down
under the shelter of a rock, when a terrifying dream, suggested by his guardian
angel, represents to him the rock falling over his head: trembling he hastens
from the dangerous spot; an instant after the huge mass falls with hideous
noise. He seeks the companion of his toil some journey; but alas! he is crushed
under the ruins. Not less agitated was the wife of Abel. What frightful images,
said she, have passed before me, while I slept! They resemble nothing in
nature. Welcome cheerful light, thou have scattered them. Hail, ye glowing
flowers, sweet objects of my attentive care, your various odours, which the
morning sun draws forth, will refresh my fatigued brain; and ye joyous
inhabitants of the air, your soft melody will re-establish serenity in my soul.
I will join your morning song. I will join with re-animated Nature in praises
to the Most High. Creator Almighty! Savior Propitious! my soul, overpowered by
Thy goodness, can but imperfectly express the immensity of Thy benefits, and
the extent of its gratitude. Thy ever-waking Providence guards Thy creatures,
when, covered by the veil of night, sleep weighs down their eyelids. May my
grateful thanks arise to Thee, O God! Accept from a feeble worm the tribute of
praise.

She now left her dwelling, and walked among the opening flowers, whose first
sweets were diffused by the morning breeze. My heart still throbs, said she,
still anxiety is lodged in my breast. What mean these unsual fears! an interior
trembling seems to shake my very soul. My mind is darkened like the heavens,
when black clouds spread through the expanse. Where art thou, Abel? Where art
thou, my beloved? Dearest half of myself! I haste, pursued by gloomy terrors,
to lose them in my arms. I fly to thee with the speed thou would fly, if,
benighted in a dark forest, thy feet were winged by fear.

Having thus spoke, she redoubled her pace, when Mahala seeing her, ran from
her cottage to meet her. I salute thee, my dear sister, she cried; Whither art
thou going in such haste, with thine hair disordered, without ornament; not so
much as one flower? I go, replied Thirza, to throw myself in the arms of my
beloved. Unusual terrors have this night disturbed my sleep, and my laboring
heart is still oppressed by sad apprehensions, which the serenity of this
delightful morning is not able to disperse. But though the blooming day; though
the smiles of nature cannot dispel my fears, I shall lose them in the
gladdening presence of my husband! I therefore run to cast myself in his arms.

The spouse of Cain replied with a sigh, Happy, happy sister! alas! I have no
such sweet resource. I should be lost to all consolation, were it not for a
father who loves me, and a tender mother to whom I am dear; were it not for
thee, my kind sister, and thine amiable husband. Yea, with you I lose part of
the load of woe that Cain's discontent heaps on my wretched head. To him
unhappy! all the beauties of nature are only sources of melancholy, and he
continually regrets the labor which his fertile fields so abundantly repay.
But, my dearest Thirza, above all I lament his unkind and causeless dislike to
our gentle brother. Mahala now melted into tears. Thirza wept also, and
tenderly embracing her, replied, Penetrated by the same idea, Abel and I spend
many anxious hours in bewalling his inveterate hatred. Our resource is in the
hand of Heaven. Often in sleepless nights we send up our most fervent petitions
to God, that a beam of His grace may disperse the dark clouds from his breast;
that every baneful weed may be rooted out from his heart, lest they choke all
principles of humanity and virtue. Ah my sister! was thy husband kind and
gentle, again would peace smile -- again would pleasure bless our dwellings,
and we should no longer with pain behold the brow of our venerable father
wrinkled by care, nor the eyes of our fond mother swelled with weeping.

Mahala, still in tears, answered, This, this is also the subject of my
incessant prayer. When the earth is covered with darkness, while all nature is
hushed, I bewail in silence the harsh obduracy of my spouse, and pray to the
Lord to soften his heart. Sometimes the agony of my soul bursts forth, in spite
of myself, in sobs and groans. Then he awakes, and in a terrifying voice
accuses me of depriving him of sleep, the only good he enjoys on this wretched
earth, so severely accursed by the Almighty Avenger of sin. My dearest sister!
this too is the employment of my mind, while my hands are busied in domestic
labor. My innocent children, playing round me, observe my tears and demand
with infantine caresses, why I weep? Ah Thirza! Thirza! I am faded by grief,
like a young flower, when the thick branches of some neighboring tree
intercept from it the sun's all-chearing rays. My unhappy husband, this very
day, left our dwelling before the dawn. His looks were terrible. Never did I
see so dark a gloom on his countenance. Anger flashed from his eyes: his brows
were knit by rage. Froze^ with horror, I heard him as he went forth curse the
(...) of his birth. This, my sister, was his salute to so fine a morning. It Is
true, I have not lost all hope; for sometimes (and thou thyself have observed
it) his virtue breaks through the gloom, and his mind is open to the soft
sensations of social love. Then he acknowledges that he has injured us, asks
forgiveness, and seeks reconciliation. But alas! too soon the light withdraws:
as in the tempestuous days of winter the sun darts a chearing ray, and is
instantly hid from our eyes by the closing clouds. Let us hope, Thirza, that as
mild spring restores light and joy to all nature, so the heart of my unhappy
husband may be restored to light and peace. For this we will incessantly
petition Heaven. I have always nourished this hope in the bottom of my heart.

Thus spoke Mahala, when Thirza, pale and trembling, cried, What mounful sound
is that, -- it comes from yonder trees -- it is not the cry of pain -- from
yonder trees -- (...) my sister! -- Mahala! -- alas! it comes nearer -- O my
God! -- Thirza was now sinking to the ground, but her alarmed sister supported
her in her arms.

Adam, with tottering steps, was coming from behind the trees, bending under
the sad load of his son's lifeless body. Eve walked by his side; sometimes she
turned her face, faded by grief, toward the bloody corpse: then hid it under
her hair, dropping with her tears.

Thirza continued pale and motionless in the trembling arms of Mahala, who was
herself ready to sink under the weight of her she endeavored to sustain. Thus
three amiable virgins (but none ever felt such sond affection) in a summer's
eve walk hand in hand over the variegated fields. Sudden the thunders roars,
the rapid lightening tears the earth under their seet: terrified they fall: but
soon recovering from their surprise, two of them rise, the third a cinder. The
survivors are struck with new horror, more dreadful than that caused by the
thunder.

This was the situation of the two daughters of Adam, when, a little
recovering, they beheld the corpse of him they loved. The afflicted father had
laid it on the grass, and was supporting in his arms his fainting wife, who,
weakened by grief, was near falling to the earth. Where am I, cried Thirza. O
my God! where am I? -- How he lies! -- Abel -- Why did I awake? Hateful light!
-- Ah unhappy that I am! -- Mahala! -- Ah me miserable! -- See, see, my sister,
he lies dead! -- Sight horrible! -- Light hateful! -- Why did I awake?

Thirza, cried Mahala, in a tremulous voice; let us not give way to vain
terrors -- to me -- to me also the idea is dreadful as the forked lightning --
Ah! she again faints -- Awake, Thirza -- awake -- Let us go to him. He is not
dead: Thy voice, thine embraccs will rouse him from sleep.

After these words, the two sisters, leaning on each other, dragged their
enfeebled limbs toward the body. Oh! my father, O my mother! how they weep! --
What dreadful terrors seize me! cried Thirza, as she approached near the
corpse. Abel! -- Abel! -- my beloved! -- my joy! -- my life! -- my husband! --
awake. Ah unutterable woe! he wakes not! -- Abel -- hear my plaintive cries, the
groans of thy distressed wife! -- She then cast herself on the body, to embrace
it with extended arms: but at the sight of the blood, and fatal wound, she,
giving a terrifying shriek, fell on the earth without voice, motion, or sign of
life; pale and cold as him she mourned. Despair was seen in her open and fixed
eye. Near her sat on the earth Mahala, dissolved in tears; wringing her hands,
she sometimes raised her weeping eyes to Heaven; sometimes she fixed them with
eager attention on the bloody corpse.

Adam, whose deep grief was augmented by the sorrows of his daughters, essayed
to console them: O my dear children! O Thirza! O Mahala! said he; would to God
that my anguish could keep from pain the hearts of those I love: but, my
beloved, hear me; listen to the soft sounds of consolation. While Eve and I
were weeping over this dear body, an angel, replete in beauty, came to us. He
was commissioned from the the Most High to sooth our sorrows. Weep not, said
he: be comforted. He whom you lament still exists. He has only left this frail
covering of dust. Disengaged from a mortal body, his soul is more happy than ye
can conceive, while your souls are envelopp'd in their earthly covering. Ye are
not separated for ever: in a little time ye shall be reunited, ye shall enjoy
with him torrents of delight, of which your gross senses can give you no idea.
Let us not, my Thirza -- let us not Mahala, profane the funeral of the happy by
our inconsolable lamentations -- Let us not offend the Almighty by our despair.

Thirza still remained without sense or motion, while the wife of Cain,
elevated her joined hands above her head, thus expressed her grief, O my
father, why do you blame our tears? Can we forbear to weep? Can we forbear to
lament, while he lies before our eyes extended, cold, and dead? O thou, our
consolation! our joy! O Abel! thou art lost to us, our sweetest employment will
be to weep for thee till the hour of death. Yes, thou art in the possession of
never ending happiness and glory; thou enjoyest that beatitude after which thy
holy soul so ardently panted: thou will for ever join with the angels in their
song of praise to the Most High. We too hope to partake of thy felicity, when
our All-Merciful God shall call us from our sad exile, this house of sorrow
rendered more desolate by thy loss. Ah Abel! ah my brother! thou art lost to
us, and our sweet employment will be to weep for thee till the wished for hour
of death. Where w^rt thou, Cain, my spouse? where were thou; when my brother
died? Had thou even then given him the fraternal embrace, and sought his
forgiveness, with what affection would he have cast his weak arms around thee!
though expiring, he would have blessed thee, and implored for thee the Divine
consolations with his dying lips. What a sweet relief would this remembrance
have been to thy sorrows! How would it have softened the griess of thy future
days! But -- O my mother! -- what new woe makes thine eyes stream? -- O my
father! speak -- speak, I conjure thee -- Why this horror on thy countenance?
-- No answer! -- O my tortured heart! -- Where -- say where, O my father! --
say O my mother! where is Cain my husband?

Eve replied, O my child! who knows where, pursued by divine vengeance -- Ah my
God! -- the unhappy -- but what do I say? -- I tremble to speak it -- he -- he
-- ah me, unhappy mother! Horrid -- detestable ideas, tear not thus my wretched
bosom! Ah miserable parent that I am! why -- he -- Ah my mother! interrupted
Mahala, spare me not, spare me not, I conjure thee, O my mother! On me -- on me
let the tempest fall -- I am already crushed; already torn by frightful
apprehensions. Cain -- O Heavens! Cain has -- killed him! cried Eve. Ah Mahala!
Ah Thirza! Cain killed him! Her excessive grief then took from her the power of
speech.

Mahala was struck mute with terror. Her immovable eyes shed no tears. The
cold sweat trickled down her pale face, and her trembling lips were
discolored. At length she cried out in agony, He kill Abel! -- Cain my
husband, kill his brother -- Where art thou fratricide? where? -- Where, oh
where has thy guilt pursued thee? Has the thunder of God avenged thy brother?
-- Do thou cease to exist? -- Where art thou, most miserable? To what country
of despair art thou fled, followed by the curse of God? Thus raved Mahala,
tearing her hair.

Barbarous fratricide! vile murderer! exclaimed Thirza; how could thou kill
so kind a brother: who, doubtless, when expiring under the mortal blow, given
by thy cruel hand, regarded thee with eyes full of love? -- Ah Cain, cursed --
cursed be -- O my sister! O Thirza! cried Mahala, interrupting her, curse him
not, he is thy brother? -- he is my husband? Rather let us implore for him the
mercies of God. I am sure, when falling in his blood, the holy victim of his
fury cast on him an eye of compassion, and I doubt not but now intercedes for
him before the eternal throne. Let our prayers ascend from the dust, and join
those of the happy. O curse him not, Thirza -- curse not thy brother.

Wh^^her does the excess of my grief transport me? answered Thirza. I did not
curse him, my sister, I have not cursed the unhappy. Then reclining on the
corpse, she kissed the blood-besprinkled checks, the cold and livid lips. She
remained long silent, indulging fruitless sorrow. At length she cried with a
faint and and interrupted voice. Would to God, my beloved, I had, at thy death,
(...) thy quivering lips; heard the the last expressions of thy love; seen thy
last tender look, and received thy last embrace! -- Oh that I had then expired
within thine arms! -- but alas! I am left a prey to unutterable sorrow. Every
object that used to inspire delight, will now increase my woes. Ye shady
bowers, ye are now desolate, ye can now only inspire me with terror: I shall
think you ask for him, who, in your sweet retreats was wont to embrace me in
tender rapture. The murmuring fountains will enquire, what is become of my
beloved; left forlorn, I can no more taste of joy. The shades, the streams, the
hills, the plains alike to me are hateful. Alas! no more I see with fond
delight, him that made all lovely. I shall, indeed, still behold him; but oh,
distressing object! I shall behold these wan cheeks, these fixed and sightless
eyes, this clotted blood, this dreadful wound. Flow, flow my tears, for ever
flow on this pale face. What dignity once appeared on this faded countenance!
the charms of soft persuasion dwelt on these cold and stiffen'd lips. Every
beauty, every grace shone in his lovely form: but his soul, too pure, too holy
to converse with mortals, to converse with me, is fled for ever! Stream my
eyes, stream without ceasing on this withered corpse, till my longing soul
leaves its dust with his.

Thus lamented Thirza, while her tears ran on the senseless body. Eve's grief
was increased by the sorrows of her daughters. My dearest children, she cried,
cease, I entreat you, cease thus to tear my heart! Your tears, your sighs and
groans augment my misery; they are to me the most cutting reproaches. It Is I,
it is I that have filled the souls of those I love with anguish! My folly, my
guilt has undone us all! I, alas! introduced sin and death! Forgive me, O my
children! forgive your afflicted mother! I conjure you, by the pangs I suffered
to bring you into the world, to forgive me! Cease to tear my heart by your
immoderate sorrow. Mahala and Thirza ran to her; they embraced her knees, and
with looks of duteous affection, said, O our mother! our dearest mother! who
broughtest us forth with pain! whose kind cares guarded us in helpless infancy!
aggravate not our d^^^ress by thy despair. We meant not, by our complaints, to
reproach thee, our dear, our tender mother. We love, we reverence, we honor
thee, but we cannot command our grief: it will burst from our bo^om^ and eyes
in sighs and tears. How can we restrain these expressions of a love the most
tender! they are the voice of nature

They still clasped their mother's knees, while their weeping eyes were
tenderly fixed on here is, when Adam said, O my beloved! let us no longer defer
restoring this precious dust to the earth, as the Lord our God has commanded.
The lenient hand of Time will abate our grief and dry our tears. Victorious
Reason will teach us to conquer this unavailing Sorrow. We shall long, ardently
long to partake of his happiness, as the bride wishes for the day that is to
unite her to her beloved. Yes, commit this dear body to its parent earth,
replied Thirza, turning her pale and faded face to Adam: but suffer me, O my
fathered to weep a little longer ere it is hid for ever, on the dear the
precious dust! Suffer me once more to press the cold clay to my breast. At
these words she threw herself with extended arms on the ^orpse.

Adam now began to dig a pit in the earth, while Eve and Mahala stood weeping
near him. When the golden hair'd Eliel, and little Josiah, Cain's two infant
sons, approached hand in hand to the spot where lay the body. Brother -- Josiah
-- said Eliel, who is that sobs so loud? Let Us go nearer, brother. Ah that is
Abel! -- it is Abel, our uncle! -- How pale he is! -- His hair is all bloody! --
He lies like a lamb going to be burnt on the altar -- My dear Eliel! replied
Josiah: see how Thirza weeps for him! -- He don't mind her tears! -- He don't
look at her -- I tremble -- I am frighted -- Let us run to our mother. -- See,
see, she weeps too! They now hasted to Mahala, on the other side the grave, and
clinging about her said, O mother! why do you weep? Why does Abel lie there?
Why is he all bloody, like a lamb for sacrifice! Mahala tende^ly embraced the
infants, while her tears ran on their little heads; and said, My dear children!
death has taken his soul from the body. It is carried up to Heaven, to dwell
there with God and his angels, where it will be for ever happy. Then he will
wake no more! replied Eliel bursting into tears: He will never awake! -- never!
He that loved us so dearly, and used to set us on his knee, and tell Josiah and
me such fine stories about God, the angels, and the wonders of Nature. Ah
brother! -- ah Josiah! we shall never more hear Abel sing hymns! He will talk
to us no more! -- He will never, never wake! How our father will weep for him,
when he comes from the field! -- How pale! how frightful! The terrified
children now hid their faces in the folds of their mother's vestment.

Adam having finished digging the grave. Wake thou, said he to Thirza: wake my
beloved. Let us obey the Divine command, and return the dust to its mother
Earth. Wake, my Thirza, he continued, and tenderly took her hand to raise her
from the corpse. She had been in a kind of trance on the body of her husband,
and now waked from the holy vision. Yes, I have seen him! -- I have seen him!
she cried as she arose. He came to me shining in celestial luster. Weep not, he
said; weep not, my dearest Thirza! I am happy. Soon shall thou partake my bliss
in the abodes of felicity and glory, where there is no death to separate us. At
these words he disappeared, having cast on me a divine smile; and an heavenly
light marked the traces of his feet. Thus she spoke, and consolation sublime
illumined her visage. Inter, O my father! inter, said she, this covering of
dust. And immediately went to her mother and sister. They all three hid their
faces under their dishevelled tresses, while Adam wrapped in skins the body of
his son. He laid it in the pit, and covered it with earth, and then said, Let
us, my dear wife! Let us, my beloved children! adore the Most High before this
grave of the first dead. They now all prostrated themselves before the grave,
little Eliel and his brother kneeling on each side their mother, and the father
of men pronounced in a loud voice this prayer, with his arms devoutly folded on
his breast.

O thou who dwell in the highest Heaven, God! Creator! Justice Eternal!
Goodness Infinite! behold us prostrate before the grave of our beloved son. We
sinners kneel before thee in the dust. O may our prayers ascend to thy
celestial throne! Look with an eye of compassion on us, O God! in this valley
of death, this abode of sin. Our iniquities are great, but thine infinite
goodness is still greater. We are polluted in thy sight: thou beholdest our
impurities, yet thou have not turned thy face from us. Thou still vouchsafest
to look on us in our misery, with a propitious eye. Thou permittest us to
implore thee. Thou have not abandoned the sinner. Eternal praises rise to thee!
Thy works, O God, render thee praise! The beauties of spring, the serenity of
the heavens, show forth thy beneficence: the loud voice of thy thunders, the
rattling hail, the howling storm, proclaim thy power. Smiling joy glorifies
thee: thy justice is also glorified by the tears of sorrow. We have beheld the
son of sin, frightful death. He is come to our dwelling, in a form most
hideous. Guilt led him by the hand, the earth groaned, and black tempests
gathered round the direful pair. The first fruit of my loins -- ah I tremble --
my firstborn has imbrued his hands in his brother's blood! O God Merciful and
Gracious! though I presume to supplicate thee for him, turn not thy face from me,
O God of clemency! cast him not off for ever. When he mourns in the dust for
his offenses, when he trembles at his crime, when overwhelmed by torturing
remorse, he weeps, he groans, and prostrates himself with deep contrition
before Thee, O my God! look with a pitying eye on his misery: commeserate his
despair, and assuage his anguish, by Thy divine consolations. O my Maker! cast
him not off for ever. Reject not, O God! reject not the presumptuous petition!
May our prayers, our cries ascend to Thy subli^^e throne, from this grave of
the first dead. We have, according to Thy command, restored the perishing dust
to the earth. Hear us Lord! -- Lord hear us! while we cry unto Thee in behalf
of our firstborn. Let him not perish in Thy wrath: for this grace, O God! we
will supplicate Thee at the rising and setting sun: in the silent hours of
night, when all nature is hushed to rest, we will implore Thee for him. O God
of Consolation cast him not off for ever! Eternal praises be rendered to Thee,
who have received the soul of the happy deceased into the regions of
never-ending felicity. Death has seized his first victim. We shall follow one
after another to the dark and silent grave; but adored be Thy loving kindness,
adored be Thy tender mercies, we shall likewise follow him to the realms of
immortality and bliss. O Thou who createst the heavens! at whose word this
world arose from nothing! they shall perish, the heavens and the earth shall
pass away; but thou art eternal. We dwell in bodies of dust. This dust shall be
dissolved; but Thou art unchangeable, and wilt raise to glory the sinner who
deplores his crimes, and the righteous man who mo^^ns that his virtues are
mixed with imperfections, and his highest seize sullied by human frailty.
Thou will gather them together out of the dust, to bestow on them eternal joys,
angelic purity: for -- O promise ineffable! the feed of the woman shall bruise
the serpent's head. Leap for joy, O earth; chant forth the praises of the Most
High, all nature. We will glorify his name in the midst of calamity. Man is
fallen: he is degraded from his original dignity: but glory be to God, he has
not cast him off -- he has not rejected him for ever: his mercy beholds the
work of his hands from his seat of judgment: He fell, whom God created upright,
yet when after his fatal transgression, the sinner, full of anguish, stood
^rembling in fearful expectation of an eternal curse, and what less could he
expect? then (let men and angels celebrate the glorious mystery) then the
Almighty pronounced that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's
head. Mystery sublime! mystery profound! wrapped in an holy obscurity, which no
finite being can penetrate! but full of divine consolations. The sinner is
reconciled to God; the offender is restored to peace and hope, shall man then
lament in the dust; shall he groan in despair, if the dream of life is
alternately filled with joy and sorrow? Death approaches, it shall break the
shackles of the soul, and free it from the consequences of just malediction.
Then those, who, while clothed in dust, forgot not their original purity, who
loved virtue, who loved God, who kindled in their hearts the seraphic flame,
shall be assembled together in the mansions on high, to enjoy there incessent,
eternal felicity. -- I see them! the holy assembly are present to my view,
numerous beyond computing, pure as the flame which descends on the sacred
altar! They stand surr^^nded by angels before the throne. They behold the face
of God. They delight in his goodness. Beatific vision! transporting prospect!
How is my soul raised! how is my heart expanded! Raptures before unknown! O
Goodness infinite! Grace inexpressible! Lost in thine immensity, the first
archangel can but imperfectly express his sensations; man can only feel them.

Adam ceased to speak; but continued in silent ecstasy, prostrate on the earth:
his wife and daughters still kneeling at his side. Nature herself observed the
same silence; all was serene; not a cloud passed over them through the lucid
sky.

Now came "on mild evening, clad in sober gray," while every breeze was hushed.
During this perfect calm, Cain, pursued by guilt, was agitated with fear,
horror, remorse and sad dismay. He roved from place to place, he wandered in
the deserts, till spent with fatigue, he sat down facing the rising moon, and
thus the voice of his despair disturbed the peaceful silence that reigned over
all nature: There beyond that dark hill, the moon begins her course, spreading
around a faint light. All under the starry expanse imbibe new life from
invigorating sleep; man only wakes. My accursed hand has driven from his
dwelling peace and rest. The voice of grief and lamentation ascends from the
cottages. It Is I -- it is I, miserable! that have brought affliction to their
abodes. The cries, the groans of my bewailing parents rise to Heaven as so many
accusations against me. This day -- this accursed day, hear it, O Moon! turn
pare and hide thy beams: Hear it, ye Stars! and set in darkness: This day the
earth has drank the blood of the first slain, shed by my unnatural hand.
Henceforth withold from me your precious influences, bright luminaries!
Cursed on the ground I tread, banished from the cheerful face of man. Hide me,
hide me in gloomy darkness. I have shed my brother's blood: I have torn the
heart of him that begat me: I have filled with despair the breast of her who
brought me forth and nourished my infancy. Hide me from the eyes of Nature, I
have trampled on her dictates. I will fly -- fly with my misery, sad companion!
to some desert region, where no human foot has marked the faded grass. I will
dwell among rocks and precipices, where putred water trickles in tears from the
steeps, into the swampy abodes of loathsome reptiles: where birds of prey build
their nests; where savage beasts devour their bloody carnage: alas! even these
will abhor me, they kill no brothers! Shade me darknes^ from the chearing sky;
shade me some horrid gloom, from the sight of every creature: there let me
lament my cruelty; there howl out my despair. When sleep overcomes me, terrors
will present themselves to my imagination: I shall behold my murdered brother:
I shall see his wounded head -- his clotted blood!

Thus Cain bewailed his wretchedness. He ceased, and sat abandoned to mute
grief. No bird of night disturbed the awful stillness; frighted by sounds of
human woe, they fled in silence; a gentle murmur only floated through the air.
Again he vents his sorrow, and casting his melancholy eyes around, he cries,
Pity me, ye woods! Weep for me, ye fields! No words can describe my misery, and
pity is due to misery. O Nature, arrayed in beauty! grieve for me -- for me,
lost to beauty and to happiness. Mourn for me each creature; ye taste, ye feel
the efficacious presence of a Gracious God, to me no longer gracious! I feel
his wrath, I tremble at his power. He is to me only God the Avenger, the just
Avenger of my brother's blood. For ever will it cry against me: my punishment
is endless.

He was now silent for some moments, then, with a deep sigh, he said, I weep!
Can such a wretch as I shed tears! Welcome precious drops, ye attest to me,
that my miseries are softened. The despair which had seized my soul, is changed
to plaintive grief -- to weeping sorrow. Ah flow my tears! receive them, O
earth! I am cursed on thy surface, thou have drank my brother's blood, yet oh
receive these tears that show my unspeakable distress! -- What new emotions! --
How is my heart softened! -- My tears flow faster -- Yes, I will -- Yes, while
darkness hides me from every eye, I will away to the dwellings of my afflicted
parents, to poor Thirza. I will go to all, and once more see them -- once more
bless them. -- Bless them! the angry winds would disperse the salutations, as
they came from my polluted lips. Ah fratricide! can thou pronounce a
blessing, thyself accursed? I will however go and strive to bless them in their
grief. I will weep before them, and in the dust deplore my guilt, and then --
yes, then I fly for ever from their reproaching eyes. Fly from thee, Mahala! I
fly for ever from my children! Here his agony stifled his words, and he moved
toward the cottages, watering with his tears the solitary way.

He was now passing a little grove, planted by the hand of Abel, near the
spring. Cain then remembered that his brother, when he had completed his work,
had said with fond affection, Flourish ye trees! spread wide your branches! may
ye for ever bloom, that under your refreshing shade our descendants may, in
affectionate converse, relate to their offspring, what they will learn from us,
saying, Here Eve brought forth her firstborn. Here she soothed with her
caresses his infant cries, him the first solace in her sad exile. Here she
viewed him with inexpressible rapture. She called him Cain, saying, from the
hand of the Lord have I received thee. The murderer passed by this monument of
his brother's tenderness with quickened step; a remorseful sweat covered his
averted face: his trembling knees could scarce sustain his weight. Thus at the
sight of his father's grave trembles the parricide, who with murtherous
dissimulation had invited the good old man, returning from the field, to
refresh himself with impoison'd viands. When he passes the tomb, the rustling
of the trees which surround it, the odours of the garlands, with which his
dutious sisters have crowned the urn, raise a storm in his guilty heart.

Now Cain had passed the terrifying grove, and drew near the cottages. The pale
moon shed on them a feeble light through the trees, and melancholy silence
reigned around. He cast on the dwellings his weeping eyes; he raised his hands
to heaven; he wrung them in speechless agony. Conscious guilt tore his now
softened heart. Trembling he stood amidst the dreary stillness. At length he
uttered in a low voice this impassioned soliloquy. How quiet deep affliction
rests here -- Ah that murmur! -- Are they not sighs? -- They came from the
cottages -- from the dwellings come those piercing ejaculations of sleepless
grief! Here -- here, ye once cheerful mansions! -- here trembling in darkness
stands the wretch who has made you the abodes of sorrow -- Here pursued by
infernal horrors, shudders in obs^^rity, he who has chased from the habitations
of those who gave him life, peace, joy, and every domestic sweet. D^^e I
breathe the air through which ascends the sighs of (...) ^^ourning parents, my
terrified wise, my widowed sister, Dare I appear in a spot consecrated to just
grief! -- grief for my crime! -- Begone -- pollute not the residence of virtue.
-- Yes, I go -- I go far from you -- But let my eyes, hagger'd with despair,
yet a little longer behold your dwellings. In pity to my unspeakable anguish,
allow me to weep here yet a little longer. Suffer me to raise to Heaven my
bloody hands for your happiness. Then I go -- Hail, hail ye -- Ah wretch! will thou profane their sacred names? Will thou pollute with thy infected breath,
titles that express the softest ties, the most exalted sensations of the human
heart? Oh that with the gloom of night your distress, your terrors might leave
you to dwell in my wretched bosom, fit companions in my wanderings on an earth
whose curse I have increased. Oh (...) I alone could endure the punishment due
to my crime! May your memories never be disturbed by my horrid image! Oh that I
myself could lose all remembrance of myself! Dreadful wish of extreme
desolation!

Cain having thus spoke, remained still near the cottages. He groaned, he
raised his eyes to Heaven; when he heard the footsteps of one advancing flowly
through the gloom. A cold shivering, like the agonies of death, seized his
limbs. He strove to fly; but in vain he strove; he sunk down trembling, without
strength, among the bushes.

Thirza, this first night of her sad widowhood, unable to sleep, had quitted
her lonely bed. She left her cottage, and went to the grave of her husband,
where seating herself on the damp grass, she wept among the clods. She viewed
with fixed eyes the starry firmament, then turning to the grave, said, Here
lies all that made life desirable: all my repose, all my joy lies under this
earth, which now imb^bes my tears. Sleep has forsaken my wearied eyelids: no
rest remains for me. Flow on, flow on my tears, ye are my sole consolation: my
melancholy hours shall be spent in bewailing thy loss, my dearest husband! --
shall be spent near thy precious remains in gloomy sadness. It Is true I have
seen thee -- I have seen my beloved arrayed in heavenly glory: but ah! I am
deprived of his sweet society, of his tenderness, his endearing care, through
the remainder of a life of calamity and wretchedness. In vain I tried to rest
^n the conjugal couch: my spirits forsook me; I almost fainted, while the sweet
pledge of our love lay by me, locked in the arms of sleep. The little innocent
smiled in his guiltless slumbers. Alas! he knows not yet the woes of mortals --
he knows not his own irreparable loss! Ah my infant! I deplore thy misfortune,
for ever deprived of a tender father, an instructor of thy childhood, a guide
to thy youth, and a friend of thy riper years. Thy wretched mother, a prey to
keen distress, torn by heart-piercing anguish, will want the strength -- will
want the wisdom to supply thy loss. O my child, how are we bereaved! How is
every comfort ravished from us -- Horrid reflection! ravished from us by the
hand of a brother! Where is he? -- Where is the miserable? -- Where has his
remorse -- where has his despair driven him? O Thou infinite Clemency! God
Propitious! despise not my supplications, turn not from my prayer, while with
unwearied fervor I entreat thee for him. Hear him O God of Grace and
Consolation, when he cries to thee from the dust -- when in deep penitence and
sincere contrition of heart, he bewails his crime, and implores thy mercy.

Her agony of soul now stopped her voice: but soon she cried, as she raised her
weeping eyes to Heaven, Bright star of night, often have thou been witness of
our chaste endearments, when thy soft light illumined our path. Often have thou
been witness to his sublime converse, when he described the charms of virtue;
the delights of an approving conscience. Thou now can only shed thy beams on
his silent grave. Buried in this dust lies every human excellence: the
consolation, the hope, the joy of his weeping parents! Here sleeps to wake no
more, my love, my life, my husband! She now continued long silent, abandoned to
speechless grief. At length, surveying the objects round her, she fixed her
melancholy eyes on the fragrant enclosure, where she and her dear companion
used to pass their most delightful hours. Ah! lovely bower! she cried; thou n^w
art solitary. In vain the pale moon pierces thy aromatic shades. There, dear
departed Abel! the ruddy evening saw thee pour forth thy soul in holy rapture.
The remembrance of thine intense devotion, thy fervent piety, thy humble love,
has lighted up in my heart a sacred fervor. I will rise above this grief. The
darkness of (...) soul is dispelled by the dear remembrance, as the rising moon
chases from the horizon the gloom of night. O my beloved! in yonder sweet
retreat, how has devotion animated thine eyes. How were thou raised above
mortality, when thou, in the joyful exultation of thine heart, said, What an
happiness is it, my dearest Thirza, to be virtuous! What a privilege to be
permitted to supplicate, to love him, from whom all these beauties are but
emanations! What an unspeakable felicity, to be conscious that the angels who
surround us approve our actions! What, my beloved wife, he added, taking my
hand, What delight is there in this beautiful creation, that can be compared to
the constant assurance of the Divine pres^^^^ -- to the consciousness of
virtue? To him who departs no^ from his integrity, who pants after
perfection, death ^^^elf has lost many of its terrors. We know -- let the
sinn^^ ^^^^lt in the inexpressible mercy! -- we know that it will only separate
the body from the immortal soul, which when escaped from its prison of earth,
will wing its way to mansions of eternal joy. O my Thirza! continued the dear
departed saint, if I quit my dust before thee -- before thee remove to bliss,
short and moderate be thy grief; weep not long over m^ perishing clay. What are
the days of this short life, compared to those of eternity? We shall meet again
in the realms of purity and joy, to part no more. Dearest Abel! I replied,
while my tears flowed, neither if I first leave my dust, do thou give way to
fruitless sorrow, shed not many tears over my senseless corpse. We shall, my
love, be reunited; we shall together enjoy everlasting happiness: we shall meet
-- Oh ecstasy! never, never to part more! -- O my soul! sink not under thy
grief. Sublime are the consolations offered thee. Remember thy dignity --
reflect on thine immortality -- look beyond the present calamity -- rejoice in
the salvation that awaits thee. Did thou perish with the frail body, where
would be my hope? -- What could assuage my sorrow? -- Well might I lament over
this grave -- Well might I pray that an end were put to my wretched being --
but -- I shall live for ever! I will rise above this dispiriting grief. Yes, my
dearest husband! if thy ennobled soul -- if thy angelic mind still retainest
any love, any concern for my happiness, thou will be pleased to know that thy
precepts, thine example, has inspired me with fortitude -- has taught me to
bear up under the unavoidable afflictions of mortality. Dear angel! if thou
still hoverest over me, thou shall be witness to my endeavors to repel this
fruitless grief: but my tears still flow -- I cannot yet command my sorrow, I
must a little longer weep on this precious dust. I will erect ^round the grave
an arbor of cypress: under the melancholy shade I will mourn my loss: but under
it too will I contemplate, in holy transport, on the happy moment, when I shall
meet my beloved; when, like him, I shall be free from all impurity, all sorrow,
all sin, and eternally out of the reach of death. This ravishing prospect will
-- it does abate my anguish. She (...) arose from the grave! but instantly
cried, sinking again on her knees, O horrid reflection, our brother murdered
him! O God of Goodness hear my supplications: show favor to the unhappy
sinner: hear him when he cries to Thee: destroy him not, O God in thy wrath.
Save him, O Gracious God! -- save him from eternal perdition. My petitions for
his final happiness, shall ascend to Thee in the early dawn. I will pray for
him without ceasing. He is still my brother. --

Cain, the prey of wild despair, lay trembling among the bushes. Fly, he cried
to himself, fly these holy dwellings, odious monster! -- Ah! I cannot fly. I am
surrounded by infernal horrors -- Leave me, furies, leave me -- Carry my
trembling feet, from this seat of virtue. I profane the sacred place. Alas! I
cannot fly, my strength fails. A cold shivering has seized my limbs -- Oh that
these were the last tremblings of nature. Unhappy that I am, I survive to feel
increasing anguish. How her lamentations pierce my soul! O Virtue, how sublime
are thy consolations! -- all lost -- for ever lost ^o me. No hope remains -- I
have sinned beyond forgiveness -- Ah! she prays! she prays for me! -- for me
who have filled her heart with sorrow -- Unexampled goodness! Ought she not
rather to call down curses on my guilty head? -- O torture! her virtue, her
piety heightens my despair. My miseries are insupportable. My crime appears in
all its magnitude. Not the apostate spirits in the lowest abyss of Hell feel
more horror -- Thou pray for me, Thirza! -- Thy rash vows are all superfluous.
-- No, God will not hear thy prayers -- he is just -- Now she retires from the
grave of her husband murdered by my hand. Dare I tread the same path? -- dare I
w^^p on the traces made by her feet? -- No, -- Retire, barbar^^s fratricide! --
Retire, bloody murderer! from the sanctified spot. -- Fly, wretch, fly. --

Having thus spoke, he walked with hasty step, but suddenly stepping, he cried,
O Mahala! how can I leave thee! -- How can I leave ye for ever, O my children!
I will in the dust deplore my crime before you -- before thee, Mahala. Perhaps
thou now shed'st tears of compassion for my misery -- perhaps thou will bless
me still -- But what do I say? cursed of God, who will dare to bless me? -- No,
hate me, curse me: I deserve it then I fly, abhorred of all, loaded with the
curse of God, and of all nature. Misery extreme! Anguish insupportable! I have
no power to fly -- I come, I come, my dearest wife! to mo^^ before thee my
guilt and wretchedness. I will weep at thy feet -- I will implore thee to
forgive my having chaced peace from thine heart, and filled thy days with
sorrow. Then -- yes, then -- I fly from thee, Mahala -- I fly from you, my
children.

Cain now passed at a distance from the grave, and advanced toward his
cottage. He frequently stopped, as irresolute. At length he came to his
dwelling; but stood long without, pale and trembling. Then with tottering and
hes^^ating step, he passed the threshold.

Mahala was sitting on her solitary bed, gazing with weeping eyes at the pale
moon, more pale herself than that star when invelopp'd in clouds. Her infants
were crying round her. At the sight of her husband, she gave a heartpiercing
shriek, and sell on the bed senseless. The terrified infan^s grasped the knees
of Cain, crying, O my father! help our dear mother. She is faint -- she is sick
with weeping for Abel -- He is dead -- Adam has put him in the ground, and
covered him with dust. Why was you so long a coming home? You have worked a
long while. Dear father! comfort our mother. Overcome with the conflict of his
various passions, Cain could give no answer to the little innocents. He
embraced them. He hugged them in his arms, while his tears ran on their faces.
Then, unable to support his anguish, he sell on the earth, at the feet of his
wife. The children now redoubled their cries, which awakened Mahala from her
swoon. She saw h^^ weeping husband on the earth. O Cain, Cain! she cay'd in a
voice of despair, tearing her dishevelled locks. Mahala, interrupted Cain, my
dear Mahala! forgive m^^ pandon the murderer of thy brother. This once allo^ me
to weep before thee -- this once let me cast myself i^ the dust at thy feet.
Ah! I conjure thee to grant me this feeble consolation -- this last hope of a
misery that has no equal -- only abstain from cursing me. Curse me not, O
Mahala! I come to deplore before thee my misery and my guilt: -- then I fly far
from thee for ever. I will hide me in the deserts. Cursed of God, followed by
his wrath, I fly. Oh curse me n^^! -- Curse not thy wretched husband!

Ah Ca^^: she replied, penetrated with the tenderest compassion; though thou have
killed the best of brothers -- though thou have heaped inexpressible miseries on
my wretched head, yet I forget not that thou art still my husband. I pity -- I
weep for thee. Cain answered, casting on her a look of tenderness, a look that
expressed the bitter anguish of his heart: Fatal moment, when a dream from Hell
deceived me! these little ones appeared before me as slaves to the sons of
Abel. To save them from misery and bondage I killed him. Cursed moment! I
murdered the best of brothers, and the bloody deed will for ever haunt my mind,
and fill it with infernal horrors. My punishment is eternal. Yet, O Mahala, I
would escape thy curses, Curse me not, my dearest wife -- Curse me not in my
misery. This hour I fly -- I quit thee for ever -- I quit you for ever, my
beloved children! I fly from you, cursed by God and man.

The children lamented round him. Th^^ raised their innocent hands in agony.
Mahala sunk on the earth, and reclined on her husband. Receive these tears --
receive these expressions of my sincere forgiveness and compassion, she said,
while she wept over him. Do thou sly Cain? Do thou fly to the desert
regions? How can I dwell here, while thou art solitary and abandoned -- while
thou art miserable far from me? No, Cain, I fly with thee. How can I suffer
thee to be destitute of all relief in the deserts? What cruel inquietudes would
torment me! Every breeze I heard would fill me with terror! Perhaps he is ^ow,
I should say to myself -- perhaps he is at this instant (...) the agonies of
death, without succor, in some barren wild. She was silent, and Cain, with a
look of astonishment, cried, What do I hear? Is it thou Mahala? is it thou
^^self, or does a dream again deceive me? It is, it is my dea^, my virtuous
wife! Thy words, Mahala, -- thy cons^^ting words have softened my despair. Thou
do not ha^^ me! -- thou do not curse me! It is enough. No, thou courageous,
thou affectionate spouse! thou shall never share in the punishment due to my
horrid crime. -- Thou shall not suffer for me the chastisements of Heaven.
Remain in this abode sanctified by virtue, where dwells the Divine
Benediction. I will not render thee miserable. Forget me Mahala -- forget thy
wretched ^^^band. Abandoned by God, I shall wander without place of rest; but
may thou be happy! -- may thou be blessed! No, Cain, if thou art miserable, I
cannot here be happy, replied Mahala. I fly with thee -- with thee I wander --
I will be desolate with thee -- I go with thee to the desert regions. Our
children shall go with us. I will there share thy misery -- I will try to
assuage it -- I will mix my tears of compassion, with thy tears of penitence.
-- I will kneel by thy side. -- My prayers shall ascend to Heaven with thine --
Our children prostrate round us, shall join their voices with ours. God will
not disdain the penitent sinner. I fly with thee, Cain -- Without ceasing we
will p^^^ -- without ceasing we will mourn before God, till a ray of his grace
illumines thy benighted soul, and justifies our confidence in his mercy. Hope
in God, Cain. He will hear the prayer of the penitent sinner.

O thou! cried Cain, by what name shall I call thee? Thou art to me as a
gracious angel! A beam of Divine Consolation has darted into the obscurity of
my soul! O Mahala! O my wife! now I dare embrace thee. O that I could make thee
sensible of what I feel! but words cannot express my gratitude -- cannot
express the tender emotions of my heart. At these words he pressed her to his
breast; then suddenly quitting her, he embraced his children: but soon returned
to his wife, and again clasped her to his heart

Now, this tender mother, this heroic wife, soothed her infants, and wiped away
their tears. She took he^ youngest child to her breast, another little one held
by (...) hand of his father, while Eliel and Josiah, full of life and gaiety,
tripp'd before them. They left their cottage Mahala, with weeping eyes, beheld
the dwelling of ^er parents, and of Thirza. Be bles^, be blessed, said she, O
desolate family, whom I abandon! Soon will I ^^turn from the place of our
habitation, to supplicate your blessings for me -- for my dear, my penitent
husband. I will solicit for him a pardon. She now wept as irresolute, when
instantly exhalations more balsamic than are breathed from all the flowers of
spring, surrounded the fugitives, and the voice of an invi^^^ ^^gel from above
their heads, said, Go, generous (...), I will, in a dream, inform thy tender
mother of (...) heroic courage. I will tell her, thou art gone (...) thy
penitent husband, to implore mercy for him, from the Sovereign Judge.

They now walked by the light of the nocturnal star. They lost sight of the
dwellings, and advanced into the desert regions, where had never been imprinted
the foot of man.

THE END.

