Mr. Johnson's ELECTION SERMON, May 10th, 1770.

Integrity and Piety the best Principles of a good Administration of
Government, ILLUSTRATED,

IN A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF
CONNECTICUT, AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THEIR Anniversary Election, MAY 10th,
1770.

BY STEPHEN JOHNSON, A. M. Pastor of the First Church of Christ in LYME.

NEW LONDON: Printed by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company of
Connecticut. M,DCC,LXX.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, in New England, in America, holden at Hartford, on the second
Thursday of May, A. D. 1770.
ORDERED, That the Hon. Matthew Griswold, Esquire; and John Lay, 2d. Esquire; return
the Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev. Mr. Stephen Johnson, for his SERMON
delivered before the Assembly on the 10th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof
that it may be printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

An Election SERMON.
II SAMUEL, XXIII. 3. THE GOD OF ISRAEL SAID, THE ROCK OF ISRAEL SPOKE TO ME,
HE THAT RULES OVER MEN MUST BE JUST, RULING IN THE FEAR OF GOD.
IMPORTANT are the rights of mankind, to the safe and unmolested enjoyment of
life, liberty and property, and to the best improvement of all their powers,
with every reasonable and equitable advantage they have to promote their
present and everlasting welfare. These natural rights, civil and religious, are
the gifts of God, as such sacred; nor may any but He, as original proprietor,
resume them at pleasure. But in such a world as this, lying in wickedness,
abounding with unruly passions, mistaken views, clashing interests and
violence, there can be no rational foundation for the security of them, without
civil government.

THIS evinces the urgent necessity and high utility of civil institution; and
proclaims it the dictate of reason, of nature, and the will of God. Divine
revelation, in express and peremptory language, confirms it, "the ordinance of
God." Romans 13. 2.
This likewise points out to view, the good of the community, to be the high
end of government, and the supreme law of the state. The important rights,
liberties, privileges and immunities of the community, (so far as is requisite
to the end of government) being by special trust put into the hand of rulers,
by God and the people, for their preservation, best enjoyment and improvement.
A trust, of very high and endearing importance, by which they are constituted
the immediate guardians of them.

THESE, as the salutary objects, and sublime end of government, are tacitly
pointed out in the text. "He that rules over men," not brutes, who may be made
slaves, or killed for the convenience of others; but men, of the same rank of
being, dignity of nature, and vested with the same great and essential rights
with themselves, "must be just" in his attentive regard to them, "ruling in the
fear of God."

UPON these principles, it is evident, that the dignity of government, and the
great essential rights and privileges of subjects, must, of right, be
inviolably maintained. "He that rules over men," must be known, duly honored
and obeyed, in his exalted station. If the dignity of government, be degraded
and weakened, the strength and energy of government, will be proportionably
enervated, that it cannot reach, and effectuate, the great design of it. On the
other hand, if the great and essential rights and privileges of the people, be
invaded and supplanted, usurped and destroyed: the design of government is
subverted, and the end of it frustrated, in the primary and fundamental
intention of it. No exalted ideas of power and prerogative, can be just, as
applying it to such destructive purposes. All the high prerogatives of power,
are for the good of the subjects, their wanton exertion therefore, for the
destruction of their unforfeited lives, liberties and properties, must be the
perversion of them, a contravention and subversion of their true intention.

THESE two important objects, which demand every one's attention, may with
great reason be supposed to be invariably united, in the constitution and
nature of things -- and yet, there may sometimes happen no small difficulty, to
adjust and compromise both: but perhaps, this will seldom or never occur;
except, where there has been a deviation, from true wisdom, good policy and
righteousness: in such case, the remedy may seem equally plain and easy, in a
speedy reversion of the measures, which have occasioned such perplexity in
administration.

THERE is a method, in the constitution and nature of things, forever to
maintain (so far as is within the power of the state to do it) the dignity of
government, with the rights and privileges of subjects, in the greatest
harmony. This will be found, in a good constitution of civil polity -- in a
good administration of civil government, pursuant to the spirit and intention
of such a constitution -- and in the joint concurrence and co-opperation of
subjects with their rulers, to the same noble and important design.

A GOOD constitution of civil polity, by which, rulers of every rank and order
from the highest to the lowest, hold all their powers and prerogatives,
emoluments and honors; and the subjects, all their rights and liberties,
privileges and immunities; is of very interesting importance to every free
state; without which, all the rights and privileges of subjects, rest upon a
very weak foundation, and are held by a very slippery and uncertain tenure, the
will and caprice of rulers in power. What a miserable foundation of security
this! is fatally seen and felt, in despotic and arbitrary governments through
the world. Whereas, in a well framed constitution, which contains ample
provision, to maintain the dignity of government, with the privileges of the
people -- where power and privilege are so essentially incorporated -- that the
one cannot of right, be held and exercised, without the protection of the other
-- nor the other enjoyed, without the support of the powers of government;
there is the best and strongest securities, both to rulers and subjects, that
can be, in the imperfect and mutable state of things, in this world. Such is
the strong, the beautiful and happy complexion of the British, of our own
constitution.

A GOOD administration pursuant to the spirit and intention of a free and good
constitution, is of like importance with the constitution itself. The best
constitution cannot operate, as an efficient effectual machine to the ends of
government, unless life and energy be given to it, in administration. The Jews
were endowed by the singular favor and gift of God, with an excellent
constitution: adapted with infinite wisdom and goodness to their state, and to
the best ends of government and religion to them; (it were easy to show the
eminent advantages of it, were there time and were it not foreign to the
occasion) but the Rock of Israel said -- there must be just rulers in
administration, ruling in the fear of God. And if rulers and subjects had fully
answered the great design of their constitution; God would have exalted them in
name and praise, felicity and honor; high above all the nations of the earth.
Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19.
Their history fully evinces, it went well or ill with them, according to good
or bad administration, and their conduct under it. The great consequences which
follow a good or bad administration, do most fully evidence the importance of a
good one. The shadow may remain, and the substance be destroyed, the form be
retained and the spirit of the constitution evanish, and the great intention of
it be defeated; yea the powers erected by the best constitution may be turned
against it, to invade, subvert and destroy it, in the fundamental intention and
municipal privileges of it: Subjects may feel themselves very sensibly injured,
perplexed, distressed and wretched; and the cry of grievance and oppression,
complaints and groans may be heard from every quarter, under the tragedy of a
bad administration. Whilst on the other hand, the ends of government may be
tollerably answered, the people enjoy much peace and quiet, under the most
defective constitutions and ill-^^^m'd governments in the world; under a wise,
righteous, lenient and good administration: which however rarely happens in
them; but how much more under the meridian shines of a good administration,
pursuant to the spirit and intention of a free and excellent constitution;
where they enjoy it with its best and most desirable advantages: and whereby
the dignity of government, and privileges of the people will be exalted in
safety.

THIS shows the vigilant attention, every free people should give, to the
spirit, tenor and tendency of administration: Their peace and welfare, their
constitution itself, with all its important privileges and securities, to
themselves and posterity to the latest generations, is nearly concerned in it.

PERHAPS, this view of administration may also suggest to us, why the all-wise
and gracious God has instituted and enjoined no particular form of government,
for all the nations, kingdoms, empires and governments of this world; but left
each to choose and determine for themselves, as is judged most suitable,
convenient or necessary to them. The God of Israel has said in the revelation
given us, that civil government is "the ordinance of God" -- has set to view
the end of it, rulers are the ministers of God for good -- has ascertained the
general duties of rulers and subjects, and bound them thereto, by the strongest
ties of interest and conscience, in the motives of this world and eternity --
these well attended to by both, and the ends of government are well answered.

IT is of weighty concern, that there be the joint concurrence and cooperation
of subjects with their rulers to the same excellent and important design.

THE duty and interests of subjects, inseparably conjoined, most strongly
oblige to it: and ordinarily, under a free government and good administration,
they will fully effect it. Indeed, the infatuated with slavish principles of
religion and policy, may, under a foreign influence, be instigated to
insurrections and rebellions under a good administration; (as happened in the
good reigns of our illustrious Kings GEORGE I. and II. of precious memory) but
it is not the true spirit of British subjects, Europeans or Americans, (however
slandered) to act such a treacherous and detestable part: but the body of the
people, well used, will readily unite their power and influence, in support of
the constitution and powers of a good administration.

IT is allowed, that parties and factions may be formed by the uneasy, restless
and ambitious, under the best administrations, may injure and disturb
government, and obstruct the salutary good effects of it for a season -- but
can seldom rise high, spread far, or long continue without real and very
sensible injuries and grievances: And are usually reduced or remedied without
great difficulty or hazard.

BUT too often, the most loyal, best and virtuous subjects are misrepresented,
and blackened with the wrong imputation of those heinous crimes of disloyalty,
disaffection, rebellion, etc. which they abhor with all their hearts: As it was
with Daniel and his brethren, when they refused obedience to the most stupid
edict of idolatry. And this is commonly the case, where a brave, loyal, and
virtuous people, are to be stripped of their invaluable privileges, and reduced
to abject slavery, by the arm of power. But no arts, falsehoods, or disguiseful
colorings, can alter the nature, or long conceal this plain truth -- that an
unoppressed, free and virtuous people, will see it their interest and important
duty; and will readily concur and co-opperate with their rulers in supporting
the dignity of government, with their own rights and privileges -- the last,
and finishing stroke by the hand of man; to the harmonious accomplishment, of
this great and excellent design.

WE rejoice, we boast in the British constitution, and in our royal charter,
the best privileges and immunities, the happiest constitution and form of
government in the whole world: the next matter of highest moment to us, to our
enjoyment of the best blessings we can hope from civil polity, is a good
administration pursuant to the spirit and grand intention of it.

To investigate the spirit and best principles of such an administration, is of
importance in it self, suitable to the present occasion, and what I shall
briefly attempt.

IT is concisely and comprehensively suggested, in this inspired message from
God, to the exalted King of Israel, and to all the rulers of this world, where
his revelation comes. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear
of God.

THE phrasealogy of the sacred cannon, will warrant us to understand by
justice, integrity; and by the fear of God, piety. Nor will it be doubted, but
this royal instruction and mandate, from the supreme and eternal King, is to
all the powers of government, supreme or subordinate, legislative or executive,
to every department and trust in the state.

WHENCE we collect this observation;

INTEGRITY and piety, joined with suitable talents, are the best principles,
and give the strongest assurance of a good administration of government:

Or,

AN administration, formed and conducted, by integrity and the fear of God;
will best support the dignity of government, secure the liberty of subjects,
and advance the public welfare.

THIS might be illustrated by showing -- these divine principles are the
highest and most energetic principles of good action in general, and
proportionably in rulers in their high spheres of action -- they are the best
safe-guards against all the high temptations of power, from fear, interest or
ambition -- they dictate the most excellent designs, and urge to the best
prosecution of them -- they derive great energy and support, from the most
weighty motives of religion and eternity -- they ensure the best and most
excellent rewards to enforce duty -- the best esteem of mankind, at least of
the wiser and better part -- the approbation of God and conscience, infinitely
to be preferred to the plaudit of the whole world -- and in connection
herewith, the great and blissful rewards of eternity. But waving these, with
many other topics -- it may appear with full evidence, by tracing the genuine
spirit, principal linaments and characters of an administration formed upon
these divine and excellent principles.

To make this evident, it is sufficient to observe,

WISDOM will conduct -- righteousness shine -- lenity temper -- religion be
warmly cherished -- the public welfare inspire and envigorate -- and intrepid
courage and magnanimity support, an administration formed upon the principles
of integrity and piety.

FIRST, Wisdom and prudence will conduct the administration, formed upon the
principles of integrity and piety. The wisdom of its councils, is the high
honor as well as safety, of every state. Superior talents are very important,
in exalted stations of power; but it is wisdom and integrity, gives them a
right direction; and turns them to the greatest advantage: severed from these
virtues, they will be in a great degree useless, and may be turned to
pernicious purposes. These illustrious virtues, are of high utility and
continual importance, in the widely extended concerns and interests of the
state; to guide the exterior connections and internal regulations of it, by the
wisest measures, to the most salutary purposes: and eminently so, in seasons of
peculiar embarassment, perplexity and dangers. Under the best constitution,
things will not long remain upon their proper basis -- the spirit of it will
not be retained, nor the best interests of the state pursued and accomplished
-- nor can they ordinarily be relieved, when reduced to great perplexity and
embarassment; without wisdom and prudence conduct the administration. This
wanting, the best opportunities and advantages may be lost, and the best
designs defeated: The wisest king of Israel long ago admonished the world, by
wisdom and counsel purposes are established, and by the want of it are
defeated. An ancient adage founded on the experience of ages, may be applied to
the greatest powers of this world -- vis concilii expers, mo^a sua ruit, power
void of counsel, rushes to ruin of its own weight. No arts, frauds, disguising
tricks of state, or political reaches of refined cunning, can be substituted
and supply the place of wisdom; as they tend in their nature, so they have
often reduced flourishing states to great embarrassing perplexities, and to the
brink of ruin; while it is sound wisdom, integrity and righteousness only, that
conducts the state in dignity and safety. Perhaps as many states have been
ruined by the infatuated folly of false policy, as determined perverseness. The
ruin of Jeroboam, his family, and finally of the ten tribes of Israel was laid
in his impious scheme of false policy. To a ruined people, the consequences are
just the same; whether it be brought on, in the one way or the other. The man
of integrity must know and feel, he cannot answer it to his own conscience, to
the state, nor to God the righteous judge, if such spacious ruin be brought on
by his neglect, criminal ignorance or ill policy. This may induce him modestly
to decline stations he cannot fill with honor and usefulness -- this will
engage him, when in an exalted station, to have his ears and heart open to the
dictates of sound wisdom and policy -- to use the best means to attain it for
all occasions; above all to ardent applications to Him who proclaims, "Wisdom
and council are mine," and "who gives liberally and upbraideth not," as the
surest way of a supply: exemplified with great encouragement in king Solomon.
In a word, this will determine and excite him to the best exertion and use of
all his wisdom and prudence, in the important concerns of an exalted station:
in imitation of king David, who guided Israel by the skilfulness of his hands.
What illustrious wisdom conducted the administrations of Joseph in Egypt,
Daniel in Babylon, formed upon the principles of integrity and piety.

SECONDLY, Righteousness will shine with luster in an administration founded on
the exalted principles of integrity, goodness and piety.

THE ruler of this excellent spirit, will cloth himself with righteousness as
a robe; and estimate it a diadem of glory. His love of righteousness, the high
importance of it, by which a nation and government is exalted and established
-- his benevolent and tender regard for the rights and interests of the
community and of mankind -- above all, his supreme love to God, and his
accountableness to him, who is the almighty patron of right and justice, and
avenger of unrighteousness, will urge him to promote the interest of
righteousness, to the utmost of his power. Under an administration formed by a
spirit of righteousness, effectual care will be taken, that the properties of
subjects, and their great essential rights and privileges, they have by nature
or constitution, be preserved to them, inviolate. These being their best
birthright inheritance in this world, and dear to them as life, an injury here
must be highly injurious to the state, and of most fatal consequence -- these
may by no means be invaded and usurped, betrayed or sacrificed. When leaders of
administration openly adopt arbitrary and oppressive measures in a free state,
government is corrupt as in its fountain, and the foundations of it are shaken.
Rulers of integrity will do their utmost in their places to prevent or remedy
such measures, with all their ruinous operations and consequences -- that all
their privileges may be amply enjoyed in their day, and transmitted full and
unimpaired to succeeding posterity. Tyranny and anarchy they will equally
avoid, and if possible prevent; each being replete with infinite mischiefs to
the state. The just prerogatives of power and rights of subjects will alike
engage their attentive care: The peace of God and the King will be preserved,
and good order established -- public merit and good services be amply rewarded
-- men of virtue and merit be impartially promoted, and continued during good
behavior; while misdemeanor in office will be properly discountenanced -- The
treasures of the people will not be lavished to support idle drones, favorites
and minions of power; who add no strength or glory to the state, but are a
scandal to government, debilitate and degrade the dignity of it: And much less
will such treasures be squeezed out of the community, by the wilds or arms of
oppression for such destructive purposes. -- Bribery and corruption will be
discountenanced, and if possible banished the state, by rulers of integrity, as
condemned by the law of God, and of most ruinous tendency to every free state.
-- The lives of subjects will be precious -- the blood of war will not be shed
in peace with impunity -- righteousness of administration will pursue the
unchangeable law of God, He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed; and, A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee
to the pit, let no man stay him. -- The channels of public justice will be kept
open, pure and incorrupt -- righteousness be impartially administered to all
high and low, of every rank and order -- the conduct of trials will be pursuant
to the spirit of the constitution, to the accustomed rules and known law of the
land; nor will any other methods, excluding subjects of their birthright
privileges, and of redress by the law of the land, be adopted and encouraged,
but as much as may be prevented -- complaints of grievance and oppression will
be willingly heard, and where found to be just, as readily redressed. -- In a
word; the innocent will be impartially protected -- the disobedient as
impartially punished -- the injured righted, without favor or affection, fraud,
or unnecessary delay or embarrassment of justice.

SUCH, I apprehend, the spirit of an administration founded in integrity,
goodness and piety; wherein righteousness will shine with luster, or in the
metaphor of the prophet, will be as the waves of the sea, bearing down all
opposition; and peace and prosperity flow as a river. -- Such an overflowing
benignant protection of government and administration, as extended to different
incorporate nations, and to distant climes and countries, is beautifully
represented by the prophet Ezekiel, under the figure of a tall pine, with
wide-extending boughs and branches, affording lodgment for birds of every wing,
and shelter for every beast of the field. Ezekiel. 17. 22, 23. chapter 31. 3, -- 7.


THIRDLY, Lenity and moderation will temper, and be the glory of an
administration, formed upon these excellent principles: Wisdom will dictate it,
and the benevolence of an upright and pious heart will strongly dispose to it.

THE throne is upheld by mercy as well as righteousness. Crimes of high
malignity against God and the state, or particular subjects are not to be
spared: justice must take place -- the exercise of lenity to such offenders may
be cruelty to the state. But slight disorders, not of a malignant nature, nor
long continuance, like the follies of children, are often best cured by wise
paternal lenities. It Is no departing from the dignity of government, to conduct
with lenity and moderation; but adds luster to it. Sudden sallies and emotions,
perhaps from laudible principles, but misguided zeal, and without malignity of
design, have often been rectified by lenient moderation; while slight disorders
magnified by misrepresentation, and followed with an undue exercise of power
and severity, have produced serious evils and much greater disorders and ill
consequences in the state.

WISDOM and lenity may temper the heat of parties, remove misunderstandings,
and allay animosities; when rigor and undue severity would but alienate and
disaffect, irritate and inflame. -- When the two tribes and half tribe in
Israel built an altar by Jordan, there were great apprehensions in the rest of
the tribes, of a very criminal defection and revolt; a fire was inkindling and
ready to burst into a flame: but by wise and moderate measures, true
information was obtained, all misunderstanding removed, and the fatal fire
extinguished. Joshua 22. 10, to the end.
Afterward, when a threatening storm was arising in Ephraim, Gideon by his
wisdom and lenity, calms and diverts the leading passions into another channel,
and allays the tempest. Judges 8. 1, -- 4.
It is the glory of an administration, where wisdom and justice, lenity and
moderation, each shine in their proper place and with due luster.

FOURTHLY, Religion and virtue will be patronized and warmly cherished in an
administration formed upon the principles of integrity and piety.

THE man of integrity and piety cannot feel indifferent to the important
interests of religion and virtue, which ought proportionably more to engage his
attention, in a superior sphere of action and influence. Are they ministers of
God? In reason and gratitude they ought to acknowledge and honor him, as the
fountain of their abilities and authority, honor and influence. They must be
just in their care of the rights and interests of subjects; they must rule in
the fear of God and for God, with a supreme regard to his will and law,
authority, honor and approbation. The interests of true religion and virtue, as
well as justice, must be patronized and encouraged according to its benignant
influence to the good of the state and happiness of rulers and subjects,
answerable to the character of nursing fathers to the church of God. It is by
no means my design, to labor this point, and pursue the argument at large --
But allowing king David to understand the instruction of God to him in the
text, and his example in administration to be a just comment upon it, (which is
but a reasonable allowance, considering he was a man after God's own heart, and
also an inspired prophet) and the point seems clear. So he understood and
practiced upon it, removing the wicked far from him, and putting the faithful
of the land in office; who would have a care of religion and virtue, as well as
justice. He was an illustrious patron and encourager of the worship of God, of
true religion and virtue, by word, example and influence. He may not be
imitated by uninspired men, in things which he did as an inspired prophet: but
in his general conduct as an eminent friend, patron and incourager of piety and
virtue; he is set up by God, as an example for his successors in
administration. 1 Kings 11. 28. chapter 14. 8. and other places.

MUCH may be done by rulers, in making salutary provision for the protection
and support of public worship, religion and virtue, and by countenance, example
and influence, without interfering with the sacred rights of conscience, or the
prerogatives of the Lord of conscience, in adding to, or diminishing from what
is already established by his supreme authority. And it is evidently important,
because religion and virtue are the great supports of the state. This is so
plain a dictate of reason and observation, that it has had the general
concurrent testimony of the wisest and best in all ages. Impiety, immorality
and vice are a wound to the vitals of the state; nor can any long flourish, or
if free, retain their liberty, if these enemies are prevalent in the bowels of
it. The favor of God, (from whose grace and providence comes all good) will
accompany true religion and virtue: but his wrath will be poured out on
profligate states and kingdoms. Great were the effects of a good or bad
administration in this point, in Judah; it went well or ill with them
accordingly; pursuant to the fixed rule of divine dispensation, addressed by
the prophet to the king of Judah, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him;
if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. II Chron. 15. 2.
The subversion or perversion of true religion and virtue for political ends,
is the worst policy in the world, as is fully exemplified in the instance of
Jeroboam. Upon every principle of duty and good policy, rulers of integrity and
piety will discountenance all impiety and wickedness, and patronize true
religion and virtue, as the best means and token of a flourishing and happy
state.

FIFTHLY, The public welfare will fix the attention, inspire and invigorate the
best efforts for the advancement of it; in rulers of integrity and piety.
Actuated by the exalted principles of love to God, to their country and to
mankind; they will be born on, with an inextinguishable ardor in the pursuit of
the public welfare. These exalted principles will inspire noble designs, make
them attentive to the wisest and best measures, and invigorate the pursuit of
them, in exalted stations, with unwearied constancy. Rulers of this excellent
spirit, will feel themselves most strongly united in interest and affection to
their country, and to the community whose interests are entrusted to their
care: will view all their own interests in this world, as closely connected
with the public welfare; and all embarked upon the same bottom, will regard the
freedom or slavery, glory or dishonor, prosperity or adversity of the
community as their own. This is a source of the best paternal or patriotic
affection and labors; which cannot fail of the benignant effects of true
patriotism, controuling and subordinating all irregular selfish views and
interests to the good of the public. This excellent spirit, with its benign
influence and effects, shone with great luster in the administrations of Moses,
Mordecai, Daniel and others in sacred history. The public good, in all its
important branches, the liberty, wealth, power and honor of the community,
whatever tends to make it easy, prosperous and respectable, will engage the
attention, and invigorate the labors, of rulers of integrity and piety.
Vigilant care will be taken, that the best ends be proposed, the best and
wisest measures be concerted, and carried into execution, for the public
welfare.

LASTLY, A dignity of spirit, an intrepid courage and magnanimity will support
an administration formed upon the principles of integrity and piety.

A PERTINACIOUS obstinacy in the pursuit of wrong measures, evidently injurious
to the commonwealth; and an easy flexibility and instability that turns with
every wind, are alike very pernicious to government. They greatly fully the
glory, degrade the dignity, and weaken down the strength of an administration.
Whereas, it is the dignity, strength and glory of an administration, where the
best ends are pursued -- the best causes supported -- the best measures adopted
and carried into execution with unshaken firmness, intrepid courage, and
unfailing magnanimity. And beyond controversy, conscious integrity and piety,
whereby in the language of the prophet, they lay hold of God's strength; and
the Almighty becomes their dependence and strength; is the best support of such
firmness, courage and magnanimity. The frowns or flatteries of the world, the
cavils or reproaches of the discontented and factious cannot shake such a firm
foundation. The high temptations of interest or ambition -- the wily promises
or menacing threats of power, will be useless and vain -- integrity makes them
proof against the one, and the fear of God against the other. Of this we have a
memorable example in the three worthies in Babylon -- they stood forth the
illustrious advocates of liberty and religion, and with what easy, amiable
dignity! with what intrepid firmness, courage and magnanimity! do they make
answer to their menacing prince, We are not careful to answer thee in this
matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the
burning, fiery furnace; and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But
if not, be it known to thee, O king, we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship
the image which thou have set up, Daniel 3. 16, 17, 18.

THE general observation being sufficiently illustrated in the course of this
representation, we may not omit these two remarks.

REMARK I. IT were ingratitude to God, and to our British sovereigns, not to
acknowledge we have generally enjoyed ample indulgence and protection of our
liberties and privileges under the administration of the British court:
especially since the glorious revolution. But justice requires it to be said,
we have ever made answerable returns of affection and loyalty, duty and
obedience. We never betrayed their trusts, their confidence or their interests;
but every requisition constitutionally made, has been readily answered with
duty and loyalty, to the good acceptance of his majesty and the British court:
and, in conjunction with our sister colonies, have been an eminent source of
the wealth, power and glory of Great Britain. The character and conduct of this
government and American colonies in general, in this point, stands
unimpeachable and irreproachable, but to ignorance and misrepresentation.

REMARK II. IT were ingratitude to God, and to the memory of our honorable
rulers, not to acknowledge, we have generally enjoyed in this colony (from the
beginning, to this day) as wise, righteous and benignant an administration, as
can be boasted in any part or province of the British empire. And in justice to
the community it must be said, that in general there has been as free and
unanimous a concurrence of subjects with their rulers, to support the dignity
and attain the best ends of government, as can any where be found. An evident
proof, of ample provision made in our royal charter, for the best
administration and ends of government; without any superadded regulations
whatsoever.

NOR may we pass the tribute we owe to the memory of our late honorable and
very worthy governor PITKIN, deceased, a christian of the primitive stamp, a
patron of liberty, religion and virtue; a dignified ruler of distinguished
integrity and piety, well answering the instruction of God in the text, who
filled his exalted station with honor and usefulness -- lived respected and
died lamented; whose memory will be deservedly precious. May the divine hand
that has given, sanctify this rebuke to us, and the whole colony.

I WOULD now turn the discourse in a respectful address to your honors the
Governor, Deputy Governor, the Assistants and Representatives in general court
assembled.

HIGHLY honored and revered,

YOUR candid and noble minds will indulge a respectful freedom, in the language
of confidence in you, suitable to the dignity of the ministerial office and
present occasion.

THIS day brings us the recognition and enjoyment of the important privileges
we hold, by the spirit of the British constitution and by our royal charter --
Privileges more precious than the gold of Oph^r, and of greater importance to
the welfare of humane society, than all the treasures of the Indies;
privileges, whether we consider their intrinsic importance and use, or the
manner in which they have been retained, secured and transmitted to us, by our
glorious ancestors, through extraordinary struggles and scenes of blood, must
be very precious to every heart. Privileges, we have confidence in you (highly
revered senators) will never be lost out of our hands, by any neglect or
default of yours. In our constitution a good foundation is laid; may I say it is
yours sirs, to build the noble structure of a wise, righteous and benignant
administration of government upon it. The work is made easy to your hands, by
the wisdom and integrity of foregoing administrations, into whose labors you
enter. We doubt not your wisdom and best abilities will be exerted, to further
and complete what has been so well begun: that in respect to our civil state,
we may be one of the happiest provinces in the world. The welfare of the
community you will ever regard as the high end of your betrustments -- The man
that betrays his trust, or sacrifices the interest of the public to his own
private ends, interest or ambition, will ever stand exposed to the just
resentment of God and men. The dignity of government, in conjunction with the
liberties and privileges of subjects, is an object you will never loose sight
of: whatever is injurious to the one or the other, will engage your vigilant
care and attention to prevent. Your eyes will be upon the faithful of the land,
men of integrity and virtue, to fill the executive trusts of government. -- You
will show yourselves the amiable patrons, examples and encouragers of true
religion and virtue -- justice be impartially administered -- vice and
wickedness you will bear down with an equal, steady, impartial but powerful
hand. Whatever your wisdom may suggest to increase the wealth, power,
reputation and interest of the government will engage your attention. We have
full confidence, you will continue your paternal patronage and generous support
of the college. We rejoice in the great utility of that institution, in the
widely extended benefits flowing from that society, to the colony and land, to
church and state. It spreads not only a literary glory upon the government, but
imparts an important, real advantage, in the knowledge there obtained, and then
communicated and diffused (in some degrees) through all ranks and orders of
men, of unspeakable service to church and state.

YOU will have it in view and at heart, that wisdom, righteousness and
benignity may shine forth in the administration of this government, to the
glory of God, and the best good of the state* that such as may seek occasion
against you, or the government, may find no place for accusation or reproach.
You need no information, of the alarming apprehensions of your constituents and
of Americans in general, from the late parliamentary regulations, and the
measures adopted to carry them into execution. We look up to you as our more
immediate guardians, of whatever is most dear to us and to our posterity
pertaining to this world: With such a trust reposed in you, and such an
expectation may I say from God and us, you will feel a most tender, paternal
regard for us, and execute a most vigilant care and endeavor for our rights and
interests: that our privileges may be amply enjoyed by us, and transmitted full
and unimpaired to posterity after us. You will adopt the most wise, salutary,
constitutional measures for their security, and confiding in God, adhere to
them with decent dignity, unshaken firmness and intrepidity. You will not omit
any thing, nor do any thing, which you cannot answer for, to conscience, to the
state and to God the righteous Judge, -- to whose wisdom and grace, care and
blessing we most heartily commend you.

I WOULD now proceed, in a respectful address to my honored fathers and
brethren in the gospel ministry.

REVEREND and beloved,

As ministers of the Lord Jesus, our principal business, doubtless, centres in
the great concernments of the kingdom of God. But is there not an important
service, which we owe to the state, to the support of government, and to the
welfare of our country; which may properly be touched on this occasion? The
public welfare must attach and deeply affect us; nor can we behold the approach
of danger and ruin to our country, from any quarter, without strong emotions of
heart: and proportionable should be our endeavors, in our proper sphere, to
prevent it. While a public spirit, a love to their country, to their
privileges, and to righteous, virtuous liberty is cherished, in our people,
which in every free state is of importance to be encouraged: it is our's to
maintain civil government "the ordinance of God:" to inculcate and encourage
all due obedience to the higher powers, to magistrates of every rank and order,
in the due execution of their office, "as ministers of God for good" -- to
forward the good designs of government -- teaching the right improvement of it,
in living soberly, righteously, peaceably and godly in the world. We are to
inculcate faith and universal obedience to the gospel of Christ: and exert our
best endeavors to form our people to be good christians good subjects, useful
members of the state, as well as amiable subjects and happy heirs of the
kingdom of God. It is our's to lay open to them the moral causes of all the
calamities we feel or fear, to lead them to a due acknowlegement of the hand of
God in every providence, to direct and urge their application to the grace of
God in Christ, to sanctify and form them for his service, in the best manner to
answer the great designs of providence, and of their creation and redemption.
To us it belongs to cry aloud and spare not to show them their transgressions
and warn them of those sins and provocations, which bring down the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience, in this world and to eternity -- to give
warnings against that impiety, vice and wickedness which has stripped many a
people of their best privileges, and fixed the galling yoke of arbitrary power
and tyranny upon the necks of so many of the great and mighty nations, kingdoms
and empires of the world: whereby they are ruled as with a rod of iron; and
fruitful lands are turned into barrenness. And should our nation and land
follow their examples of corruption, wickedness and provocation (which God
mercifully forbid and prevent) how can they always escape their exemplified,
tremendous punishment. In a word, it is our's to urge a thorough repentance and
reformation of the evils found with us, and a hearty return to God in Jesus
Christ -- to the best improvement of the glorious gospel, and of all our
privileges; as the way to secure the favor, protection and blessing of the
almighty, as the surest foundation of lasting peace, tranquillity and
prosperity. Our principal labors are to be employed, to carry into execution
the great designs of redeeming love, in the salvation of perishing sinners in
Jesus Christ to the glory of God and the Redeemer -- This is a service so every
way important, as discloses the most glorious prospects which can open upon the
humane mind -- and brings with it the strongest motives that can influence the
heart of man. May it ever deeply impress us, and excite to all fidelity: May we
obtain mercy of the Lord, to serve the best interest of the public, and to save
our selves and them that hear us.

I SHALL now close the discourse with a solemn address to the audience in
general.

INTEGRITY and true piety, which are of such use and importance to rulers in
their exalted stations; are of absolute necessity to every one of you -- to
render you good christians, most useful members of society in your several
places, and above all to insure you the approbation of God our righteous Judge,
and a blessed inheritance in his everlasting kingdom. Be it your principal care
then to seek and secure the grace of God in Christ -- to form you into this
excellent spirit; and to improve it in a sober righteous, peaceable, holy,
useful, godly life. Be attentive to your privileges, thankful for them, careful
to improve them to the best purposes, and stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free. Be it your care to be good christians, good subjects,
to honor and obey your civil rulers, as the ministers of God -- pursuing their
proper office and trusts, and to cooperate with them, in carrying into
execution the best designs of government; and to prosecute the duties of your
respective callings faithfully, that you may be the children of God, without
rebuke, and worthy members of society. -- We are here, but beginning our
existence, bound and hastening to another and eternal state -- in the best
state, and under the best administrations of government in this world, we are
not to expect true and lasting happiness. All things here, are transient, and
upon the wheel of change -- but blessed be God, there is a rest which remains
for the people of God, in heaven -- far out of the reach of all the calamities
of this world, and the power of death, and where the cry of the oppressor will
be no more heard: be it our principal care to secure and attain it. To this we
are urged by the importance of the prize set before us, and all the peculiar
motives of the gospel, and loudly admonished by the great changes which have
passed over us -- of repeated imminent dangers, and then of eminent salvations
brought us, by the hand of our God -- and more especially by the threatening
clouds which spread over us, and the shaking apprehensions which are felt
through the land -- Be it our care to make God our friend and trust -- to put
away all evil from before him -- and make sure an interest and glorious
inheritance in that kingdom which shall never be moved. -- Then shall we be
happily prepared for all events -- and in that all-important day which hastens
-- (when the governments and kingdoms of this world, with all their powers,
pomps and pageantry shall pass away and be no more), shall we rejoice and
triumph in the GREAT SALVATION OF GOD.

AMEN.

