A LETTER To the Rev. Samuel Hopkins, Occasioned by his ANIMADVERSIONS on Mr.
Hart's late DIALOGUE. IN WHICH Some of his Misrepresentations of Facts, and of
other Things, are corrected.

By the AUTHOR of that DIALOGUE.

He that is first in his own Cause seems just; but his Neighbor comes and
searches him.

SOLOMON. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1779.

A LETTER, etc.
REVd. SIR,
PLEASE to turn your eye on what you have wrote in the close of your 3d page,
in the 4th, and first half of the 5th, and seriously compare it with what I
told you when you was at my house last fall. I then told you, I had not read
the whole of your Inquiry, but only some extracts sent me by a Gentleman, in
whose faithfulness I could fully confide; from which I had given what you had
read in my Dialogue. When you said, Mr. Mills had wrote against the doctrine I
remarked upon as yours, and that you, in answering him, had answered or
obviated my objections against it, and that I ought to have waited till I had
seen your answer: I replied, I had not seen Mr. Mills's piece, and had only
heard in general that he had wrote against you, but did not know till now that
he had opposed that doctrine of yours I remarked upon: And as to your answer to
him, I had never heard of it before. You said it had been advertised several
months past. I told you it might be so but I had never heard any thing of the
matter till now; and added, I am sorry I did not know of it in season, I would
have waited a little to have seen it; but I did not tell you I was sorry for
what I had wrote. I further added to this purpose, that I did not design what I
wrote upon your doctrine, as a full answer to all your reasonings in its
defense, but to make my own remarks upon it, viewing of it in various lights,
not regarding whether the whole directly opposed your reasonings or not. -- I
believe, Sir, you remember this conversation; I remember it well.

Having read the above to Mr. Chapman, he gave me the following under his hand,
and I present it to you.

I Hezekiah Chapman, of Say-Brook, waited on Mr. Hopkins to Mr. Hart's house,
as he returned from Commencement last fall, and was present during the first
part of their conversation. Mr. Heart having now read to me the narrative he
gives Mr. Hopkins, in a letter to him, of the conversation which passed between
them at that time, I well remember most of it; and in particular, that Mr. Heart
told him, he had not seen or read the whole of his Inquiry, but only some
extracts from it, sent him by a Gentleman; that he had not seen Mr. Mills's
piece, and did not know that he had opposed the doctrine he remarked upon as
Mr. Hopkins's; that he had never heard till now that Mr. Hopkins was writing or
publishing an answer to Mr. Mills; that he was sorry he did not know it sooner;
he would have waited a little to have seen it. But I did not hear him say he
was sorry for what he had wrote, or that he had wrote (...) that doctrine. If
my memory don't fail me, I also heard him ^^ll Mr. Hopkins, he did not design
what he wrote on that head as an answer to his book, or to all his reasons in
support of that doctrine.

HEZEKIAH CHAPMAN.


How inconsistent with truth is the idea you raise in your readers mind? In the
passages pointed to you above, you represent the case to the reader, and reason
upon it, as supposing it true that I knew Mr. Mills had before wrote against
that doctrine of yours which I censured as false, and that you was publishing a
reply and vindication of it; and on this supposition paint me in a false light,
and flourish your colors in a characteristic manner. How could you do so? You
must have strangely forgot what I told you, or designedly imposed on your
readers by giving them a very wrong view of the matter, injurious to your
brother, and calculated to raise in them an unjust resentment against him. Do
you think, Sir, our great Master will say to you, in respect to this, Well
done, good and faithful servant? Surely such carnal weapons of offense very ill
become the hands of the ministers of righteousness.

You say, Sir, Mr. H's friend took such care not to transcribe any of my
arguments for the sentiment I espoused, that he carefully passed over the only
sentence in the first paragraph he transcribed, which contained a reason for
it, though he transcribed the words immediately before and after it. (p. 5.) I
told you, when at my house, I had taken some things out of the extracts sent
me. I aimed to take enough to give my reader a just idea of the doctrine I
designed to remark upon, and omitted some other things. So you don't know
whether the omission you complain of was by my friend or me. -- I observe you
don't censure the extracts I published as giving a wrong representation of your
doctrine. Indeed you could not, without being condemned out of your own mouth.
The reports to the contrary which have been spread among the people are
entirely without ground. If I had transcribed all you say upon this doctrine in
your Inquiry, and answer to Mr. Mills, the doctrine would have appeared just
the same as it does in the extracts I gave, except in some views of it, more
exceptionable.

To what purpose is the loud outcry you have raised? Do you think, Sir, that a
man who has been in the ministry more than thirty years, and not wholly
inattentive to what the scripture says, is taxable with presumptuous rashness
in censuring and remarking on a doctrine as false, which you have affirmed as
true, unless he has first weighed and answered all you have said in its
defense? Indeed if I had undertaken to give a particular answer to all your
arguments in support of the error, I ought to have done it. My title page
expressed my design: ' Brief Remarks on a number of false propositi^^^, 'etc.
-- Indeed I intended at first to have censured more of your dangerous errors,
and took some pains to procure your books or proper extracts out of them, but
was unhappily disappointed, and so obliged to forbear. Will you, Sir, forgive
me this wrong?

You say, (p. 5.) I have such an opinion of Mr. H. that I doubt not he is sorry
for what he has done, and heartily ashamed of it. I have not seen cause yet, to
extend my sorrow further than to what I mentioned to you at my house. I am
indeed sorry you have so injuriously misrepresented the state of facts, and
hope you will be so too.

In the next paragraph you say, If it should be asked, How could Mr. H say he
had collected a few things out of many which are faulty, when he had never seen
any thing I had wrote, except the words he produces? I must leave him to answer
this question. Since you are so mightily puzzled by it, I will do it. I had
been informed by more than one credible person, (see your fifth page) yea, by
more than two or three credible persons, gentlemen of good memory, judgment and
integrity, who had read your Inquiry and sermons, what new and strange
doctrines you had taught in them. On the foot of this evidence I thought I
might warrantably say in general, that your writings contained many things
faulty. I have since read your Inquiry and Sermons, and find I was not imposed
upon, and that, as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, the one half was not
told me.

You quote these words, (p. 6.) For their lusts sake they bear partial enmity
to the law of God; and reason from them as though I here used the word partial in
a sense directly opposed to total. -- Don't you know, Sir, that you have here
concealed my sentiment from your reader, and substituted a very different one
in its place? Is this to use him well? If you read what preceeds and follows
this little scrap of a sentence, with due attention, I think you could not but
perceive I used the word partial there, in the same sense as when we say of a
corrupt judge, he is partial in his judgment. See the dialogue, p. 57, 58.

In your 5th page you say, I implicitly grant that you and Dr. Whitaker are
both right, if the doctrine of man's total depravity is admitted, (you had, I
believe, no warrant to say so) and that the doctrine of regeneration by the
immediate operation of the Spirit of God will follow, the doctrine of total
depravity being allowed. Is this a blunder, Sir, or an instance of art? I
neither denied, nor reasoned against the immediate operation of the Spirit,
etc. but only against an operation without the word of gospel truth, which you
gentlemen have taught. The Spirit's operation may be immediate, and yet be with
the truth. If instead of immediate, you had said the physical, miraculous
operation of the Spirit, without giving light or communicating truth to the
mind, this would have been a fair and just stating of the matter. -- I observe,
Sir, though you carefully avoid using the word physical in your writings on
this subject, yet you use the word immediate in such a manner as must convey to
the discerning reader the same idea.

You say, sir, (p. 6.) The dispute between him and me does, by his own
acknowlegement, turn upon the doctrine of man's total depravity: (a very
unwarrantable assertion) And Mr. H. has no other way to oppose Dr. Whitaker or
me, but by denying this doctrine. (You are greatly mistaken in this, sir.) --
The doctrine of man's total corruption in his natural unrenewed state, which
has been held by all sound calvinists from the reformation down to this day,
and is expressly asserted by the assembly of divines at Westminster, in their
confession and catechisms: This doctrine, I say, is as false and dangerous an
error as any of those Mr. H. has opposed in Dr. W. or me: and more so if
possible, as the former is the foundation of the latter; so that these cannot
be opposed but by opposing that, which is really the only thing in dispute. --
This, sir, is a very extraordinary passage. I suppose sound calvinists hold the
general doctrine of man's total corruption; and that they do approve the
substance of the Westminster confession and catechisms: But they are not
obliged exactly to agree in every tittle with that assembly, in the explanation
they give of this corruption, in order to be sound calvinists, any more than
with you and Dr. W. in your explanations. However, I believe they do generally
like the Westminster definition better than yours. They agree in the general
doctrine of a total corruption, but their modes of explaining of it,
circumstantially differ; as the modes of explaining the doctrine of the
trinity, used by the trinitarians do; and yet these are all sound calvinists,
as the other are sound trinitarians. The most moderate, believe that the grand
principle of true piety and heavenly virtue is dead, and its root perished in
the hearts of fallen man, and that it cannot be revived, but by a new
plantation of the sacred seed, sent down from heaven, by Jesus Christ, and
planted in the heart by the gracious influence of the holy Spirit, and
supernatural grace of God, administered by the gospel; and that there are
certain seeds of sin in the hearts of all men, or natural principles and
springs of action, which left to themselves, uncontrouled and ungoverned by
grace, will infallibly produce actual sin, and bring forth fruit unto death;
and that some of other of the passions or lusts of sin have in fact the
ascendant in every heart of man, till the heavenly seed of virtue or true
holiness is planted by the Spirit of grace. All this is undoubtedly true. --
The most rigid calvinists profess to believe the Westminster definition of the
natural corruption, just; but it is observable that they, in their
explanations, depart a little from the strict literal sense of the latter
clause, viz. ' wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually.'
There is a distinction to be made Sir, between sound and perfect. Perhaps you
are disposed to compliment yourself as a perfect Calvinist: but I think if you
can possibly be admitted at all as a Calvinist, you ought to be esteemed a
corrupt one, relating to the doctrines now in view. You, sir, and Dr. W. with
some others among us, have carried orthodoxy to such prodigious excess that it
is, in your hands, degenerated into heterodoxy. But is it not a presumptuous
thing in you to set up yours, and Dr. W's particular explanations of the
general doctrine of the total depravity as the standard of soundness in this
article? What possible pretense can you have for this, more than the venerable
Mr. Baxter, Dr. Watts, Dr. Doddridge, and a thousand more great names? There
are, sir, great numbers of sound Calvinists who will never consent to lie down
and be stretched upon your bed. None indeed need to fear their feet will be cut
off as too long.

But let us, sir, view the standard you have implicitly set up as the rest of a
sound belief relating to the doctrine of the corruption of nature. It is this,
The enmity of man's heart is levelled directly against God's whole moral
character as being hateful to the natural man, in itself, or for its own sake;
that this enmity is wro't into the very frame of the human heart, and is of
such a nature- and so confirmed a principle, that no possible applications of
gospel truths to the mind and heart can subdue or weaken it: The Spirit of God
himself cannot overcome it by applyimg gospel truth and the doctrines of grace
to the heart. But on the contrary, the more a natural man sees of the light and
truth of God's character, the more in proportion does his hatred of it rise and
exert itself. This, sir, is a just summary of the doctrine you and Dr. W. have
taught relating to the natural enmity. I know indeed you do both of you
frequently contradict yourselves; but this doctrine comes out at last as what
you hold to. I could easily collect as large a section of striking
inconsistencies from your Inquiry and Sermons, as you have from the aged Mr.
Mills; but that would not please or edify the public more than your fragrant
posey did.

But is it really as you say, that a man cannot disbelieve and oppose this
doctrine concerning the enmity, but he must disbelieve, and consequentially
deny the doctrine of a total corruption? Is this latter doctrine really the
only thing in dispute? You could not have suggested any thing more
exceptionable. You have put the controversy upon a wrong foot; no sound
Calvinist will join issue with you here. The general doctrine of the total
depravity is not at all in dispute. Men who admit this doctrine do, and may
very consistently deny your doctrine concerning the nature of the enmity: for
they believe the corruption is of the moral kind, and in its nature curable by
an application of that supernatural doctrine of truth and grace which came by
Jesus Christ, in such a manner as the holy Spirit knows how to apply it. There
is an essential difference between your doctrine concerning the enmity, (on
which that other doctrine I opposed, is built) and their doctrine of the
corruption. -- Indeed, sir, it appears to me, that you have treated your
readers very ill, in thus making them lose sight of the merits of the cause,
and substituting quite another thing in its place, as being, you tell them, '
really the only thing in dispute.' Some, no doubt, will believe you, and be
filled with fervent zeal And the glory will be yours of blowing up an
unhallowed flame, founded in misrepresentation. If you have misled them through
inadvertence and without design; I hope they will easily forgive you this
wrong: But if it was done with design, it is artful enough, but how unfaithful!

I hope, sir, for your sake, it was only a confusion in your tho'ts that caused
you so wrongly to state the controversy. Perhaps sir, you will say, I have not
told you what my sentiments are relating to the general doctrine of a total
corruption. I have told you what they are not. I will further say, in general,
I apprehend they are much nearer the Calvinistic doctrine than yours are, and
to the scriptures of truth. But you appear to have a great disposition to have
your readers think me an Arminian; and I suppose, think you shall find your
account in it. I suffer you to enjoy the pleasure. Perhaps I may soon have
opportunity to let the public know more fully what my sentiments are relating
to these matters.

What you say, p. 8. I pass over as unworthy of notice -- It affords a striking
instance of unfairness and misrepresentation. As such I recommend it to your
serious review.

I observe, sir, that in your following pages, you very carefully keep up the
misrepresentation of the merits of the controversy, which I took notice of
above, and labor to persuade your readers it is genuine Calvinism that is
opposed as a new system of errors. In this you impose upon your readers. Some
will see it, others will not. -- You say, p 9. I question whether an author
can, with a right temper and view, take this method to run any doctrine down,
by appealing to the prejudices of the people Why then did you do so? You have
done it, I think, in an extraordinary manner.

You are pleased to censure me very severely for calling the scheme of
doctrines, some of which I remarked upon, a new scheme. And refer to the synod
of Dort, and Westminster assembly as teachers of these things, and say, if I
had called all the calvinistie doctrines quite new, it would not have been more
contrary to apparent fact. p. 10, 11, 12. Some of your brethren in this scheme
have acknowledged it in some respects new, they speak of new discoveries and
further improvements in divinity. I heard one of them, not long since, in a
public discourse, after he had drawn the outlines of the new scheme, apply
himself to obviate the prejudice that might arise against it as in some measure
new; and to this purpose he observed, that new discoveries and further
improvements had lately been made in philosophy, and other branches of natural
science, and why should not the like be expected in divinity? I wish you
gentlemen, had made any further improvements in true divinity.

If sir, you had fairly represented the doctrines I remarked upon as erroneous,
you would have made but a poor figure in representing of them as the ancient
and established doctrines of calvinism, and of the Westminster assembly of
divines. -- Suffer me sir, to present you with a number of doctrines which
belong to that scheme of divinity I call a new scheme. A just summary of the
doctrines concerning the enmity I have given you above. To these I add the
following, viz. Men are not converted to God -- by any rational arguments,
whereby their hearts are persuaded to turn from sin to God. -- I don't think
that regeneration is effected. -- by presenting the things of religion to their
minds, or even by opening their eyes to see them. Whitaker's Sermons, p. 53.
Light and truth, or the word of God is not, in any degree, the means by which
this change is effected. Hopkins's Sermons.
I refer you to your sermons for many more corrupt doctrines which belong to
the new scheme of divinity. I do not ask you to prove your new doctrines true,
by the holy scriptures. This I know is impossible. But prove them to be
calvinistic, by the Westminster assembly of divines, and fairly reconcile them
with the following propositions delivered by them, and I will no longer call
your scheme new, though it is very corrupt and destructive. In their confession,
chap. 10th, they say, God does effectually call the elect, by his word and
spirit, -- enlightening their minds, spiritually and savingly to understand the
things of God, taking away the heart of stone, etc. In their brief sum of
christian doctrine, which was also received by the general assembly of the
calvinistic church of Scotland, they say, Head 3d. The outward means for making
men partakers of the covenant of grace are so wisely dispensed as the elect
shall be infallibly converted and saved by them. These means are 1st. the word
of God. Under the 4th head they say, By these outward ordinances (means of
grace) our Lord, in the power of his Spirit, applies unto the elect all saving
graces, and makes a change in their persons. 1st. He does convert OR
REGENERATE them by giving spiritual life unto them. (How does he effect this?)
In opening their understandings, renewing their wills, affections and
faculties. Surely sir, this Westminster bed is shorter than that you can
stretch yourself upon it; the covering is narrower than that you can decently
wrap yourself in it. -- Perhaps you will say, Divines sometimes distinguish
between passive and active conversion, etc. Some do express themselves in this
obscure, improper manner. To speak more intelligibly, their is a distinction to
be made between the action of the Spirit of God on the mind, in which the mind
is passive as acted upon, and the action of the mind answering thereto. The
Westminster assembly speak to this purpose in their confession, chap. 10. art.
2. spe^^^^g of God's effectual call of man, they say, he is altogether passive
therein, until being quickened and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby
enabled to answer this call, and embrace the grace offered. Your doctrine
essentially differs from theirs in this; you say to this purpose, this action
of the Spirit quickening or regenerating the mind, is wholly without impressing
on the mind any idea or sense of the truth, or communicating any new light to
the soul, a mere act of creating power, and that the truth is not used by him
at all as a means and instrument in this work: (this sir, is the doctrine you
and Dr. W. have plainly taught, and which I opposed) but they teach to this
purpose, as we have seen above, that in the quickening action, or regenerating
work of the Spirit he uses gospel truth as his means or instrument,
inlightening the mind spiritually and savingly to understand the things of God,
impressing a strong sense of them on the heart, under, and by which action and
influence the man is quickened and enabled to answer the call and embrace the
grace offered. So we must understand them, or they will be involved in
contradiction.

In this view of their doctrine it is true. It is you sir, who are departed
from the Westminster doctrine in this particular. -- You also say, Repentance
preceeds faith, but they represent it as the fruit of faith, as all sound
calvinists do. In their shorter catechism they say, Repentance is a saving
grace, whereby a sinner out of a true sense of his sin, and apprehension of the
mercy of God in Christ, does with grief and hatred of his sin, turn from it
unto God.

You observe sir, (p. 12.) that in my dialogue, I say, God graciously subdues
the enmity, changes and reconciles the soul, by letting in the light, and
sweet, attractive sense of his holy truth and love; and that I add, The new
divines indeed are so bold as to say, all this is not sufficient to convert and
reconcile one soul. On this you are pleased to say, Mr. H. cannot find, I
trust, any divine, old or new, that ever did, or ever will say this. I think I
may safely pronounce this as false a proposition as can be collected from any
author whatever. Please sir, to turn your eye on what I quoted from Dr.
Whitaker just now; and observe these other passages in his sermons, The
wonderful manifestations of God's love and grace in the gospel, with all the
moving and melting accents of his mercy, are not sufficient to prevail with one
sinner to make up the quarrel with God. p. 44. The manifestation of the divine
glory by Christ, transcends every other method in which God has revealed his
perfection; -- but all this serves not to engage unrenewed man to love, but
more sensibly to abhor God, in proportion to the clearer manifestation of his
nature and perfection. p. 50. If so God does not subdue the enmity, convert and
reconcile the soul, by letting in the light, and attractive sense of his holy
truth and love. For the sense thereof acts in the heart as a repulsive force.
--

Mr. Hopkins, in his sermon on Joh. 1.13. says, Light is not, cannot be given
antecedent to regeneration in order to influence or change the heart or will.
-- The more the divine character, and the things of God's moral kingdom -- are
seen and understood -- by such an one, (by any man who is not first regenerated
and changed) 'the greater will be the mind's disgust at them.' and the more it
will hate them p. 41, 42. 'Light and truth is not in any degree the means by
which this change is effected.' p. 39. He says much more to the same purpose.

I trust, sir, you will admit these gentlemen as good witnesses. If you do, my
proposition, which you say is notoriously false, is fully proved to be true,
and my accuser turns out poorly. I am sorry for him; but see no way how you can
bring him off but by saying, Mr. Hopkins and Dr. W. are no divines. -- Many
other charges of false assertions, as indefensible as that above, I pass over
unnoticed, particularly that poor one in the margin, p. 13. and that mean
suggestion in the margin, p. 16.

I observe, sir, you complain of injury and falsehood in that I sometimes call
the new doctrines Sandemanean errors. When you objected this to me at my house,
I answered that the new scheme and Sandeman's are near akin, coincident in some
things, and both come to much the same issue. More than this is not pretended
in the dialogue, though in some particular passages I may have expressed myself
too loosely. If your smiting was that of the righteous, I would esteem it as
excellent oil. But unhappily for you, you are come abroad this time in the
spirit of a Jew at the close of his fast. As the teachers of the new scheme of
doctrine had not given it a new name, I was a little in doubt what name it
ought to be called by. Calvinism I could not call it, without misleading my
readers. It appeared to me much nearer related to Sandeman than to Calvin, so I
sometimes loosely called it the Sandemanean scheme. But since it displeases, I
forbear. Please, sir, to give the poor stranger a proper name. It is your right
to name your own children. If it is called after your own name, I believe
nobody will be displeased.

You, sir, labor to convince your readers that I have embraced several of Mr.
Sandeman's distinguishing doctrines and know it not, (p. 14.) This is pleasant
enough. First of all you represented me as agreeing with the Devil, (p. 8.) now
with Mr. Sandeman. If your wrath rise a little higher, I fear you will
undertake next to prove that I have also embraced Mr. Hopkins's sentiments, and
knew it not. -- You have actually done so, toward the close of your letter.

Speaking of Mr. Edwards's piece on the nature of virtue, you observe, that his
notion of virtue and natural conscience, etc. are fundamental to the scheme of
doctrines I oppose. They are so! And his notion of virtue is new and strange,
and the scheme you have built upon it new -- Both must stand or fall together.
You ask, Why did not Mr. Heart take this dissertation in hand, and censure and
confute it? This would be -- laying the ax to the root of the tree. It would.
-- I will also tell you why I did not. I had not then seen that dissertation,
though I had heard of it. If I had seen that, and your sermons before I wrote, my
dialogue would, in some respects, have been more perfect. I have since read
that dissertation, and laid the ax to the root of the tree; and perhaps shall
publish some remarks upon it, showing that Mr. Edwards's notions of virtue, of
the primary and secondary beauty of moral things, etc. are wrong, imaginary,
and fatally destructive of the foundations of morality and true religion: If I
do, I hope to have the piece out of the press by next commencement. Since you
think this will be doing something, and that I ought to have done it before, I
presume this intelligence will please you, and that you will subscribe for a
dozen copies, at least.

You say, (p. 17.) One design of president Edwards's piece on virtue, is to
show that men have naturally no degree of true virtue, but are wholly corrupt.
And he has there considered the very things Mr. H. says to prove the contrary
-- and shows, that what Mr. H. calls virtue and an approbation of moral good,
is nothing but natural conscience and natural taste, both which are consistent
with the -- most perfect corruption of heart, and opposition to all moral good.
Here, sir, if I understand your meaning, you lead your reader to think I have
said and endeavored to prove that men have naturally some degree of true
virtue, and that their natural corruption is partial, as limited and restricted
by some remaining degree of true virtue in the heart naturally; and that I
represent the approbation which natural conscience or the natural moral taste
gives to virtue or moral good, simply considered as such, as a truly virtuous
approbation, or an exercise of some degree of true virtue, natural to the heart
of man. In all this you impose upon your reader, and abuse his confidence in
you. I said nothing of all this, and what is more, I have not though it it. You
have given here as wrong an idea of what I said, and of what I believe, as
could well be given. If you though it yourself warranted to say this of me, by what
I said in the second dialogue, you must have read it with very little attention
or great partiality. -- I would not be understood to intimate that I think Mr.
Edwards's notions of the nature of true virtue are right. They are essentially
wrong, and the view you give of my sentiments is essentially wrong. If you ever
see my remarks on his piece, you will know more fully what my sentiments are.
In the mean time, I pray you not injuriously to misrepresent me any more, as
you have done throughout your animadversions. Is it not too much like the conduct
of the old heathen in dressing up the christians in bears skins, and setting
their dogs upon them? If you write again in a controversial way, I wish you to
honor yourself as a fair and equitable writer and reasoner. This is what we are
commanded. And your spirit and manner ought to be very good, to make some
amends for the badness of your principles.

I observe, sir, what you say, (p. 18.) relating to my mentioning a passage in
Dr. Bellamy's sermon, at the college chapel, etc. -- In answer to this, I will
only remind you of what I told you; when at my house you professed your self
offended with me for mentioning of it I thus told you, I had my information
concerning the doctrine there delivered from four or five gentlemen who heard
that discourse, (this was at different times, each one giving me his
information in the absence of the others) that after I had wrote what I at
first though it proper on that head, I showed it to sundry of my informers,
desiring them to observe whether my representation was just, (two of them were
the Dr's particular friends) and reduced it to what I finally published, as
what the most scrupulous said he well remembered the Dr. did say, if not in
those very words, yet to the same purpose: I observed further, that a
discourse, once delivered in so public a manner, becomes public property. All
this seemed to calm your resentment: But an evil spirit seems now to trouble
you.

I observe, Sir, you endeavor (p. 19 to 2^.) to persuade your readers I am
inconsistent with myself in sundry important particulars, and really own the
doctrines I condemn: I don't think it needful to answer you particularly as to
this. The inconsistencies you complain of are of your own making. The
appearance of contradictions is the result of your misconstructions,
misrepresentations, and false colorings. Pray, sir, turn a serious thought on
what you have wrote in the last paragraph of your 24th p. and first part of the
25th. You know, sir, that in dialogue writing, one of the speakers only
personates the author, and is supposed to speak his sentiments, the others not,
only so far as he approves or admits them; and that in my dialogue the
clergyman personates the writer. In the passage you refer to, (in p. 67 of the
dialogue) I made the gentleman say, all reasonable and honest men, I think, can
be at no loss to determine on which side the truth lies. -- This I did (as
supposing some persons, more zealous than charitable, would be ready to make
such a rash conclusion) that I might censure it as unjust, and inculcate a more
charitable and generous sentiment; which I make the clergyman do immediately,
in his reply. All this must be obvious to every intelligent and impartial
reader. Yet you are pleased to represent this sentiment of the Gentleman,
first, in a false and very aggravated light, and then to impute it to me, and
represent me as thinking all the most noted Calvinist divines are unreasonable
and dishonest men; and cry out, 'This a bold stroke indeed.' This of yours is
indeed a bold stroke. -- You next represent me as a little shocked at this
severe censure, and attempting to correct and soften it; but to very little
purpose, according to your representation. If I was your enemy (which I am not)
I could not wish you to dishonor yourself more, than, I think you have done in
this surprising paragraph, and indeed through this whole piece. In this paragraph
your reasoning supposes that the Westminster assembly, and many of the most
noted divines in New England, and elsewhere, agree with you and Dr. W. and that
I in censuring your peculiar sentiments equally censured theirs. This is a
favorite representation. I believe this will be though it unjust by the judicious:
and it ought to be so though it by you, if you would be consistent with yourself;
for you say, (p. 28) I have sometime though it the doctrines which have of late
been called by many new divinity, are really a revival and improvement of sound
Calvinism. It Is only so far as they are what you call an improvement that
others call them new, and that I censured them as false. And thus far they are
not patronised by the respectable body of Calvinist divines 'from the
reformation down to this day.' How could they? The improvements you speak of
are new. Mr. Edwards's posthumous piece, on virtue, you acknowledge is the root
of the tree; which you have cultivated and adorned with many of its branches.

You say, sir, It is reported that a number of ministers in New England, who
were zealous promoters of the revival of religion (about 30 years ago) and did
then abundantly preach up the doctrine of total depravity, do now profess their
approbation of Mr. H's piece. If any such there are, it becomes them to know
that they have indeed changed sides, and departed from the faith they once
earnestly contended for. And you, sir, have rebuked them sharply that they may
be sound in the faith. But I bespeak your pity and tenderness for them. Poor
gentlemen, they have embraced Arminian errors, and are become opposers of
revived religion, 'and know it not!' and I believe never would have known it,
if you had not revealed it to them. If they go no farther than to pity you, you
ought to be thankful to them for their lenity.

You are pleased to say, my objections against the new scheme, are in substance
the same that Arminians have always made against Calvinism. I believe, Sir, you
are under some mistake in this. -- But suppose it so, they may lie against your
doctrines, and be unanswerable on your principles, though not so on Calvinistic
principles. Suppose a foreign body plays cannon against his Majesty's fort; may
not the King's soldiers after this point the same cannon against a fort erected
by the Pretender, and be blameless? Would you call them the King's enemies
because they do so?

I pass over many other things in your animadversions, which deserve to be
animadverted upon. Indeed you have said very little but what merits censure.

I have heard Dr. Whitaker is writing against the dialogue, you intimate as
much; and suppose your animadversions are sent out as his forerunner. They are
well adapted to prejudice people in favor of what he may have to offer. But I
question whether the method you have taken is calculated to give them ears to
hear with that impartiality which becomes christian men. Your forerunner, as we
have seen, has made strait ways crooked, and smooth ways ruff. I hope the Dr.
will have more wisdom than to walk in your prepared road.

I have two requests to make to you sir, if you will be so good as to hear
them; first, that you will once more review your animadversions, with solemn
seriousness, and blame yourself before God for whatever you have reason to
think is displeasing to him in them, or in the spirit with which they are
wrote. Indeed sir, you do not write with a good spirit. In your reply to Mr.
Mills you treated that worthy father very ill, in an ungenerous and unworthy
manner. This is the judgment of all I have heard speak of it, who have read it.
And now, besides misrepresenting many things to your readers, you have
manifestly endeavored to injure me, and render me the object of unjust popular
odium and contempt; and to this purpose have said many things, which, for your
sake, I was sorry to see. So far as I am injured by you, I am ready to forgive
you, whenever you are in a prepared disposition to ask and receive God's
forgiveness; which, I wish we may both obtain for all our wrongnesses, and
grace thoroughly to sweeten and christianize our spirits.

My second request to you sir, is, that you will calmly and impartially review
the new doctrines you have advanced, and no more perplex and corrupt the
doctrines of truth, by mingling them with metaphysical notions, falsely so
called. The observation of president Edwards, which you mentioned to me in
conversation, is just, viz. That no man is under greater temptation than an
author who has unhappily advanced indefensible doctrines. This is eminently so,
when he has expected to get himself a name thereby. It may be hard to overcome
this temptation, but it must be done. We ought sir, to be so much above our
selves as to be able to re-examine our own public doctrines with as great
impartiality as those of any other man, and to retract and censure them, once
seen to be erroneous, as freely as the errors of any other. What are we? what
is our honor, as contrasted with the truth itself, and with the honor of the
great teacher of truth? How much lighter than the smallest dust of the
balance? I am strongly convinced sir, I believe, on the foot of the clear^^^
and fullest evidence, that your scheme of doctrine relating to the natural
enmity, regeneration, and their consequences, is false, and destructive of the
gospel of God; and am persuaded you are master of so much discerning and
judgment, that if you can re-examine it with strict impartiality, free from
prejudice, you will see it to be so, and repudiate it. I am not about to reason
with you upon this subject; but suffer me to suggest one thing: Your scheme is,
in many respects, inconsistent with itself, and with sundry gospel truths which
you hold: and you know truth is self-consistent throughout. I will only mention
one of your inconsistencies. You sir, and all the brotherhood, so far as I have
seen, say the natural corruption, enmity, and impotence of the heart, is wholly
of the moral kind, and that the change which is wrought in what you call
regeneration, is a moral, not a physical change; and yet you say, this change
is not, and cannot possibly be effected by a moral influence and power of the
Spirit of God, with the gospel truth; that it is, and can be effected only by a
physical or ^^^^culous operation of the Spirit, without giving light, or
applying gospel truth. You must, Sir, make both physical, or both (...), or
remain entangled in inconsistency: But the truth is not thus bound. To detect
and renounce your own errors will be greater glory to you, than it would be to
prostitute the whole christian world to the belief of them. I only add my
friendly wish that you may attain this height of glory, and henceforth speak
the pure, unadulterated truth, in love; and am, though treated in an injurious,
unfrindly and ungentlemanly manner,

Rev'd sir, Your brother, Wm. Heart.
SAY-BROOK, MAY 3d. 1770. P. S. Reading your Postscript bro't to mind this old
proverb, You may know the bird that is hit, by her fluttering. --

Did you, sir, ever hear of an army's being drove out of the field by the
enemy, before he had taken the field?




