Mr. Hovey's FAREWELL SERMON.

A Farewell SERMON. A SERMON, Preached at Rochester second Parish, October 15th
1769. Being the Day immediately preceding the Dismission of the Author from
his pastoral Relation to the Church and People in said Parish.

BY IVORY HOVEY, A. M.

Phil. 1.27. Only let your conversation be as becomes the gospel of Christ;
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your Affairs,
that ye stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel.

Ephesians. 4.32. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

BOSTON: Printed by D. KNEELAND, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cornhill. 1770.

Advertisement. To the Reader.
THE occasion of publishing the following farewell Sermon, was the repeated
importunity of a number of my late parishioners who heard it. But as to the
particular occasion of its being preached, and the very peculiar situation of
affairs in said parish, at that time, and the special circumstances attending
the same, I forbear to enter into a relation thereof; least it should seem to
carry in it, some reflections on those who are supposed to be the more
immediate instruments of my removal from that people; which I would carefully
avoid, as I also have in the following Sermon; and would earnestly advise my
late adherents to do likewise: for I am exceeding desirous that all those
things that have the least tendency to irretate the minds of any, should be
laid aside and buried in oblivion; and that every one would put on that
"fervent charity" toward each other, which "covers a multitude of Sins." So,
begging the candor of all who may read the following Discourse, and praying
that the divine blessing may accompany it, especially to that people who have
been my late charge, I abide your sincere friend and souls well-wisher,

I. H.

A Farewell SERMON.
2 CORINTHIANS, xiii.11. Finally brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the GOD of love and peace shall be
with you.


OUR Apostle (...) this his epistle to the Corinthians with a validiction, or a
pa^^^^al and affectionate wish of all perfection, consolation, and christian
concord and communion to his beloved brethren, whom he is now taking his leave
of; which is a far better legacy, than if he could have bequeathed to them all
the riches, honors, and pleasures that this world could afford: which shows us
what fervent and unfeigned love there is, or ought to be in all the Ministers
of CHRIST, to the people committed to their charge, and how desirous to leave
GOD with them, when they themselves are departing from them.

WHEREFORE I have chosen these words of the Apostle to vent the love of a
friend, and the heart of a Pastor, in taking my final farewell of you, who have
been, so long, the beloved people of my charge -- 'Finally, brethren, farewell;
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the GOD of
love and peace shall be with you.' And truly I do not know how, in fewer and
more comprehensive words, to express my ardent desire of your spiritual
welfare, than by adpoting a similar language with the Apostle in my text in my
last address to you, 'Be perfect.' i. e. See that you are united to JESUS
CHRIST by faith, and knit together, one to another by love and charity: This is
gospel perfection. Then, 'Be of good comfort,' even rejoice in tribulation
which befalls you in the way of duty. 'Be of one mind,' of the same judgment, if
possible, in all things. However, if this cannot be attained, yet be of one
heart. 'Live in peace.' Let not difference in judgment cause difference in
affection. If in some lesser things your heads be different, yet let your
hearts be one: And for your encouragement to hearken to this counsel, be
assured that 'the GOD of love and peace will be with you;' even that GOD who is
the author of peace, the worker of peace, and the lover of peace and concord:
the heart of GOD will be with such, the help of GOD and the presence of GOD: He
will dwell with them here, that love and live in peace, and they shall shortly
dwell with him in his glorious presence hereafter forever.

THUS you have briefly heard what is implied in the Apostle's validiction and
affectionate farewell to his beloved Corinthians, and in what manner I desire
to take my leave of you also, to whom I have so long stood in a pastoral
relation, now immediately to be dissolved. And I have the rather chosen these
as my parting words, because, (as to some of you) 'I perceive sorrow has
filled your hearts,' upon this melancholy occasion. Therefore I would be glad
to guide you to the fountain head of all consolation, even to 'the GOD of love
and peace,' and to JESUS CHRIST 'the prince of peace,' and 'the consolation of
Israel,' and to the 'Spirit of truth,' who is the 'comforter of them that are
cast down,' and are 'mourners in Zion.'

BUT perhaps some of you may be ready to raise some objections in your own
minds, which, (as my design is to be very practical in handling the subject) I
would endeavor to obviate; especially as I may hereby as fully open and
explain the scope and meaning of the text, as in any other method.

SOME then, may be ready to say, within themselves, That, 'if in the conclusion
of your Ministry among us, and in your parting advice to us, you should insist
upon our compliance with these comprehensive exhortations, contained in the
text, that you will, herein, not only put us upon improbabilities, but upon
impossibilities under our present circumstances. For (first) perfection is not
attainable in this life. Nor (secondly) is it possible we should be of good
comfort under our present unhappy, distressed, and broken circumstances, in
this place; being deprived of our Pastor, and in all probibility of ever more
enjoying gospel ordinances among us. Nor (thirdly) can it be expected that we
should ever be all 'of one mind' and judgment in every thing, in such an
imperfect state as this; much less under our divided circumstances; and that
there is little or no hopes of our being ever so well reconciled to one
another's way of thinking, who are now so wide in our opinions and sentiments.
And therefore (fourthly) there is no hopes of our 'living in peace' among our
selves, and so of the 'GOD of love and peace' being with us.

I SAY, these are the objections, my hearers, which some of you may be under a
temptation to make against my pressing those pathetical exhortations upon you,
urged in my text; especially in your present frame of mind, produced by your
grievous afflictions: and may be provoked to say, It is in vain to tell of
these things; especially of 'living in peace' with some of our brethren and
neighbors; for we can never get over what we have met with, during life.

WHEREFORE I shall now endeavor to make answer to these your objections, and
show you that the things mentioned in the text, are possible, and what may be
attained, by the help of divine grace, even in this imperfect state, and under
your present disadvantageous circumstances, in the sense of the Apostle. As,

I. WITH regard to the exhortation, Be perfect. This may be attained, in the
sense of the text, by getting united to CHRIST by faith, and so clothed with
his perfect righteousness, and then you will be perfectly justified: And by
getting knit to one another in love and charity, which is the 'bond of
perfectness,' and sanctified throughout, in soul, body, and spirit. Your
sanctification will be perfect as to parts, though defective as to degrees,
when your hearts are 'sound in GOD's statutes,' and you 'have respect to all'
his 'commandments,' and 'hate every false way: When the mark you aim at and
pursue, is the highest degree of perfection, with the Apostle Paul; and to be
'perfect as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect,' according to our
Savior's direction. This is to be perfect in a scripture sense; which is
attainable in this life. This is evangelical or gospel-perfection, consisting
in a state of justification by faith, and a spirit that has no allowed guile.
For there is a proportion between such a heart and GOD's commands: No other
heart can reach every commandment; and without this integrity and uprightness
of heart, we do nothing to purpose in religion. But where there is this
soundness, simplicity, and singleness of heart, GOD has, in a measure, what he
calls for, even the whole heart; and such an one with Caleb and Joshua, will
'follow the LORD fully;' making up swervings, repairing breaches in his heart,
and every day laboring that it may be perfect with GOD. These are, in
scripture called 'perfect and upright,' as Abraham, Job, etc.

THEREFORE never say that it is impossible to attain what the Apostle enjoins
in the first part of his val^dictory exhortation, 'Be perfect.' And therefore,

II. 'BE of good comfort.' Now if we have attained to the former duty, we may
easily arrive to the enjoyment of this privilege, for that will lay a good
foundation for it. And surely this may be enjoyed by Christians in this world,
and that, even under the most uncomfortable circumstances of life. The Apostles
and primitive Christians attained to it, who were 'sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing:' Yea, they were 'exceeding joyful in all their ^^^^^lations;' and
well they might, while suffering for CHRIST, in that they had the 'Spirit of
GOD and of glory resting upon them.'

BUT perhaps you may be ready to say, this is the hardest duty of all, and even
impossible to comply with under your present circumstances, when you are
deprived of gospel ordinances, and are never like to enjoy them more in a
stated way; where can we look for consolation, when our Barnabases are removed
from us, etc.?

To which I reply, -- Then is your time to look out for it, then is your time
to expect the fulfillment of that gracious promise of our Savior, John xiv.16,
17. 'I will pray the Father and he shall give you another comforter that he may
abide with you forever, even the Spirit of truth.' Observe, our Savior was at
this time, just taking his leave of his disciples, and departing from them as
to his bodily presence; and they were almost overwhelmed with sorrow upon this
occasion; wherefore the compassionate Savior, after lovingly chiding their
inordinate grief hereupon, saying, 'Let not your hearts be troubled,' he adds
the words before cited, as an antidote against their being excessively troubled
upon this account, namely, 'I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another comforter. And v.18, 'I will not leave you comfortless:' As if he had
said, Although I cannot abide always with you myself in person, nor by my
ministers, yet I will send the HOLY GHOST to abide with you forever, whose
proper work and office it is, to comfort the disconsolate and them that are
cast down. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST hereby signifies, that his people should not
think themselves undone when he withdraws the external symbols of his presence
from them, his ministers and ordinances; as if, when these were gone, all must
be inevitably gone -- no, no, if all creature comforts, and even religious
advantages too, as to externals, are gone, yet so long as GOD and CHRIST and
the Spirit live and abide with GOD's people, they cannot want for grounds of
comfort.

INDEED the comfort of ordinances is sweet, and Sermons are sweet when GOD is
in them; but are not the comforts of the Spirit sweet also, when enjoyed
without them? Wherefore, O children of GOD, you may 'be of good comfort,' if it
is not your own fault, under whatsoever sad providence befall you, or your
families, your Ministers or the church of GOD. 'In the multitude of your
thoughts within you,' his 'comforts may delight your souls, Psa. xciv.19.
'Therefore be of good comfort' -- for when you have trouble without, you may
have peace within. See to it that you do not grieve the Spirit, your divine
comforter; and then, though earthly comforts are fled, and even those
ordinances, through which divine consolations used to be conveyed to your souls
are removed, yet hasten to the Father in the name of his Son JESUS CHRIST, and
plead with him to send you relief in this way, according to his promise. Yea,
plead with your Savior, under those gloomy circumstances, that he would do
that for you in Heaven, which he promised when on earth, even, 'pray the
Father, that he would send the comforter' into your hearts. Thus lay up your
comforts, not in creatures, but in CHRIST himself, even in his spiritual
presence: For if he can comfort, his people without his bodily presence, (as we
have heard) then surely he can do it in the want of all outward means, and
consequently, without his Ministers, or external ordinances. As it is the
Spirit of GOD alone that can comfort in the use of these means, so he can do it
in the want of them. He can comfort in the wilderness, in 'a land of drought
where no water is.' Where he denies us the streams, he can make us drink of the
fountain: Yea, these comforts which we have so from the first hand, are abiding
comforts; whereas, what comes by second hand or mediately, are, like those
means themselves, not abiding. Ordinances and Ministers may be taken from you,
either by death or otherwise; but here are comforts that abide forever.
Therefore 'let not your hearts be troubled,' but 'be of good comfort;' for
though instruments may, when GOD permits, keep your Ministers out of the
pulpit, yet none can keep the comforter out of your souls, and who is he that
'can harm you,' while 'ye be followers of that which is good.' Now as to the

IIId thing: 'Be of one mind.' This is also attainable, in the sense of my
text; which implies an agreement in all essential things, and in the
fundamental points of religion; and as to those of less importance, and things
indifferent in themselves, surely difference in opinion, need to breed no
alienation in affection, or bitter dissentions and divisions. Wherefore, not to
enlarge here, I pass to the

IVth thing mentioned, 'Live in peace:' That is, live no longer in strife,
contention, and wrath, but let all schisms and breaches be healed among you,
and good agreement take place. The Apostle says, Romans xii.18. 'If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men,' Hence it is
our duty always to endeavor, and it is doubtless possible to live in some
degree of peace, with all, even the worst of men, if it is not our own fault.
And methinks the consideration of GOD's readiness to be reconciled to us, even
when in a state of enmity with him, should beget in us a placable and
reconcilable disposition toward those that are enemies to us, even toward
such as remain of an implacable temper toward us, so as to harbor no
malevolent or unchristian resentments against them, but from our hearts to
forgive them in that respect, and to wish and seek their best good and welfare
both of soul and body; and when we are brought to such a temper as this, not
indulging any spleen, bitterness, or ill will, but are possessed of a
benevolent disposition toward them, we do so far 'live in peace;' being at
peace with GOD and having a peaceable frame and disposition of heart toward
all men: And then may we claim and expect the benefit of that gracious promise,
Prove. xvi.7. 'When a man's ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies to
be at peace with him;' that is, GOD ordinarily will, in such cases, so
mercifully lay his restraints upon our most bitter enemies, as that they shall
not be suffered greatly to harm us, when we ourselves are, in this respect,
'followers of that which is good.' And in this way it is, that we may overcome
evil with good, at least so as to secure ourselves from the mischief, if we
cannot from the resentment of our enemies. Wherefore, say not, it is impossible
for you, under your present circumstances, to comply with this part of the
exhortation, 'live in peace;' since there is no circumstance or condition you
can be in, here in this world, but, if your hearts are right with GOD and your
neighbor, you may enjoy peace with GOD, peace in your own breasts, and possess
a peaceable disposition toward all men, even your worst and bitterest enemies.
If they will contend with you, the blame will not lie at your door, nor is it
necessary the peace of your own minds should be disturbed thereby.

I GRANT indeed, it is no easy matter, in such an imperfect state as this is,
and under very trying circumstances, to attain to such a degree of grace, and
such stedfastness of faith and charity, as to stand our ground against such
strong temptations, as we are liable to; yet it may be attained, and has been
attained, and is what we ought earnestly to seek and endeavor after: And in
attaining such a frame of mind as this, we shall reap the present comfort and
benefit of it, as well as the future rewards of grace; for in the very 'keeping
of' this 'command, there is a great reward.'

THEREFORE be persuaded to 'live in peace', by being so far from giving any
just cause or grounds of stumbling to any, as to remove all such occasions out
of the way of such as would seek occasion. Yea, endeavor not only to 'leave
off contention before it be meddled with,' 'but use your best' your utmost
endeavors to make up differences and heal divisions where they have risen, and
you shall thereby obtain the blessedness of 'peace-makers', and be honored
with being 'called the children of GOD.' Thus see that you 'live in peace'
putting up injuries, forgiving offenses, as you expect that GOD for CHRIST sake
will forgive you.' Say not that your brethren and neighbors have done you such
unspeakable wrongs, and offered you such abuses, that you can never put them
up, and do not think you are required in duty to do it -- I pray you to
consider what wrongs, what injuries have you been guilty of against the blessed
GOD! Yea, what indignities, high handed offenses, and affronts have been
offered to the infinite Majesty of Heaven! Can you imagine the wrongs and
abuses you have received from men, your fellow creatures, can be comparable
with those you have offered to GOD your Creator, and to JESUS CHRIST your
Redeemer? And yet do not you hope to obtain forgiveness from GOD? But what
grounds have you for these hopes, if you do not forgive men their trespasses?
Our Savior says expressly, Matt. xiv.15. 'If ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will forgive you, but if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses.'
Comfortable words indeed to the reconcilable in spirit; but awful words to
them that are of an implacable and unforgiving spirit, and harbor malice in
their hearts.

BUT perhaps some may say, 'I know I ought to forgive, upon repentance and
christian satisfaction, and hope I stand ready to do it; but do not think I am
obliged to do it without; nay I think I ought not.' To which I reply, -- It may
be granted that you are not obliged to forgive so fully as to restore to your
christian charity, an offender, but upon evidence of his repentance and offered
satisfaction; yet you ought so far to forgive, without such manifestation of
repentance, as to indulge no secret grudge, ill will or unchristian resentment
against your worst enemies upon earth; yea, so as to wish and pray for their
welfare, that they may be the subjects of all the good things that they are
capable of, and endeavor to do them all the good that lies in your power,
though they despitefully use and persecute you,' Matt. v.44. And so far as this
disposition is wanting, and the contrary to it harbored and indulged, you fail
of complying with the exhortation in the text, 'live in peace.' But this temper
and conduct may, by the grace of GOD, be attained, and ought to be the object
of your desire and pursuit; and so far as you succeed herein, it shall turn to
your good account, both as a community and as individuals; as appears by what
is added in the last part of the text; to which I proceed in a few words,

Vthly, To set forth the great privilege which all such shall enjoy who comply
with the foregoing precepts and exhortations, 'the GOD of love and peace shall
be with you.' As if he had said, All such who comply with the exhortations,
shall have the gracious presence of 'the GOD of love and peace,' with them. And
O! what tongue can tell, or what heart can conceive the unspeakable
blessedness, the immense privilege contained in this promise, 'The GOD of love
and peace shall be with you; Now GOD is rightly styled 'the GOD of LOVE,' who
is originally and essentially love; and who has 'so loved the world as to give
his only begotten Son' to die for them. And he is styled 'the GOD of PEACE,' in
that he is the Author of peace and worker of peace: As he has provided for
reconciliation and peace between himself and sinners, which is a special work
by which he manifests that glorious attribute, even in finding out a way and
means to win those that are sinners, 'and by nature children of wrath,' to be
'the children of GOD.' Thus you may judge something by the amiable and
endearing character which is here given of GOD, 'as the GOD of love and peace,'
what an inestimable advantage it will be to have him dwell with you; who in an
especial manner delights in displaying these attributes of 'love and peace.'
This ought unspeakably to recommend him to us, who must be forever ruined, and
irrecoverably undone, unless we experience the blessed fruits and effects of
GOD's presence with us in these respects. Whereas this favorable presence of
GOD with us, is sufficient to make our condition tolerable, yea, pleasant in
every circumstance of life, even under the severest afflictions; by supporting
us under them, and finally by delivering us out of all tribulation, and making
us inconceivably happy in the enjoyment of him forever and ever. Thus we see
the concluding part of the text contains a strong and most powerful argument
for us to endeavor to 'live in' love and 'peace:' Intimating that it is
impossible for us to see and enjoy 'the GOD of love and peace,' while destitute
of this peaceable disposition. But being possessed of this spirit, we become in
some measure like GOD himself, and so are brought into a capacity of enjoying
the happifying presence of 'the GOD of peace,' according to the promise in our
text. But I proceed to some more particular application and addresses, by way
of IMPROVEMENT.

I. IN the first place, is it as we have heard, that the faithful Ministers of
CHRIST have such an unfeigned love to their people while abiding with them, but
especially when called to leave them, as to desire above all things to leave
'the GOD of love and peace with them' -- hence suffer me, as becomes such an
one, now upon my taking my farewell of you, to press these exhortations of the
text, upon you, in this my last Sermon to you. The compliance with which alone
will entitle you to the great privilege therein mentioned: For you have heard
upon what condition this is to be obtained, even upon your being 'perfect,
being of good comfort, of one mind, and living in peace.' And you have also
heard that this is a possible and practicable thing; that is, It may, by the
grace of GOD, be attained, in the sense of the Apostle, even in this present
world, and under as bad circumstances as you are at present, or can be in. O!
suffer me then to press these duties upon you, as they are of such exceeding,
great importance, especially to you un^^^ your present melancholy
circumstances. And suffer me to use some earnestness and importunity herein.
For although my pastoral relation is dissolving, through a strange dispensation
of Providence, best known to GOD, yet my brotherly relation still continues
with you; and therefore I cannot loose my love to you, and tender concern for
you. Nay, in leaving you I leave a number among you, that are near and dear to
me 'according to the flesh,' even children and grand children, who will share
with you in your prosperity or adversity; therefore, I cannot but naturally
care for you and for the welfare of this society, and wish your perfection,
your spiritual edification and comfort: And sincerely desire and pray, that the
unhappy schisms and divisions in this church and society, may yet be healed,
and that peace and unity in opinion and affection may again be restored, and
that 'the GOD of love and peace' may yet take up his abode among you and dwell
in the midst of you, as your covenant GOD, your reconciled Friend and Father
through CHRIST: And if so, you need not despair of being reunited to one
another, nor of being comfortably resettled with the gospel ministry and
ordinances among you: For nothing is too hard for GOD. He that raised Lazarus,
when he had 'been dead four days' -- he that 'breathed upon the dry bones,'
causing them to live, when to all outward appearance, their case was hopeless
and desperate, surely can easily restore you to your former privileges.
Wherefore 'wait on the LORD,' by a deep humiliation, by the 'prayer of faith,'
and by a thorough reformation, and you shall yet 'see the' power and 'salvation
of GOD.' Do as the disciples of John did when their master was beheaded; they
'went and told JESUS.' Do thus, as becomes the disconsolate disciples of JESUS
CHRIST; whatsoever ails you at any time, go and breathe out all your complaints
into the bosom of a compassionate Savior; who is 'the great Shepherd and
Bishop of souls,' not liable to be removed from his flock by reason of death,
or any other means, as all his earthly under-shepherds are. For though he has
been 'dead,' yet 'he is now alive for evermore' To him, therefore, you may
easily commit yourselves and your little ones, when your earthly shepherds are
removed from you, and he 'will never leave you nor forsake you,' whilst you
observe the directions in my text; 'Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace:' Then be assured, 'the GOD of love and peace' will dwell
with you.

BUT without strictly confining myself to the words or immediate scope of the
text, permit me, out of the abundance of my heart, to leave a few instructions,
cautions, admonitions and counsels, as my parting advice, according to the
different ages, conditions and other circumstances you may be in.

I. To the young people and children of this flock, who were born, and have
hitherto been brought up under my pastoral care and charge.

Dear children and youth, you have already heard frequent addresses from my
mouth, both in the pulpit and out of it, concerning the things which belong to
your everlasting peace; what impressions they have made upon you, GOD and your
own consciences, are the best witnesses. It is an encouraging thought to me,
that the LORD JESUS CHRIST has a very tender regard for the lambs of his flock,
as well as the sheep. This he plainly discovered in saying, 'suffer little
children to come unto me and forbid them not' -- when some would fain have kept
them from him. Yea, he not only 'gathers these lambs in his arms,' but 'carries
them in his bosom.' -- O! my dear children and youth, I must repeat to you, in
this my last address, what I have always insisted upon, that you stand in
absolute need or a Savior as well as others; and it is your duty and interest
to come to JESUS CHRIST, to this great Shepherd, when under-shepherds are
removed from you; come and choose CHRIST for your divine and heavenly Teacher,
how your earthly teacher and instructor is to be taken from you. O! come and
'learn of him, and you shall find rest to your souls.' Hear what he says, Prove.
viii.17. 'I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find
me.' It is only through him, that you guilty sinners can have access to a holy
GOD. But I know you will never be persuaded to hearken to this counsel, until
you see and feel your extreme need of JESUS CHRIST; therefore study your own
sinful, guilty, lost, and perishing condition by nature and practice, that you
may see the necessity of, and be persuaded to come to him, as an all-sufficient
and willing Savior who 'is able to save to the uttermost,' from sin and wrath;
and to bring to holiness and happiness. 'all that come to GOD by him.' O!
remember you have, the most of you, been baptized in the sacred name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which lays you under an obligation to make choice
of GOD the Father for your father and the portion of your souls, GOD the Son
for your Savior, and GOD the Holy Ghost for your sanctifier and comforter; and
by thus securing the all-sufficient GOD, the sacred Three for your everlasting
portion, you will be happy in this world and the next. But whilst you remain in
a christless state, 'the wrath of GOD abides on you,' because you are
'children of wrath,' and 'GOD' out of CHRIST 'is a consuming fire.' Hence JESUS
CHRIST alone, is the 'way to the Father' for you as well as others. Let CHRIST
therefore be 'precious' to your souls. Take him for your LORD and Savior, and
rest your souls upon him for reconciliation, pardon, and peace with GOD. --
And, dear children, see that you are speedy in, repentance toward GOD, and
faith' in 'our LORD JESUS CHRIST;' now whilst GOD is calling, CHRIST inviting,
and the Spirit striving with you. O! 'make haste and delay not' to comply with
these motions and calls, considering life is so short and uncertain, and one
day more, should you refuse, may prove your utter undoing. Should you neglect
this present opportunity, perhaps you may never hear another Sermon, never have
another offer of CHRIST and grace. O! trifle not with your souls; now 'life and
death' are set before you, choose life, in choosing the way leading thereto. It
is a pity that your youth, and the flower of your age should be wasted away in
sordid pleasures and gratifications, and you be thereby everlastingly deprived
of spiritual delights. Sure if you make the trial, you will find the pleasures
of religion far prefarable to all the delights of sense and sin. Remember, dear
children, and young people, the day of account is near, and hastens on apace,
when you will be called to account how you have spent your childhood and youth;
for thus says the LORD, -- 'Know then that for all these things GOD will bring
thee into judgment, Eccl. xi.9. O! then secure him now, to be your friend and
advocate, who will be your Judge, in the the great day of accounts. Although
the generality of youth take another course, yet do you resolve by the grace of
GOD to devote yourselves to him, and become religious betimes. Is it better to
go to Heaven alone, or with fewer and better company, than to go to Hell with a
multitude, a world of sinners? Consider, morever, the work of repentance and
conversion, humanly speaking, is much easier, the sooner you begin: Sin will be
less rooted, Satan not so fortified, ^^ace not so much slighted, nor the Spirit
of GOD so much grieved, nor conscience so much feared and hardened, as when
older. Besides, young disciples are the most beloved disciples. GOD the Father
will love you; for he takes delight in early converts. JESUS CHRIST will love
you, the HOLY GHOST will love you -- all the Saints will love you -- the holy
Angels of GOD will guard and defend you, yea, the great GOD himself will dwell
with you. Dear children and youth, what determination do you now come to? Will
you choose CHRIST and Heaven, or sin and Hell?

As you are now like to be left for a season, without a spiritual guide and
instructor, O! see that you read and study much in the word of GOD -- prize it
more than ever, and make that your rule in all you do.' Agreeable to Ps.
cxix.9. 'Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.' And see that you get the divine Spirit for your
teacher, and dwell in the strength of CHRIST. And while you endeavor to live
every day in the fear of GOD, so especially keep holy the Sabbath. I have
sometimes of late been ready to tremble for your sakes, dear youth, when I have
had a prospect of the future silent Sabbaths that are coming on among you; lest
whilst you are destitute of the preached word, GOD's holy day should be
profaned by sinful neglect, idle talk, impertinent behavior, or by unsuitable
unseasonable visits, CHRIST JESUS thereby dishonored, and your souls ruined.
O! let me therefore now advise and exhort, yea, solemnly charge you before GOD.
to 'remember the Sabbath to keep it holy;' and so to spend every one, as that
you may get nearer to GOD thereby. Let none of it be trifled away in vanity,
but the whole day carefully spent in reading, meditation, and prayer, when you
cannot regularly attend the preached word. And while you are praying, reading,
meditating, etc. take heed you do not make a righteousness of these duties --
despair of saving yourselves hereby, being assured that all your 'own
righteousness' are but 'filthy rags' Yet in this way it is your duty to wait
upon GOD to interest you in CHRIST, and give you a justifying righteousness in
him, as well as sanctifying grace. Remember that true victory is to overcome
yourselves, and true strength to break the tempter's snare: Therefore
henceforward 'be strong in the LORD and in the power of his might,' that you
may be famed among those worthy young men, to whom the Apostle wrote, 'Because
they were strong and had overcome the wicked one.' In this way you may hope
before long to see matters take a new and different turn, for the better, in
this place. And it is to you, dear youth, that we principally look, under GOD,
to forward such a blessed revolution. You are now in your forming age, and so
more likely to receive good impressions, than those who have long 'accustomed
themselves to do evil.' Hence to you we look, under divine Providence, as the
seed of the church, for the preservation of religion in the places where you
live: And a token for good it will be to this church and society, if you do not
disappoint our hopes nor disregard this my parting counsel to you; besides
which, you will find your own good account therein, as by this means you will
lay a good foundation for rejoicing hereafter, and not be found among those
miserable youth who will mourn at the last day, and say, how have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my
teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me.' But you will be
found among those happy ones who have 'heard counsel and received instruction,
who shall be wise in their latter end;' and then, if I should never more have
an opportunity of speaking to you in this world, I shall hope to have a happy
meeting and rejoicing with you together in another and a better world.

II. LET me now address myself to the elder people, even those of this flock,
who are past their childhood and youth, and have arrived to an advanced age --
to parents and heads of families. Hear my last counsel and advice to you; and
that for your own sakes, and also for the rising generation among you. Remember
the eyes of the younger will be upon you, as the guide of their youth; at least
they will, in all probability be very much influenced by your conduct and
example, whither it be virtuous or vicious. Oh see, therefore, you behave
yourselves "circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, redeeming your time
because the days are evil'. Improve your religious opportunities, such as you
shall have whither public or private, to the best advantage. Oh! let not the
children and youth see you, who are older than they, trifling with the precious
seasons of grace, and neglecting your soul's salvation; lest you bring the
'guilt of their blood' as well as your own, upon you. Especially does this
exhortation belong to you, who have the care of children and families. Do not
content yourselves, barely with not hindering them in the ways of religion, by
your bad examples, but endeavor, as much as in you lies, to further them as
well as yourselves therein; according to Joshua's resolution, resolve that, by
divine grace, 'as for you and your house, you will serve the Lord.' Therefore
be frequently praying with and for them -- improve all opportunities in
counselling, advising and catachizing them, especially on Lord's-days, whilst
you are deprived of the stated preaching of the word among you; and endeavor
thereby to make up, as much as possible the lack of ministerial instruction,
even by abounding so much the more in parental, family and private
instructions, admonitions and restraints. In this way, wait upon GOD for his
gracious return to you in the way of his public ordinances. Avoid every thing
in heart, speech and behavior, in your personal and relative conduct, that may
have a tendency to provoke the lord to leave you long without those usual means
of convincing and converting sinners and edifying saints. Beware of barrenness
and unfruitfulness under what you do still enjoy; 'for to him that has, shall
be given.' i. e. They that improve the spiritual privileges and advantages they
do enjoy, may hope for greater advantages of the same nature. Whereas, 'from
him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has.' Now by
observing these cautions and exhortations, dearly beloved, you may humbly hope,
that in GOD's time, you shall yet see good days; and that he will 'make you
glad according to the years wherein he has afflicted you.'

BUT to draw toward a conclusion -- Let one and all, young and old, male and
female, parents and children, labor, in the respects beforementioned, to 'be
perfect, to be of one mind, living in peace;' and then you may 'be of good
comfort,' assuring yourselves that 'the GOD of love and peace shall be with
you,' for GOD lives, GOD loves, CHRIST interceeds: and though the great
sovereign head of the church has permitted such a separation to take place
here, between minister and people, before death had dissolved the pastoral
relation; yet let us not be inordinately disquieted at such an event; only make
sure of CHRIST, and you may be of good comfort still -- for has he not said,
'fear not little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
kingdom.' While CHRIST is your Shepherd, both the sheep and lambs of the flock
shall find pasture: Therefore be not dismayed, you cannot finally miscarry,
whilst you are 'followers of the LAMB,' and are suitably affected with GOD's
dealings with you, humbling yourselves for what has been amiss among you in not
improving former privileges and gospel ordinances -- acknowledging GOD's
justice in thus dealing with you, and your own unworthiness of further favors.
Yet at the same time plead with GOD for his names sake, for his dear Son's
sake, for his promise sake, as well as your souls sake, that he would prepare
you for, and in his due time bestow such a precious gift of an ascended Savior
upon you, as a Pastor after his own heart, even one that shall naturally care
for your spiritual welfare. And dearly beloved, 'see that you fall not out by
the way,' while you are looking out after a resettlement and preparing for it;
but 'let all your things' therein 'be done with charity' Lay aside all
unchristian resentments toward any who you may think have been the blameable
instruments of the removal of your Minister. I repeat it, do not harbor or
indulge any unbecoming resentments or grudges against one another, upon your
own account, or for my sake, whom you may think injuriously treated. For I do
desire from my very heart to forgive any personal injury done me, and I pray
GOD to forgive them and me, and hope you will do likewise. Be persuaded to 'put
on, as the elect of GOD, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, if any
man have a quarrel against any, even as GOD for CHRIST sake has forgiven you.'

WHAT shall I add further, but a few miscellaneous counsels and exhortations?
Pray mind your families more than ever. The fewer opportunities you have in
public, on Sabath-Days or lecture days, O! be more diligent and conscientious
in reading, meditation, and prayer in your families and closets. When you
cannot hear Sermons, then read Sermons, and call to mind what you have heard.

ARE there any children or youth who are rejoicing at the thoughts of their
Minister's departure from them, in hopes they shall be under less restraints on
Sabbath Days and other times? O! do you, who have the care and watch over them,
disappoint their vain expectations and wicked hopes; and they will, it is to be
hoped, one day give you a thousand thanks that they have had such parents and
such masters; though now they may murmur and complain of such restraints.

AND as to such, among you, as fear GOD and are mourning under this sad
providence that has befallen you, O! lay not the blame any where, so much as
upon yourselves. I desire to take part to myself, and be humbled before GOD
this day, under a sense of my own barrenness and unfruitfulness, yea, for my
unspeakable defectiveness in my work, who have been so long honored of the
LORD with a standing in the vineyard. And whereinsoever my neglects and
miscarriages in the ministry, have been the means of procuring or continuing
any divine judgments upon this society, (instead of 'standing in the gap' to
keep them off I desire to fly to the atoning blood of JESUS CHRIST, which was
shed for the priesthood as well as for the people; and hope you will improve
your interest in Heaven for me, as I desire to improve mine for you, that we
may be together pardoned, purged, and saved, through the merits of the Redeemer.

I FIND in history, that when idolatry was once established by law, instead of
the true religion; those who suffered martyrdom on the account of it, did not
lay the blame of it so much upon the law makers, nor upon their persecutors as
upon themselves, upon their own hearts. One of them said, 'all this is come
upon us because we did not love the gospel.' Another, when his minster was
silenced, comes to this resolution, 'well, by the grace of GOD, the world shall
never have those hours that I used to spend in hearing GOD's preached word,
they shall now be spent in my closet and in holy duties.' If I could prevail
with you as well as persuade myself to make such an improvement of the rebukes
of providence which we have met with, I should believe that the devil and his
kingdom would be loosers by this our parting; that is, if we could but be
brought to prize the gospel more, and by how much the less opportunities we
have in public, be so much the more in private duties, such as prayer,
reading, meditation, and instructing our families.

TRULY, my beloved hearers, do not the silent Sabbaths which seem to be coming
upon you, loudly proclaim the importance of that doctrine which I am, and have
long been preaching to you? even speedy 'repentance toward GOD and faith' in
'our LORD JESUS CHRIST?' humble yourselves under the mighty hand of GOD;
endeavor to repair your decays in religion, recover your 'first love' and do
your 'first works.' Speedily make up the breaches among you. Oh! have not
parents and heads of families much to repent of, and cause to lament before the
LORD this day for their omissions in duty, in their particular relation? And
have not children much to be humbled for, on account of their disobedience and
want of subjecting themselves to the good order and government of the families
to which they appertain? Nay, who is there among us all, but have reason to
say, 'what have I done'. Let every one therefore search and see what has been
amiss in their hearts and lives, and in their houses, and repent and reform,
'putting away all iniquity far from your tabernacles'; and then shall you be
lifted up in due time; yea, you shall be built up in perfection and comfort, in
unity and peace.

TO conclude, hearken to that exhortatation in Phil. 1 xxvii. 'Only let your
conversation be as becomes the gospel of CHRIST: that whither I come and see
you or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one
mind, striving together for the faith of the gospel. I shut up all with that in
Acts 20.32. And now brethren, I commend you to GOD and to the word of his
grace* which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified. -- AMEN.


