THE TRIAL OF William Wemms, James Hartegan, William M'Cauley, Hugh White,
Matthew Killroy, William Warren, John Carrol, and Hugh Montgomery, Soldiers in
his Majesty's 29th Regiment of Foot, FOR THE MURDER OF Crispus Attucks, Samuel
Gray, Samuel Maverick, James Caldwell, and Patrick Carr, On MONDAY-EVENING, the
5th of MARCH, 1770, AT THE Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
general Goal Delivery, held at BOSTON. The 27th Day of November, 1770, by
Adjournment. BEFORE The Hon. BENJAMIN LYNDE, JOHN CUSHING, PETER OLIVER, and
EDMUND TROWBRIDGE, ESQUIRES, JUSTICES of said COURT.

Published by Permission of the COURT.

Taken in SHORTHAND by JOHN HODGSON.

BOSTON: Printed by J. FLEEMING, and sold at his PRINTING-OFFICE, nearly
opposite the White-horse Tavern in Newbury-street. M, DCC, LXX.

THE TRIAL OF William Wemms, James Hartegan, William M'Cauley, Hugh White,
Matthew Killroy, William Warren, John Carrol, and Hugh Montgomery, FOR THE
MURDER OF Crispus Attucks, Samuel Gray, Samuel Maverick, James Caldwell, and
Patrick Carr.
The Indictment was as follows.
AT his Majesty's Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and general
Goal Delivery, begun and held at Boston, within, and for the County of Suffolk,
on the second Tuesday of March, in the tenth year of the reign of GEORGE the
THIRD, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
defender of the Faith, etc.

The Jurors for the said Lord the King, upon their oath present, that Thomas
Preston, Esquire William Wemms labourer, James Hartegan labourer, William M'Cauley
labourer, Hugh White labourer, Matthew Killroy labourer, William Warren
labourer, John Carroll labourer, and Hugh Montgomery labourer, all now resident
in Boston, in the county of Suffolk, and Hammond Green boat builder, Thomas
Greenwood labourer, Edward Manwaring, Esquire and John Munroe, Gentleman, all of
Boston aforesaid, not having the fear of God before their eyes, but being moved
and seduced by the instigation of the devil and their own wicked hearts, did,
on the fifth day of this instant March, at Boston aforesaid, within the county
aforesaid, with force and arms, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice
aforethought, assault one Crispus Attucks, then and there being in the peace of
God, and of the said Lord the King, and that he the said William Warren, with a
certain hand gun of the value of twenty shillings, which he the said William
Warren the^ and there held in both his hands, charged with gun powder and two
leaden bullets, then and there, feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice
aforethought, did shoot off, and discharge at and against the said Crispus
Attucks, and that the said William Warren, with the leaden bullets as
aforesaid, out of the said hand gun, then and there by force of the said gun
powder, so shot off and discharged as aforesaid, did then and there,
feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought strike, penetrate, and
wound the said Crispus Attucks in and upon the right breast, a little below the
right pap of him the said Crispus, and in and upon the left breast, a little
below the left pap of him the said Crispus, thereby giving to him the said
Crispus, with one of the bullets aforesaid, so shot off and discharged as
aforesaid, in and upon the right breast, a little below the right pap of him
the said Crispus, one mortal wound of the depth of six inches, and of the width
of one inch; and also thereby giving to him the said Crispus, with the other
bullet aforesaid, so shot off and discharged by the said William Warren as
aforesaid, in and upon the left breast, a little below the left pap of him the
said Crispus, one other mortal wound, of the depth of six inches, and of the
width of one inch, of which said mortal wounds, the said Crispus Attucks then
and there instantly died; and that the aforesaid Thomas Preston, William Wemms,
James Hartegan, William M'Cauley, Hugh White, Matthew Killroy, John Carroll,
Hugh Montgomery, Hammond Green, Thomas Greenwood, Edward Manwaring, and John
Munroe, then and there, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice
aforethought, were present, aiding, helping, abetting, comforting, assisting,
and maintaining the said William Warren, to do and commit the felony and murder
aforesaid.

And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their said oath, do say, that the said
Thomas Preston, William Wemms, James Hartegan, William M'Cauley, Hugh White,
Matthew Killroy, William Warren, John Carrol, Hugh Montgomery, Hammond Green,
Thomas Greenwood, Edward Manw^ring, and John Munroe, then and there in manner
and form aforesaid, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought,
did kill and murder the said Crispus Attucks, against the peace of the said
Lord the King, his crown and dignity.

JON. SEWALL, At. pro Dom. Rege. This is a true Bill. WM. TAILOR, Foreman. At
the same Court the said James Hartegan was indicted for the murder of Samuel
Gray; and the said Thomas Preston, Esquire William Wemms, William M'Cauley, Hugh
White, Matthew Killroy, William Warren, John Carroll, and Hugh Montgomery, for
being present, aiding, helping and abetting the said James Hartegan to do and
commit the felony and murder aforesaid.

At. SAML. WINTHROP, Clerk. And at the same Court the said Matthew Killroy,
was indicted for the murder of one Samuel Maverick; and the said Thomas
Preston, William Wemms, William M'Cauley, James Hartegan, Hugh White, William
Warren, John Carrol, and Hugh Montgomery, for being present aiding, helping,
abetting, and assisting the said Matthew Killroy, to do and commit the felony
and murder aforesaid.

At. SAML. WINTHROP, Clerk. And at the same Court the said John Carrol was
indicted for the murder of one James Caldwell; and the said Thomas Preston,
William Wemms, William M'Cauley, James Hartegan, Hugh White, William Warren,
and Hugh Montgomery, for being present aiding, helping, abetting, and assisting
the said John Carrol to do and commit the felony and murder aforesaid.

At. SAML. WINTHROP, Clerk. And at the same Court the said Hugh White was
indicted for the murder of one Patrick Carr; and the said Thomas Preston,
William Wemms, James Hartegan, William M'Cauley, Matthew Killroy, William
Warren, John Carrol, and Hugh Montgomery for being present aiding, helping,
abetting, and assisting the said Hugh White to do and commit the felony and
murder aforesaid.

At. SAML. WINTHROP, Clerk. On Saturday, the 27th November, 1770, the Court
being met, the prisoners were brought into Court and set to the bar, when the
Court proceeded thus.

Clerk of the Court ( read the indictment to them as before. Clerk. How say
thou, William Wemms, art thou guilty of the felony and murder whereof thou
stand indicted, or not guilty?


William Wemms. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


William Wemms. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, James Hartegan, art thou guilty of the felony and
murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


James Hartegan. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


James Hartegan. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, William M'Cauley, art thou guilty of the felony and
murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


William M'Cauley. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


William M'Cauley. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, Hugh White, art thou guilty of the felony and murder
whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Hugh White. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Hugh White. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, Matthew Killroy, art thou guilty of the felony and
murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Matthew Killroy. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Matthew Killroy. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, William Warren, art thou guilty of the felony and
murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


William Warren. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


William Warren. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, John Carrol, art thou guilty of the felony and murder
whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


John Carrol. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


John Carrol. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. How say thou, Hugh Montgomery, art thou guilty of the felony and
murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Hugh Montgomery. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Hugh Montgomery. By God and my country.


Clerk. God send thee a good deliverance.


The Jury were then called over and appeared. Clerk. You the prisoners at the
bar, these good men, which were last called and do now appear, are those who
are to pass between our sovereign Lord the King and you, upon the trial of your
several lives; if therefore you will challenge them, or any of them, you must
challenge them as they are called to be sworn, before they are sworn, and you
shall be heard.

The prisoners being asked whether they would agree in their challenges,
consented that William Wemms should make challenges for them all. Samuel
Williams, Roxbury, challenged for cause. Joseph Curtis, ditto, challenged for
cause. Nathaniel Davis, ditto, sworn Joseph Mayo, ditto, sworn Abraham Wheeler,
Dorchester, sworn Edward Pierce, ditto, sworn William Glover, ditto, challenged
peremtorily. Josiah Thayer, Braintree, sworn. Samuel Bass, jun. ditto,
challenged peremtorily. James Faxen, ditto, challenged peremtorily. Benjamin
Fisher, Dedham, sworn. John Morse, ditto, challenged peremtorily. James White,
Medway, challenged peremtorily. Nehemiah Davis, Brookline, challenged
peremtorily. Samuel Davenport, Milton, sworn. Joseph Houghton, Milton, sworn.
James Richardson, Medfield, challenged peremtorily. John Billings, Stonghton,
challenged peremtorily. Joseph Richards, ditto, challenged for cause. Consider
Atherton ditto, sworn. Abner Turner, Walpole, challenged peremtorily. John
Brown, Boston, challenged for cause. Joseph Barrel, ditto, challenged for
cause. Silas Aitkins, ditto, challenged for cause. Harbottle Dorr, ditto,
challenged for cause.


The Clerk having gone through the panel, and there being a deficiency of
Jurors, the Sheriff, by order of the court, returned the following talesmen.
Samuel Sheppard, challenged peremtorily. John Goldsbury, challenged for cause.
Samuel Peck, challenged for cause. William Gouge, challenged for cause. Joseph
Turrel, challenged for cause. Jacob Cushing, jun. Hingham, sworn. Josiah Lane,
ditto, sworn. Jonathan Burr, ditto, sworn.


N. B. The three last being illegally returned, as Jurors, were rejected by the
Court, and returned by the Sheriff as talesmen.


Clerk. Crier count these. Joseph Mayo, Forem. Roxbubury. Nathaniel Davis,
Roxbubury. Abraham Wheeler, Dorchester. Edward Pierce, Dorchester. Josiah
Thayer, Braintree. Benjamin Fisher, Dedham. Samuel Davenport, Milton. Joseph
Houghton, Milton. Consider Atherton, Stonghton. Jacob Cushing, jun Hingham.
Josiah Lane, Hingham. Jonathan Burr, Hingham.



Crier. Gentlemen are ye all sworn.


Clerk. Prisoners hold up your hands. Gentlemen of the Jury look upon the
prisoners, and hearken to the charge. ( The Clerk then read the several
indictments against them as before set forth.) Upon each and every of these
several indictments. the prisoners at the bar have been arraigned, and upon
their arraignment have pleaded not guilty, and for trial have put themselves
upon God and their country, which country you are; your charge therefore is, to
enquire whether they or either of them be guilty of the felony and murder
whereof they stand indicted, or not guilty. If they or either of them are
guilty, you are to say so; if they or either of them are not guilty, you are to
say so and no more. Good men and true, stand together and hearken to your
evidence.


Council for the Crown.
Robert Treat Pain, Esquire, Samuel Quincy, Esquire
Council for the Prisoners.
John Adams, Esquire Mr. Josiah Quincy, and Mr. Sampson Salter Blowers.
Samuel Quincy, Esquire addressing himself to the Court and Jury, opened the cause
nearly in the following words: May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of
the Jury.
THE prisoners at the bar, are that party of soldiers belonging to his
Majesty's 29th regiment, who in the evening of the 5th of March last, were
induced from some cause or other to fire on the inhabitants of this town, in
King street.

They are charged in five distinct indictments, with the wilful premeditated
murder of five different persons mentioned in the respective bills; to each of
these indictments, they have severally pleaded, not guilty; and by that plea
have thrown upon the crown the burden of proving the fact alleged against
them: It is my province therefore to give you evidence in support of this
charge, and yours, gentlemen of the Jury, to determine whether they are guilty,
or not.

The cause is solemn and important; no less than whether eight of your fellow
subjects shall live or die! A cause grounded on the most melancholy event that
has yet taken place on the continent of America, and perhaps of the greatest
expectation of any that has yet come before a tribunal of civil justice, in
this part of the British dominions.

I am aware how difficult, in cases of this sort, it ever is, and more
especially so in these times, and in this trial, to preserve the mind perfectly
indifferent; but I remember, we are bound, not only by the natural obligations
toward God and man, but also by an oath, to examine into the evidence of fact
without partiality or prejudice; I need not therefore caution you of your duty
in this respect: It is upon that evidence and the law resulting from it, you
gentlemen are, in the language of your oath, to give a verdict; and I will
venture, before hand, to pronounce that verdict righteous, if it is founded in
these principles as the rule of your judgment.

It has become my duty, it shall therefore be my endeavor, to acquit myself in
the course of this trial with decency and candor; reflecting, that however
interesting the question may be, the object of our enquiry is simply that of
truth, and that this enquiry is to be conducted by the wisdom of the laws and
constitution.

In support of this accusation against the prisoners at the bar, it is
incumbent on the crown, to ascertain the following things; viz. The indentity
of the persons charged; the fact of killing; and the circumstances attending
and aggravating that fact.

To this end, I shall immediately produce to you such evidence, from the
testimony of credible witnesses, as may be sufficient to sustain the several
indictments, and when I have gone through the examination, make such remarks
upon it, as may be most concise and pertinent to the present issue.

The following witnesses were then sworn and examined in their order.

Jonathan Williams Austin, clerk to John Adams, Esquire sworn. Q Do you know either
of the prisoners at the bar?


A. I do.


Q Which of them?


A. M'Cauley. -- I knew the man before, but did not know his name; I was
afterward told it was M'Cauley. On the evening of the 5th of March last, I
heard the bells ring, and immediately went into King Street.


Q How many people do you imagine might be there when you got into King Street.


A. There might be twenty or thirty I believe. -- I saw the Sentry at the
Custom House door swinging his gun and bayonet; there were a parcel of men and
boys round him. I desired them to come away, and not molest the Sentry: Some of
them came off and went to the middle of the street; I then left them and went
up toward the Main-Guard. Immediately a party came down, I walked by the side
of them till I came to the Sentry box at the Custom House. M'Cauley then got to
the right of the Sentry-box; he was then loading his piece.


Q. How near was you to M'Cauley at that time?


A. I was about four feet off: M'Cauley said " Damn you, stand off," and pushed
his bayonet at me: I did so: -- Immediately I heard the report of a gun.


Q. How near did M'Cauley stand to the corner?


A. He came round the Sentry-box, and stood close to it on the right.


Q. When the party came down, were there many people there?


A. I cannot really say, I think about fifty or sixty.


Q. What did they say to the people as they came down?


A. I did not hear them say any thing.


Q Did you hear any orders given?


A. I did not, either to load or fire.


Q Did you hear the Sen^y cry out for help to the Main-Guard.


A. No; I was not there half a minute.


Q. Whereabouts did you stand?


A. I stood inside the gutter, close by the box.


Q. Whereabout did the Sentry-box stand?


A. Three or four feet from the corner of the Custom-House.


Q How many guns did you hear?


A. Five or six, I cannot swear to any particular number.


Q. Did you look round after you heard the guns fired?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you see M'Cauley then?


A. Yes.


Q Was he loading again?


A. I think he was; it so lies in my mind; (I cannot absolutely swear it.)


Q. Do you know whether any soldiers stood on the right of M'Cauley?


A. I took so particular notice of M'Cauley, that I minded no other object.


Ebenezer Bridgham, Merchant, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners at the
bar?


A. I particularly saw that tall man, ( pointing to Warren, one of the
prisoners.) Next day after the firing in K. street, I saw more of them whom I
cannot particularly swear to now.


Q. Did you see the soldiers before the justices on examination?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you then observe you had seen any of them the night before in
King Street?


A. I was well persuaded next day in my own mind, that I saw that tall one; but
a few days after, I saw another man belonging to the same regiment, so very
like him, that I doubt whither I am not mistaken with regard to him.


Q. Were there any other of the party you knew?


A. I am well satisfied I saw the Corporal there.


Q. Did you see White there?


A. I do not remember.


Q. What was the situation of the Corporal?


A. He was the corner man at the left of the party.


Q Did you see either of the persons, you think you know, discharge their guns?


A. Yes; the man I take to be the tall man, discharged his piece as it was upon
a level.


Q. Did you see the Corporal discharge his gun?


A. I did not.


Q. Where did you stand?


A. I was behind them in the circle.


Q. What part of the circle did the tall man stand in?


A. He stood next but one to the Corporal. The tall man whoever he was, was the
man I saw discharge his piece.


Q. Was any thing thrown at the soldiers?


A. Yes, there were many things thrown, what they were I cannot say.


Q. How did the Soldiers stand?


A. They stood with their pieces before them to defend themselves; and as soon
as they had placed themselves, a party, about twelve in number, with sticks in
their hands, who stood in the middle of the street, gave three cheers, and
immediately surrounded the soldiers, and struck upon their guns with their
sticks, and passed along the front of the soldiers, toward Royal
exchange-lane, striking the soldiers guns as they passed; numbers were
continually coming down the street.


Q. Did you see any person take hold of any of the guns or bayonets of any of
the party?


A. I do not remember I did.


Q. Did you hear any particular words from this party of twelve.


A. I heard no particular words, there was such a noise I could not distinguish
any words.


Q Did they load their guns before the people surrounded them, or after?


A. They were loading at the time.


Q. How near did they go to the soldiers?


A. Very near them, almost close to their guns.


Q. Were the people who struck the guns, there at the firing?


A. I cannot say whether they had gone away or not.


Q Did you apprehend the soldiers in danger, from any thing you saw?


A. I did not, indeed.


Q Where did you stand at the firing?


A. I kept my place. At the time of the firing of the first gun, I heard a
clattering noise on the right like one gun striking against another, and
immediately the first gun was fired from the right.


Q. At the time of firing that gun was any assault made on the person that
fired?


A. I did not see the person that fired.


Q. You said, you saw several blows struck upon the guns, I should like you
would make it more plain.


A. I saw the people near me on the left, strike the soldiers guns, daring them
to fire, and called them cowardly ^as^ls, for bringing arms against naked men;
bid them lay aside their guns, and they were their men.


Q Did you see any person fall?


A. Yes, I saw Gray fall.


Q. Where was that?


A. He fell in the middle of the street.


Q. Was the place where he fell nearly opposite to the tall man you talk of?


A. No; the gun that killed him, must have been nearer to the center. When the
soldiers on the left fired, there were fewer people on the street.


Q. Did you see a molatto among those persons who surrounded the soldiers?


A. I did not observe.


Q. Did they seem to be sailors or town's men.


A. They were dressed some of them in the habits of sailors.


Q. Did you hear any bell ring?


A. Yes.


Q. What bell?


A. I believe all the bells in town were ringing, I heard the Old South first.


Q. Did the clattering or blows on the guns to the right, immediately before
the first gun went off, appear very violent?


A. Yes, very violent.


Q. Where was the second gun fired from?


A. I took it to be the person next to him who fired the first, or very near
him.


Q. Betwixt the first and second gun, did you see any assault given to the
soldiers?


A. No.


Q When the firing came along to the left, were there many people in the street?


A. There were very few people then in the street.


Q. What place did those few stand in?


A. Right over the way.


Q. Was you looking at the person who fired the last gun?


A. Yes, I saw him aim at a lad that was running down the middle of the street,
and kept the motion of his gun after him a considerable time, and then fired.


Q. Did the lad fall?


A. He did not, I kept ^ay eye on him a considerable time.


Q. This soldier was toward the left you say, was he quite to the left?


A. Not quite, but toward it.


Q Was the lad among the party that struck at the soldiers?


A. He was passing the street, I cannot say where he came from.


Q. After the firing of the first gun did the people disperse?


A. They drew away down Royal-exchange-lane, but others were coming continually
down the street; but when the first person was killed, they seemed all to draw
off.


Q. Did the people that came down the street, endeavor to join the party that
was striking the soldiers, or did they come because of the ringing of the bells?


A. I believe they came because the bells were ringing, for they came from all
parts of the town, and did not appear to me to join in the assault.


Q. How many guns were fired?


A. I believe seven.


Q. How many soldiers were of the party?


A. I did not count them, but I believe twelve.


James Dodge, sworn. Q. Do you know either of the prisoners?


A. Yes, I know Warren, and saw him with the party in King Street on the
evening of the 5th of March last --


Q. Do you know any of the rest?


A. I know them all by sight, but that is the only person I can swear to.


Q. The night of the firing, did you see the Corporal there?


A. Not so as to know him; but Warren I can swear to.


Q Did you see him discharge his piece?


A. No: I went away when the first gun fired.


Q. Where did the person stand, who fired the first gun?


A. He stood toward the left of the party.


Q. Whereabout did you stand yourself?


A. Opposite the soldiers, by Mr. Warden's shop the barber.


Q. Did you see any body fall?


A. I saw none fall. I went off when the first gun was fired, and came back
again and heard there were three men killed.


Q. Do you mean the first gun was fired from your left, or from the left of the
party?


A. From the left of the party; there were two stood to the left of Warren.


Q. What appeared to be the conduct of the soldiers before the firing?


A. When I got there, they were swinging there guns backward and forward, and
several among the people, said, fire, damn you fire; but I think it was Capt.
Preston that gave the word to fire.


Q. How many people were there?


A. I took them to be about fifty.


Q. What had they in their hands?


A. They had nothing in their hands.


Q. Did you see any ice or snow-balls thrown at the soldiers?


A. I saw several snow balls and pieces of ice thrown, and heard a rattling
against the barrels of their guns, whether it was sticks, or what, I do not
know.


Q. Where did the snow-balls seem to come from?


A. From the people right before the party.


Q. Did the snow-balls seem to be thrown in anger?


A. I do not know; I saw the soldiers pushing at the people before any snow
balls were thrown.


Q Were the people pressing on?


A. They were very near, within reach of their bayonets.


Q. Did you see any oyster-shells thrown?


A. No.


Q. Was the snow trodden down, or melted away by the Custom-House?


A. No, the street was all covered like a cake.


Samuel Clark, Sworn. Q. Did you see any of the prisoners in King Street on the
5th March.


A. Yes, before the affray happened.


Q. Which of them was it?


A. It was White. He was standing Sentry at the Custom-house: he spoke to me,
and asked me how we all did at home. I immediately went home. Soon after I
heard the bells ring, and went into King Street. When I came there, the
soldiers were drawn up by the Main Guard.


Q. Was you there at the time of the firing?


A. I was not.


Q. When you spoke to the Sentry, was there any body with him?


A. No, he was walking backwards and forwards by himself.


Edward G. Langford, Sworn. I am one of the Town watch.

Q. Was you in King Street that evening the 5th March?


A. Yes. The bells began to ring, and the people cried fire: I run with the
rest, and went into King Street; I asked where the fire was; I was told there
was no fire, but that the soldiers at Murray's barracks had got out, and had
been fighting with the inhabitants, but that they had drove them back again. I
went to the barracks, and found the affair was over there. I came back, and
just as I got to the Town pump, I saw twenty or five and twenty boys going into
King Street. I went into King Street myself, and saw several boys and young men
about the Sentry box at the Custom house. I asked them what was the matter.
They said the Sentry had knocked down a boy. They crowded in over the gutter; I
told them to let the Sentry alone. He went up the steps of the Custom-house,
and knocked at the door, but could not get in. I told him not to be afraid,
they were only boys, and would not hurt him.


Q. Do you know the Sentry?


A. Yes.


Q. Is he among the prisoners?


A. Yes, that is he. ( Pointing to White.)


Q. Do you know any of the rest?


A. Yes, that man. ( Pointing to Killroy.) The boys were swearing and speaking
bad words, but they threw nothing.


Q. Were they pressing on him?


A. They were as far as the gutter, and he went up the steps and called out,
but what he said I do not remember.


Q Did he call loud?


A. Yes, pretty loud.


Q. To whom did he call?


A. I do not know; when he went up the steps he levelled his piece with his
bayonet fixed. As I was talking with the Sentry, and telling him not to be
afraid, the soldiers came down, and when they came, I drew back from the Sentry
toward Royal Exchange lane, and there I stood. I did not see them load, but
somebody said, are you loaded; and Samuel Gray, who was shot that night, came
and struck me on the shoulder, and said, Langford, what is here to pay.


Q. What said you to Gray then?


A. I said I did not know what was to pay, but I believed something would come
of it by and bye. He made no reply. Immediately a gun went off. I was within
reach of their guns and bayonets; one of them thrust at me with his bayonet,
and run it through my jacket and great coat.


Q. Where was you then?


A. Within three or four feet of the gutter, on the outside.


Q. Who asked, are you loaded?


A. I do not know whether it was the soldiers or inhabitants.


Q. Did you hear the word given to load?


A. I heard the question asked, whether they were loaded! but I heard no orders
to load. Somebody then said, are you all ready: I then heard the word given to
fire, twice distinctly.


Q. How many people were there before the soldiers at that time?


A. About forty or fifty, but there were numbers in the lane.


Q. Were they nigh the soldiers?


A. They were not in the inside of the gutter.


Q. Had any of the inhabitants sticks or clubs?


A. I do not know. I had one myself, because I was going to the watch, for I
belong to the watch.


Q. How many soldiers were there?


A. I did not count the number of them, about seven or eight I think.


Q. Who was it fired the first gun?


A. I do not know.


Q. Where about did he stand that fired?


A. He stood on my right, as I stood facing them: I stood about half way
betwixt the box and Royal-exchange-lane. I looked this man ( pointing to
Killroy) in the face, and bid him not fire; but he immediately fired, and
Samuel Gray fell at my feet. Killroy thrust his bayonet immediately through my
coat and jacket; -- I ran toward the watch-house, and stood there.


Q. Where did Killroy stand?


A. He stood on the right of the party.


Q. Was he the right hand man?


A. I cannot tell I believe there were two or three on his right, but I do not
know.


Q. You spoke to him you say before he fired, what did you say to him?


A. I said either damn you, or God damn you do not fire, and immediately he
fired.


Q. What in particular made you say do not fire?


A. Hearing the other guns go off.


Q. How many guns went off before he fired?


A. Two: but I saw nobody fall. Gray fell close to me. I was standing leaning
on my stick.


Q. Did Gray say any thing to Killroy before he fired?


A. He spoke to nobody but me.


Q. Did he throw any snow balls?


A. No, nor he had no weapon in his hand; he was as naked as I am now.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown?


A. No, I saw nothing at all thrown of any kind.


Q. Was you talking with Gray at the time the gun went off?


A. I did not speak with him at that instant, but I had been talking with him
several minutes before that.


Q. Was you so near Gray, that if he had thrown any thing you must have seen it?


A. Yes, his hands were in his bosom, and, immediately after Killroy's firing,
he fell.


Q. Did you hear any other gun at that time?


A. None, till I had got near to the watch-house.


Q. How near were the people standing to the soldiers, at the time that gun
shot Gray?


A. They were standing near the gutter.


Q. Did you see any thing hit the soldiers?


A. No, I saw nothing thrown. I heard the rattling of their guns, and took it
to be one gun against another. this rattling was at the time Killroy fired, and
at my right, I had a fair view of them; I saw no body strike a blow nor offer a
blow.


Q. Have you any doubt in your own mind, that it was that gun of Killroy's that
killed Gray?


A. No manner of doubt; it must have been it, for there was no other gun
discharged at that time.


Q. Did you know the Indian that was killed?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body press on the soldiers with a large cord wood stick?


A. No.


Q. After Gray fell, did he ( Killroy) thrust at him with his bayonet?


A. No, it was at me he pushed.


Q. Did Gray say any thing to Killroy, or Killroy to him?


A. No, not to my knowledge, and I stood close by him.


Q. Did you perceive Killroy take aim at Gray?


A. I did not: he was as liable to kill me as him.


Francis Archibald, Clerk to Mr. Price, sworn. Q. Did you see any of the
prisoners in King Street, that evening of the 5th March.


A. Yes, I saw Killroy go down with the party toward the Sentry.


Q. How many of them?


A. I took them to be six, besides the Corporal.


Q. Did you see any of the rest there that you knew?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any of them fire?


A. No, I was not near them; I went to Stone's door.


Q. Did you see any snow balls or sticks thrown?


A. No.


Q. Was you looking at the party and the people by them before the firing?


A. Yes. There was a noise amongst them; I was not near enough to hear what was
said, but I saw nothing thrown.


Q. Where was you when the party came down?


A. Near the middle of the street.


Q. Did you observe the party to divide themselves?


A. No; the corporal walked in front of them, as he always does at a relief.


Q. Do you know who rung the bell at the Brick meeting house?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body get in at the windows of the Brick meeting house.


A. No. In Cornhill somebody said ring the bell, but who it was I do not know.


Q. Which bell rung first?


A. The Old Brick, I believe.


Q. Did you see what passed betwixt the soldiers and others at the barracks?


A. About ten minutes after nine, I saw a soldier, and a mean looking fellow
with him, with a cu^lass in his hand; they came up to me: somebody said, put up
your cutlass, it is not right to carry it at this time of night. He said, damn
you ye Yankie bougers, what is your business: he came up to another that was
with me, and struck him. We beat him back, when seven or eight soldiers came
out of the barracks, with tongs and other weapons; one aimed a blow at a young
fellow, John Hicks, who knocked the soldier down. As he attempted to rise, I
struck him down again, and broke his wrist, as I heard afterward. I went to
King Street, and when the guns were all fired, I saw several persons dead.


N. B. The Court being unable to go through this trial in one day, the King's
Attorney and the prisoners consented to the Court's adjourning over night
during the Trial, the Jury being kept together in the mean time, by proper
officers, appointed and sworn by the Court for that purpose.

FIVE o'clock P. M. the Court adjourned to next morning, Wednesday. NINE
o'clock. Wednesday, NINE o'clock, the Court met according to adjournment, and
proceeded. James Brewer, Block-maker, sworn. Q. Please look upon the prisoners,
do you know any of them?


A. I think I remember this man ( pointing to Killroy.)


Q. Was you in King street the fifth of March last?


A. Yes, in the evening.


Q. Please to inform the Court and Jury what you saw there?


A. I came up Royal-exchange-lane, and as I got to the head of it, I saw the
Sentry on the steps of the Custom-house, with his bayonet breast high, with a
number of boys round him: -- I called to him, and said, I did not think any
body was going to do him harm. I saw Capt. Preston and some soldiers come down.


Q. Which of the prisoners was the Sentry?


A. I cannot tell, I was not so high him as to know his face.


Q. How many boys were there round him?


A. I think about twenty.


Q. How old were these boys?


A. About fourteen or fifteen years old, perhaps some of them older, I saw no
men there except one, who came up Royal Exchange lane with me, thinking it was
fire. He went back again.


Q. What did you take to be the reason that the Sentry charged his bayonet?


A. I could not tell what the reason was; there was no body troubling him. I
was at the corner of Royal-exchange-lane, and a young man went up to the Sentry
and spoke to him; what he said I do not know.


Q. Was yo^ there in the time of the firing?


A. Yes, I went toward the Sentry-box, there I saw Capt. Preston. I said to
him, Sir, I hope you are not going to fire, for every body is going to their
own homes. He said I hope they are. I saw no more of him. He immediately went
in amongst the soldiers.


Q. What number of soldiers were there?


A. I think seven or eight, I did not count them.


Q. Did Capt. Preston lead or follow them down?


A. I think he was upon the right of them. As they came down they had their
guns charged breast high. I saw Christopher Monk, who was wounded that night, I
turned to speak to him, and directly they fired, and he seemed to faulter. I
said are you wounded, he said yes. I replied, I do not think it, for I then
apprehended they fired only powder.


Q. Was it the first gun that you thought wounded Monk?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any of these prisoners there?


A. I think I saw Killroy, and that he was the man who struck me with his
bayonet, when they came down, before they formed.


Q. Did any body near you do any violence to him?


A. No, I saw none.


Q. Had you seen Monk that evening before?


A. No, nor the day before.


Q. How near were you to the soldiers when they fired?


A. I was about ten or fifteen feet from them, I stood in the street just above
Royal-exchange-lane, about six or seven feet from the gutter.


Q. Could you see the whole party?


A. Yes, they stood in a circle, or half moon.


Q. Did you take notice of the distance betwixt the first and second gun?


A. No.


Q. Was your back to them, when the first gun was fired?


A. No, my face was to them.


Q. Where did the firing begin?


A. Toward the corner of Royal-exchange-lane, I think it was the man quite on
the right.


Q. Did you know him?


A. No.


Q. Did the man that struck you do it on purpose, or accidentally, do you think?


A. I think he did it on purpose, I apprehended it so; I was standing by the
gutter, and he was before me.


Q. Said he any thing to you?


A. No, nor I to him: he came to form, and I was closer than I wished I was,
and he struck me.


Q. How came you to speak to the Sentry, and tell him not to be afraid?


A. Because he was swinging his gun in that manner.


Q. Did you come up Royal exchange-lane?


A. Yes. I saw Doctor Young there, and several others coming up to know where
the fire was; Doctor Young said it was not fire, but that the soldiers had made
a rumpus, but were gone to their barracks again. Then said I let every man go
to his own home.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the soldiers?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear any body call them names?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear any threatening speeches?


A. No; except that the people cried fire! fire! -- the word fire, was in every
body's mouth.


Q. Just before the firing, when Killrey struck you, was there any thing thrown
at the soldiers then?


A. I saw nothing.


Q. Was there a number of people betwixt you and the soldiers!


A. Not many.


Q. Did you see Palms talking with Capt. Preston?


A. No; I saw the molatto fellow there, and saw him fall.


Q. Did you see a party of people like sailors, coming down from Jackson's
corner, with sticks?


A. No, I saw none.


Q. Where did you first see the molatto?


A. He was just before me by the gutter.


Q. Did you see any people coming from Quaker-lane with sticks?


A. I saw several inhabitants coming through that lane, but I saw no sticks.


Q. Were there any coming up Royal Exchange lane?


A. Yes, numbers, but I saw no sticks.


Q. When you first saw the molatto, did you hear him say any thing to the
soldiers, or strike at them?


A. No.


Q. Had he a stick or club?


A. I did not take notice.


Q. Did you hear any huzzas or cheers as they are called?


A. I heard a clamor of the people, but I heard no cheers.


Q. Did you hear them call the soldiers any names?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear any body say, kill them, damn them knock them over?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear the whistling about the streets at that time?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any person strike with a club at the soldiers or any of them?


A. No.


Q. Did you see them attempt to strike their guns?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear the rattling of the guns as though a stick had struck upon
them?


A. No. I heard the people around call fire.


Q. Did you take that to be the cry of fire, or bidding the soldiers fire?


A. I cannot tell now what I thought then?


Q. How many guns did you hear fired?


A. I think seven.


Q. Did the word fire proceed from the people or from the soldiers?


A. From the people.


Q. Was there a greater noise than usual, when the bells rang for fire?


A. I did not think there was so much. When I saw Dr. Young, he had a sword in
his hand. When I came to King Street it was as quiet as I ever saw it in my
life.


Q. Was the sword naked or not?


A. I cannot remember.


Q. What sort of a sword was it?


A. I do not remember.


Q. What did Young say to you?


A. He said it was the best way for every body to go home.


Q. Did any body huzza for King street?


A. No. I said, every man home, and the word went round.


Q. Did not Dr. Young say the soldiers were beat to their barracks?


A. No; He said they had made a rumpus, and were gone to their barracks.


Q. Do you know if Dr. Young went into King Street?


A. I cannot tell, I left him in the lane.


James Bailey, sailor, sworn. Q. Did you see any of the prisoners in
King Street on the evening of the 5th of March last?


A. Yes.


Q. Which of them?


A. Carrel and Montgomery, and White who was the Sentry there.


Q. Did you see any of the rest?


A. No, I do not remember to have seen any of the rest?


Q. Was you there before the party came down?


A. Yes.


Q. In what part of the street?


A. I was standing along with the Sentry, on the Custom-house steps; I saw a
number of boys round the Sentry.


Q. What number?


A. Twenty or thirty.


Q. Were they all boys?


A. Yes, none older than seventeen or eighteen years old.


Q. Did any thing pass between you and the Sentry?


A. Yes, When I first went up to him, I said, what is the matter? -- he said he
did not know. -- The boys were throwing pieces of ice at him, and after I went
to him, they threw no more; I stood with him five or six minutes.


Q. Did you see the pieces of ice thrown?


A. Yes.


Q. What sort of pieces, were they small or were they big enough to hurt a man?


A. Yes, hard and large enough to hurt any man; as big as ones fist.


Q. Did he complain any thing about it?


A. He said very little to me, only that he was afraid, if the boys did not
disperse, there would be something very soon, he did not mention what.


Q. Did he tell them to disperse?


A. No, he did not say a word to them.


Q. Did you see any of the pieces of ice hit him?


A. There was nothing thrown after I went to him; if any thing was thrown, it
was before.


Q. How came you to go to him?


A. I went up to him because I knew him, and to see what was the matter.


Q. Did you hear him knock at the door?


A. No.


Q. Did he call for any assistance?


A. I did not hear him.


Q. Was you there at the time of firing; please to recollect the circumstances?


A. When the soldiers came down, Carrol came up to me and clapped his bayonet to
my breast, and White said do not hurt him.


Q. Was that before the soldiers had formed?


A. Yes; immediately on their first coming down. I stood betwixt the corner of
the Custom house and the post there, with my arm a top of the post.


Q. Did you hear the first gun fired?


A. Yes.


Q. From what quarter?


A. From the right.


Q. Do you know the man that fired that gun.


A. It was Montgomery, he was the very next person to me, close to me. When
White told him not to hurt me, he took his hand and pushed me right behind him.


Q. Did that first shot kill or wound any person?


A. I do not know.


Q. What space of time was it betwixt the first and second gun?


A. Half a minute, or less.


Q. Did you see any ice or snow thrown betwixt the first and second gun?


A. No.


Q Did you hear any thing said?


A. There was a noise among the inhabitants, but I cannot say what they said.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown before the firing?


A. Yes; Montgomery was knocked down with a stick, and his gun flew out of his
hand, and when he recovered himself he discharged his gun.


Q Do you know where he stood at that time?


A. He was the very corner man, on the right, close to me.


Q Who stood next him?


A. I do not know, but the man that stood the third from the right was Carrol,
and I believe he was the next that fired


Q. Did you observe any, body strike Montgomery, or was a club thrown?


A. The stroke came from a stick or club that was in somebody's hand, and the
blow struck his gun and his arm.


Q Was he knocked down, or did the gun only fly out of his hand?


A. He fell I am sure.


Q. What with the blow on his arm?


A. His gun flew out of his hand, and as he stooped to take it up he fell
himself; the blow struck his arm and might hit his body, for any thing I know.


Q Did you see the person that struck him: was he a tall man?


A. He was a stout man.


Q Was any number of people standing near the man that struck his gun?


A. Yes, a whole crowd, fifty or sixty.


Q. When he took up his gun and fired, which way did he present?


A. Toward Stone's tavern, I imagine he presented toward the Molatto.


Q. How far distant was he from Montgomery when he fell?


A. About fifteen feet.


Q. Did you see any of the rest of the persons fall?


A. No. When Montgomery fired, I stooped down, and when the smoke was gone, I
saw three lying dead.


Q. Was the blow Montgomery received, upon the oath you have taken, violent?


A. Yes, very violent.


Q. When you came to the Custom-house, and saw the boys throwing ice, where did
they stand?


A. In the middle of King Street.


Q. Were they thrown as hard, as they could throw them?


A. I belive they threw them as hard as they could.


Q. Was there at that time a good deal of ice in K. street?


A. Yes, considerable broken ice.


Q. Before the firing, after the party came down, did you see any snow balls,
sticks, or ice, thrown at the party?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear any thing said to the party?


A. I heard nothing in particular said to them. -- I heard the cry of fire.


Q. Did you hear any threats?


A. No, none at all.


Q. Do you remember your examination before the Justices?


A. Yes.


Q. Do you remember your saying they were throwing sticks and cakes of ice, in
the mob way.


A. No, not at the soldiers.


Q. Did you hear any cheers.


A. Yes, I heard two or three cheers.


Q What time?


A. About two minutes before they fired.


Q Did you hear any thing said to this purpose, knock them over! kill them!
kill them!


A. No, I did not.


Q. What did the people seem to be doing?


A. They stood front of them, and were shouting; but I saw no violence done,
but to that one man.


Q. What did the people do immediately on the firing of the first gun?


A. I could not see because of the smoke.


Q Did Montgomery say any thing upon the firing of his gun?


A. Not a word: nor any of the soldiers.


Q. Did you see a number of persons coming up Royal-exchange-lane, with sticks.


A. No, I saw a number going up Cornhill, and the Molatto fellow headed them.


Q. Was this before the guard came down or after?


A. It was before the guard came down.


Q. How many might there be of that party?


A. Betwixt twenty and thirty: they appeared to be sailors; some had sticks,
some had none. The Molatto fellow, had a large cord-wood stick.


Q. Did they come down King Street afterward?


A. I did not see them come down. I did not see the molatto afterward, till I
saw him dead.


Q. Which way was the Molatto with his party going, when you saw them?


A. Right toward the Town-pump.


Q. Which way did you go into King Street?


A. I went up Royal exchange-lane.


Q How long before the firing, was it, you saw them in Cornhill?


A. Six, seven, or eight minutes, I believe.


Q. Were the bells ringing then?


A. Yes.


Q. What did the party with the Molatto do or say?


A. They were huzzaing, whistling and carrying their sticks upright over their
heads.


Q. What number of sticks, do you suppose might be in the whole?


A. seven or eight I suppose; some of them whistling, some huzzaing and making
a noise.


Q. Did you know their design?


A I did not: when they went up Cornhill, I went up Royal Exchange lane.


Q. Did you see any soldiers about that time in the street?


A. Yes, I saw a number at Murray's barracks, and some officers driving them in.


Richard Palms, Merchant, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners?


A. I know Montgomery, I saw him in King Street with the party on the evening
of the 5th of March last. I was with some gentlemen in company, I heard the
bells ring after 9 o'clock; I went into King Street, and I saw the Sentry at
the Custom-house door as usual, and no body with him: when I came to the
Townhouse, I was told the soldiers were abusing the inhabitants; I asked
where, and was told at Murray's barracks. I went down there, and saw four or
five soldiers, with their guns and bayonets; I told the officer who stood by, I
was surprised they suffered the soldiers to be out at that time of night; an
officer said, do you pretend to teach us our duty Sir, I said no, only to
remind you of it: You see, says he, the soldiers are in their barracks, why do
not you go home. I saw Mr. Hickling, he was my neighbor, he said he was going
home, we came up as far ^ns the post office, where he left me; then I saw Mr.
Spear, ^he said he was going to his brother David's; when I got to the Town
pump, I heard a noise, and was told there was a ^rumpus at the Custom house; I
said, I will go down and make peace, he said, you had better not go. I left Mr.
Spear, and went down, and saw Capt. Preston at the head of seven ^or eight
soldiers, with their guns, and bayonets fixed; I went to Capt. Preston, and saw
Mr. Theodore Bliss talking with him, who said to Capt. Preston, "Why do you not
fire," "God damn you fire." I stepped betwixt them and asked Capt. Preston if the
soldiers were loaded, he said yes, with powder and ball: I said, I hope Sir you
are not going to fire upon the inhabitants, he said by no means: That instant I
saw a piece of ice strike Montgomery's gun, whether ^t sallied him back, or he
stepped one foot back. I do not know, but he recovered himself, and fired
immediately. I thought he stepped back and fired, he was the next man to Capt.
Preston, the only soldier that was betwixt the Captain and the Custom house.
When he fired, I heard the word fire, who gave it I do not know. Six or eight
seconds after that, another soldier on the Captain's right fired, and then the
rest one after the other, pretty quick; there was an interval of two or three
seconds, between the last gun but one, and the last.


Q. How many guns were fired?


A. I do not know certain, seven or eight I believe, I did not count them.
Before the last gun was fired, Montgomery made a push at me with his bayonet, I
had a stick in my hand, as I generally walk with one, I struck him, and hit his
left arm, and knocked his gun down; before he recovered I aimed another stroke
at the nearest to me, and hit Capt. Preston, I then turned and saw Montgomery
pushing at me again, and would have pushed me through, but I threw any stick in
his face, and the third time he ran after me to push at me again, but fell
down, and I had an opportunity to run down Royal Exchange lane.


Q. Did you take notice of the situation of the soldiers?


A. I saw the form they were in, they were formed in a half circle.


Q. Which way did Montgomery front?


A. He fronted the watch house.


Q. Did you stand in a range with the watch house and corner of the
Custom-house?


A. Yes.


Q. Are you certain that Montgomery was struck and sall^ back before he fired?


A. Yes.


Q. Do you know whether it was with a piece of ice or club?


A. No.


Q. Do you know whether it hit his body, or his gun, (...) both?


A. It struck both, I suppose.


Q. Did you see any other violence offered, except the which struck Montgomery
and the blows you ^emed and gav^


A. No, no other.


Q Are you sure Montgomery did not fall, (...) before h^ discharged his gun?


A. Yes.


Q. Upon the firing the first gun, did the people seem ^ retire?


A. Yes, they all began to run, and when the rest we^ firing they were a
running.


Q. Did you see any of the deceased fall?


A. No, I did not, but afterward I saw Gray and Attu^ lying.


Q. Did you see all the rest of the soldiers discharge the^ pieces?


A. I saw the smoke, and it appeared to me at that tim^ they all fired.


Q When the last gun was fired, where were the people


A. They were running promisouously about every when


Court. Call James Bailey again.


Q. Have you heard Mr. Palmes' testimony?


A. Yes.


Q Are you satisfied, notwithstanding what Mr Pal^ says, that Montgomery was
knocked down by a blow give him, immediately before he fired?


A. Yes, I am.


Q. Did you see any of the prisoners at the Rope walks i^ the affray there, a
few days before the 5th March?


A. Yes, I saw Carrol one of the prisoners, there with other soldiers in that
affray.


John Danbrooke, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners?


A. Yes, the two furthest men, Hartegan and Carrol.


Q. Did you see them in King Street the 5th of March?


A. Yes.


Q. What time did you come into King Street?


A. About a quarter after nine, after the party were come down.


Q. Were these two men of the party?


A. Yes.


Q. Was you there at the time of the firing?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you see any of the party discharge their muskets?


A. Yes, Montgomery.


Q. Did you know him before?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body strike him with a stick, or a stick thrown at him?


A. No.


Q. Whereabouts did you stand?


A. About ten or twelve feet from Capt. Preston, I saw a little stick fly over
their heads, but I did not perceive it struck any of them.


Q. How large was it?


A. I took it to be a piece of a rattan.


Q. Did you see any thing at all hit the soldiers?


A. No, I did not.


Q. Was you looking at Montgomery when he discharged his piece?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you see any body fall upon his firing?


A. Yes, I saw two fall, one fell at my elbow, another about three feet from
me. I did not hear the sound of another gun, before they both fell.


Q. Were they standing before Montgomery.


A. Yes, about twelve or fifteen feet from him, and about five feet apart, one
was the Molatto, the other I did not know.


Q. Do you think one gun killed both these men?


A. Yes, for I heard no other gun when they fell.


Q. Are you certain the other person was killed?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you hear any other gun before that man fell?


A. No.


Q. Did the Molatto say any thing before the gun went off?


A. I heard him say nothing. The Molatto was leaning over a long stick he had,
resting his breast upon it.


Q. Was you in Dock square before the firing?


A. Yes.


Q. How many people did you see there?


A. I saw about twenty or thirty gathered up by the Town pump in the market,
some with clubs; they went up Cornhill, most of them dressed in sailors clothes.


Q. Did you then know where they were going?


A. They said let us go up to the Townhouse. The bells were ringing at that
time.


Q. Had they in general clubs?


A. The biggest part of them had clubs,


Q. Did you see any of them afterward in King Street?


A. No, not that I knew


Q. Did you see a tall man at the head of them?


A. No, I took notice of none in particular.


Q. Did you hear a huzzaing before the firing, or see any thing thrown except
that stick you mentioned?


A. No.


Q. Had these persons when they were in Dock square, any clubs?


A. About half of them had sticks; there were between twenty and thirty of them.


Q. Did they hold them up over their heads?


A. Some did, and some did not.


Q. Did you see any body with a sword, at the bottom of Royal exchange lane?


A. No, I did not.


Q. Did you see any soldiers there, about that time'


A. No.


Q. What do you mean by clubs?


A. They were cord wood sticks broken up.


Q. Did any of them appear to be large?


A. They were about as thick as one's wrist.

Jedediah Bass, Sworn. I came up Royal-exchange-lane, and the first I saw was
Montgomery, I saw him pushing his bayonet.


Q. Did you know Montgomery then?


A Yes: I drew back about five feet, and I saw his gun go off.


Q. Where did Montgomery stand?


A. At the corner of the Royal exchange-lane, the right hand man of the party.


Q. Who did he push at?


A. I cannot tell.


Q. How long after that before his gun went off?


A. About a minute.


Q. Had any thing happened betwixt that and the firing?


A. I saw a stick knock up his gun.


Q. Do you know who it was knocked it up?


A. No.


Q. How near did you stand to him?


A. About five feet off, within Royal exchange-lane.


Q. Did that stick knock up his gun before he fired?


A. Yes,


Q. Did he bring it down before he fired?


A. He brought it down to the place where, it was before, and then he fired.


Q. Was you looking at him all the time before he fired?


A. Yes.


Q. Are you certain, he did not fall before he fired?


A. Yes.


Q. Are you sure, if he had fallen, you must have seen him?


A. Yes, from my situation I think I must have seen him.


Q. What sort of a stick was it his gun was knocked up with?


A. It looked like a walking stick.


Q. Did you see him fall after he fired?


A. Yes.


Q. What occasioned his fall?


A. I cannot tell.


Q. Did you see any body strike him, or at him?


A. No.


Q. Did his gun fall out of his hand?


A. I think it did.


Q. Are you sure that was before, or after his firing?


A. After his firing.


Q. How near were the people to him at the time of his firing?


A. Seven or eight feet off.


Q. Did you see any other of the prisoners there that night?


A. Not to my knowledge.


Q. Did you stay till all the guns were fired?


A. Yes.


Q. How many were fired?


A. Six, I think, but I did not count them.


Q. At the place where you stood, could you see (...) the soldiers?


A. No, only two, they stood in a circular form,


Q. After the first gun was fired, did not the people begin to run down the
lane?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you hear any words spoke by the party of soldiers or any of them?


A. No.


Q. How long did you continue there?


A. About five minutes, not longer: until all the guns were fired.


Q Did you come from Dock-square up to King Street?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you see any people there?


A. I saw about twenty.


Q. What were they doing?


A. They were talking about going home.


Q Were the bells ringing?


A. Yes.


Q Did they mention any thing why the bells were ringing?


A. They said first it was fire, and then that the soldiers were out.


Q. Did you hear any cheers given in King Street?


A. I think I did before they fired.


Q. How many?


A. Two I think.


Q. Who gave them?


A. The town's people.


Q. How long before the firing?


A. About two minutes before the firing?


Q. How were the people dressed in Dock square?


A. Some in sailors cloths, some in surtouts.


Q. Had they sticks?


A. Some had, some had not.


Q. Did you hear them mention their going to the Townhouse?


A. No.


Thomas Wilkinson. sworn. Q. Do you know either of the prisoners?


A. Yes, I know Montgomery, he used to live close by my house; I know none of
the rest. I was at home the whole evening, the Old-south bell rung for nine as
usual; about a quarter after, I heard Mr. Cooper's bell ring, I went out and I
saw the Old south Engine haulled out. I ran down as far as the town-pump, there
seemed to be a considerable body of people, and some with buckets. The people
out of the chamber windows, said, do not go down there, you will be killed. --
I saw ten or twelve soldiers with naked cutlasses by Boylston's alley: -- I saw
them with their cutlasses and bayonets drawing up toward the people. I went
back and stopped at the Main-Guard.


Q Were there a number of the town's people there at that time?


A. Yes, and many with buckets in their hands.


Q Were they contending with any body?


A No they were standing in the street.


Q What were the soldiers doing?


A. They were brandishing their swords and sallying up to the people, but I did
not tarry there one minute.


Q What number of people were there?


A. Thirty or forty.


Q. Had the persons the soldiers came up to, any thing in their hands?


A. No they had nothing but buckets. I took it they were brandishing their
swords at the people, but I saw them strike no body. I went to the Main Guard,
I saw the Sentries before the Guard house, walking as usual. I staid on purpose
to see some body come back from Boylston's asley, to know if any were wounded.
People were coming down from the South-end, crying where is the fire? Where is
the fire ^ I said there is no fire, but the soldiers fighting. At that time, in
King street, I do not think you could see a man, child, or boy passing. I stood
there at the Main Guard about four minutes. -- The Old Brick bell began to
ring, and the people seemed to come along fast, with buckets and bags.


Q. Did Mr. Cooper's bell ring before?


A. Yes, a good while.


Q. Could you see the Sentry at the Custom-House where you stood?


A. No, I staid there about five minutes, and in a very short time I looked
down King Street, and saw thirty or forty people in King Street; Capt. Preston
came down to the Main-Guard, as it were from behind the Brick meeting, and said
turn out, damn your bloods, turn out: A party of soldiers turned out,
Montgomery was amongst them; I was going to Montgomery, to ask what they were
going to do? -- They drew up in two files, I think there were eight men, Capt.
Preston drew his sword, and marched down with them, and I went down as far as
Mr. Waldo's shop with them, I thought they were going to relieve guard. After
that, I went up by the Main guard again, having left the soldiers on their
march down from Waldo's shop, and passed round the Town House, came down the
north side of it, and went down King street, and got within two yards of the
right of them; I saw Capt. Preston standing at the right of the circle, I staid
there about four minutes, when I heard the word given, fire! -- There was none
fired then. -- Then I heard (...) your bloods, fire! -- Instantly one gun went
off, I saw the flesh of every gun as they went off, one after another, like the
clock striking.


Q. Where did the firing begin?


A. It began at the right.


Q Did you see Montgomery after he got down there?


A. No.


Q Where did you stand when the guns were fi^ed?


A. I stood above two yards to the right, in Royal-exchange-lane and toward
the back of the soldiers; I am positive the firing began at the right and went
on to the left. I counted the guns.


Q. How many were fired?


A Seven fired, and one fl^shed.


Q. Was there a longer distance betwixt the first and second gun, than betwixt
the rest?


A. No more than the rest, I think.


Q. Did you see any man fall?


A. I did not. there was a large opening at the center, but on the right and
left wings the crowd was close and thick


Q Could you see all the soldiers?


A. No, I could not, there were many people between me and the soldiers.


Q Did you see the person who held the gun that flashed?


A. Yes, but I did not know him.


Q Whereabouts was he standing?


A I believe, by the flash, he was the third or fourth man from the fight.


Q Did you see any thing thrown at any of them before the firing?


A. No, I stood all the time they were there, and saw nothing thrown at all.


Q Did you see any body knocked down?


A. No.


Q You saw no ice nor snow balls?


A. No, I did not.


Q. Did the people round you seem to be pressing on so as to injure the
soldiers?


A. No; had I seen any thing thrown, I would have gone away.


Q. Did you see any blows given by any body, before or after the firing?


A. No, I did not.


Q. Do you know Mr. Palms?


A. No, I saw a man talking with the officer?


Q. Do you know Mr. Bliss?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear any huzzaing?


A. Yes, before the party marched down, there were two or three huzzas, but
afterward none at all.


Q. How many people do you imagine were there?


A. sixty or seventy.


Q. From the time they went from the Main-Guard, till the firing, how long was
it?


A. It was not more than ten or twelve minutes.


Josiah Simpson, Joiner, sworn. Q. Do you know either of the prisoners?


A. Yes, White.


Q. Do you know either of the rest?


A. Yes Wemms.


Q Do you know any other?


A. Yes, Warren and Hartegan, I saw them there that night under arms. On Monday
evening 5th of March, I was at work near Hancock's wharff, hearing a bell ring
it caused me to leave the shop to make inquiry what the matter was; I heard the
soldiers had rose on the inhabitants, and I got as far as Fanuiel-Hall. I saw
several gentlemen, I asked them what the matter was, they answered me, that,
two young men had been abused by the soldiers, but that they had returned to
their barracks. The bells still ringing made me proceed up Royal Exchange lane
with a number of other persons: I out run them and came to the head of the
lane, there being no person there but a soldier who was the Sentry, the other
Inhabitants coming up, they cried out there is a soldier and huzza'd. The
soldier immediately repaired to the Custom house door, he was at the west
corner of the house before; there, with a large brass knocker, gave three loud
and remarkable strokes.


Q. What number of persons were there came up immediately after you?


A. Five or six. Somebody came to the door and opened it, and spoke to the
Sentry, and then shut the door again.


Q. What was said to him?


A. I did not hear. The soldier then turned about and loaded his gun, and
knocked it twice very loud on the steps; then he went to the west corner of the
house where he had been before, the people gathered round him; I went with him,
and I cast my eye up King Street, and saw an officer and seven men, they came
to the west corner of the Custom-house.


Q. Was any thing done to molest them then?


A. No, nothing at all. The officer then cried shoulder.


Q. Do you know who that officer was?


A. I have seen him in the Court.


Q How many soldiers were with him?


A. Seven.


Q How did they stand then?


A. They stood in a circle. The officer then said, handle your arms, ease your
arms, secure your arms, support your arms, ease your arms, prime and load.


Q Are you certain he said all that?


A. I am as certain, as I am of my own existence.


Q. Where did Capt. Preston stand then?


A He stood a little behind the soldiers toward the Custom-house. There were
about fifteen or twenty inhabitants in the street, when the party came down.


Q Were the soldiers formed before they loaded?


A They were not really formed: they were in a kind of a circle, after they had
loaded they formed more into a circle than they were before.


Q. Did you know Capt. Preston before that?


A. I did not.


Q. Was you there when the guns fired?


A. I went up to the officer, and said for God's sake do not fire on these
people: he made me no answer at all.


Q. Where was he then?


A. He was standing behind the soldiers.


Q. Was you behind the soldiers?


A. No, a little before them, at the edge of the gutter.


Q. Did you see any person with him?


A. No, none at all. I pushed through betwixt two of the men, and spoke to him
that way, he had on a red cont, and laced hat. I saw no more of him. I went to
some of the inhabitants, and said, do not trouble these men, they are on duty.
Some said we will neither trouble them, not be drove off by them.


Q. Did you hear any orders given for firing?


A. I heard, damn you fire: it seemed to me as it came from the Sentry-box
where I left the Captain. I was then by Vernon the barber's shop; I had passed
across the street. I saw a man going to throw a club, I begged of him not to do
it, for I said if he did, the soldiers would certainly fire: he said, he would
not, and did not. I then saw a white club thrown at some distance from me
toward the soldier's; immediately I heard the word present, I stooped down, a
little space of time ensued, I heard damn you fire: two guns were discharged
then as I judged.


Q. Did that club hit any body?


A. I believe it hit one of the soldiers guns, I heard it strike.


Q. Was that before the firing, or after?


A. Before the firing.


Q. How near to the soldiers was the person that threw the club?


A. About ten yards off. Three or four more guns were then discharged, which
killed Attucks and Cray, I heard and saw them fall; then two more were
discharged, one of them killed Mr Caldwell, who was about ten feet distance
from me, the other struck about five inches over my back.


Q. What space of time was there betwixt the second gun and the third?


A. I took it to be about two or three seconds. Another gun was then fired,
which wounded Mr. Patterson in the arm.


Q. How long after the club was thrown, was it, before the first gun was fired?


A. Not above one or two seconds.


Q. What sort of a stick was it that was thrown?


A. I took it to be a white birch cord-wood stick, an inch thick.


Q. What fort of a man, for height, was he that threw it!


A. He might be about five feet and an half.


Q. How do you know what number of guns were fired together?


A. I judged by the report: I saw the flashes,


Q. Did you see any of the persons that were killed, that evening before they
were killed?


A. No.


Q. Upon the oath you have taken, did that man throw the stick with
considerable violence, or not?


A. He threw it considerable hard, he threw it over hand.


Q. Were any people standing betwixt the soldiers and the man that threw that
stick?


A. Yes, some, but not many.


Q. Did the people make a great deal of noise and huzzaing?


A. Yes, considerable.


Q. Did you hear them say to the soldiers, bloody backs, come on you bloody
backs?


A. No. I heard no such thing, but when the two first guns were discharged,
some one cried murder, and by the voice I think it was Maverick. These guns
killed nobody, unless Maverick was then shot.


Nathaniel Fosdick, Halter, sworn. Q Did you see any of the prisoners the 5th
March?


A. Not so as to know them again. That evening, at the cry of fire, I came out
of my house, and saw the people running down town, and I followed them; when I
got by the Townhouse, I saw some going down King Street, I went down also: At
the Guard house, I saw a number of the soldiers running; I asked where was the
fire, no body answered me. I went down to the middle of King Street, and while
I stood there, was pushed from behind me with a bayonet. I turned round and saw
a party of soldiers coming down, I asked one the reason of his pushing at me?
he dumn'd my blood, and bid me stand out of their way, I said I would not, I
was doing no harm to any man, and would not stand aside for any one; they
passed me some on one side, some on the other. They came to the Sentry-box,
faced round and formed a circle. I spoke to some of the inhabitants to speak to
Preston, to know what the matter was; some body spoke to him, but what was
said, I do not know. I saw Preston fall in betwixt the fourth and fifth man,
the word was given fire! immediately the right hand man fired; after that I
pushed in toward them, and they run a bayonet at me and wounded me in my arm.


Q. Who was it struck you?


A. The second man, the first gun was the fired, the second was not; the guns
went off pretty quick


Q. Was it the same soldier that struck you, pushed you in the arm?


A. No. I was pushed twice in the arm by two different bayonets; I knocked off
one of them with my stick, with the other I was wounded in my breast, the wound
an such long, through a double breasted jacket.


Q. Was no blows given before the guns were fired?


A. No, not where I stood, and I saw two thirds of the soldiers.


Q. What was the occasion of your rushing in upon them after the first gun was
fired?


A. All my end was to know who they were.


Q. Did you wonder what was the occasion of their firing?


A. Yes, I did not know what their intention was.


Q. Did you see any insults offered the soldiers?


A. No, none at all, I saw the right hand grenadier fall.


Q. Was it before or after he had fired?


A. It was after. He fell on his backside.


Q. Did you see any of the people that were killed?


A. Yes, I saw the Molatto, and crossed to Quaker lane and there steped over
two more.


Q. Where did the Molatto man lay?


A. By the gutter on the south side of it.


Q. Did you see any of them before they were killed?


A. Not as I know of.


Q. What do you think was the occasion of the granadier's falling?


A. It was occasioned by his pushing at somebody that went in at Royal
exchange-lane.


Samuel Hemmingway, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners?


A. Yes, several, there is Killroy I know particularly well.


Q. Did you ever hear Killroy make use of any threatening expressions, against
the inhabitants of this town?


A. Yes, one evening I heard him say, he never would miss an opportunity, when
he had one, to fire on the inhabitants, and that he had wanted to have an
opportunity ever since he landed.


Q. How long was that before the 5th March?


A. A week or fortnight, I cannot say which.


Q. Did you ever hear any of the rest threaten any thing?


A. No.


Q. Who was present when this conversation passed?


A. Mrs. Bouker, Mr. Apthorp's housekeeper.


Q. Was any body else present?


A. Only the Negroe boy.


Q What gave occasion for this?


A. He and I were talking about the town's people and the soldiers.


Q. Did he say it with any resentment?


A. No otherways than he would not miss an opportunity.


Q. Do you remember what conversation immediately preceded that?


A. No.


Q. Was he in anger?


A. No.


Q Was Killroy in liquor or not?


A. No.


Q Had there any angry words passed betwixt him and you at that time?


A. No, none at all.


Q. Was it in jocular talk?


A. I do not know. I said he was a fool for talking so. -- he said he did not
care.


Q. Had Killroy said that evening, that he had been at the rope-walks?


A. No, he said nothing about the rope-walks.


Q Was this conversation before or after the affray at the rope-walks?


A. I cannot say.


Joseph Hiller, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners?


A. I do not.


Q. Was you in King Street at the time of the firing on the evening of the 5th
March?


A. Yes.


Q What did you observe?


A. I came there about fifteen minutes before the soldiers came, I staid there
till they came down, and remained there till the firing was over.


Q. Narrate what happened in relation to the Sentry.


A I was at the North end of the town when the bells rung, when I come to the
middle of the town, I was told there was no fire; but a rumpus betwixt the
soldiers and the inhabitants. I passed on, the bells still kept ringing, I came
to Dock square, and was informed much to the same purpose; there were some
persons there, who told me it was dangerous to go up; they seemed to be like
people that were afraid to pass, because of the danger, others were going up, I
went up, when I got past the ally, the street was very clear of people, I
hardly saw any body. -- I came to the Townhouse, and saw a few lads, but no
great number, I have often seen more collected for their diversion.


Q. How many people were there?


A. From twenty to thirty. I saw the Sentry upon the steps of the Custom house
door, but I heard him say nothing, but he had his gun waving as if it was to
defend himself, or to exasperate the people. I thought to speak to him, but I
thought he might insult me, and therefore I declined; I went in order to go
away, and met the party coming down; that made me stop, because when they got
to the Custom house, there was a noise something like what they call cheers,
and the people went more to the middle of the street; after the soldiers had
passed through them, I went down again, as I passed before them, there was very
few people there, I passed without the people, and inclined more to the Custom
house, the greatest part of the soldiers were full to my view; the people that
were there, were collected in a body at the end of Royal exchange lane, they
did not go so high as Mr. Stone's house.


Q. Where did you stand?


A. I was walking right before them. They had their guns rested on their hips;
when I passed the last man on the left, the first gun was fired from the right;
as I judged, the time might be twenty seconds before the first gun was fired
from the time they formed, in a short space there was another, and then very
soon another, and then there was a short space of time again, before the last
guns were fired. A little boy run along and cried, fire! fire! fire! as people
generally do when there is fire, a soldier pointed his gun to him and fired,
but did not hit him, he was the last but one on the left.


Q. Did the people appear to be passing off after the first gun?


A. I did not mind the first gun, I thought it was only powder to scare them;
but when the next was fired, they were a scattering. After the firing ceased, a
little boy came and told us some persons were killed. I saw them lie in the
street, but I did not imagine it was any body killed, but that they had been
scared and run away, and left their great coat's behind them: I saw nothing
like an attack that could produce any such consequences: I went to look at the
Malatto man, and heard a noise like the cocking of firelocks, but an officer
passed before them, and said, do not f^e on the inhabitants The street was in a
manner clear, it was as bush as at twelve o'clock at night, the noise of the
cocking seemed to come from the right, and passed on to the left.


Q How many guns were fired?


A. Six was the least, and one missed fire.


Q. Did the last man on the left fire, or not?


A He did no fire, his gun seemed to miss fire, and he brought it down in (...)
priming posture, and a man, like an office^ stepped up to him and spoke to him.


Q Did you see them load betwixt the firing and this noise you speak of, like
the cocking of firelocks?


A. I did not see them load, for I did not leave my station.


Q How many soldiers were there?


A Six or eight.


Q Did you see any blows given, or any thing thrown!


A No, and I was there the whole time.


Q Did you see Palms there, or Bliss?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body strike the soldiers guns?


A. No.


Q Did you hear any huzzaing, when the soldiers came down?


A. There seemed to be a huzza, but when I went down and passed them they were
very still, only talking together, but I heard nothing they said: the shou^ing
was first when they went down, and it was not two minutes till they fired.


Nicholas Ferreter. Rope-maker, sworn. Q. Do you know any of the prisoners?


A Yes, I know Warren and Killroy.


Q Did you ever see them at the rope-walks?


A Yes, they were both at the rope-walks


Q How long was that before the 5th of March?


A. On the Friday before.


Q Did you ever hear them make use of any expressions of mischief toward the
inhabitants?


A. No On Friday Mr. John Gray told me to go to his rope-walk to make some
cables; I went and worked till about twelve, and then I saw a soldier coming
down the outside rope-walk, swearing, and saying he would have satisfaction.
Before this there was one of our hands while I was coiling a cable, said to a
soldier do you want work, yes, lays the soldier I do faith; well said he to the
soldier, go clean my little-house, he damned us and made a blow at, and struck
me, when I knocked up his heels, his coat flew open and out dropped a naked
cutless, which I took up and carried off with me. He went away, and came back
with a dozen soldiers with him: the people that were attacked called to us for
help. When they called to us, we came up; then we had several knocks amongst
us, at last they went off. They all got armed with clubs, and in the afternoon
they were coming again, but Mr. John Gray stopped them.


Q. When they came the second time, ^as Killroy with them?


A. Yes.


Q. What did they do the second time?


A. We had a battle, and they went to their barracks. On the 5th of March I
went to Quaker lane, and met Samuel Gray; I said where are you going, he said
to the fire. I went into King Street, and saw nobody there, the Sentry was
walking as usual. We agreed to go home. I went toward home, and stopped at the
bottom of Long lane, and while I was talking there, I heard guns go off. I went
to King Street, and was told several were killed, I then went home. Samuel
Gray, when I saw him that night, was quite calm, and had no stick.


Benjamin Burdick, Barber, sworn. Q. Did you see any of these prisoners in
King Street the night of the 5th of March?


A. Not that I can swear to as they are dressed. I can recollect something of
their faces, but cannot swear to them. When I came to King street, I went
immediately up to one of the soldiers, which I take to be that man who is bald
on the head, ( pointing to Montgomery) I asked him if any of the soldiers were
loaded, he said yes. I asked him if they were going to fire, he said yes, by
the eternal God, and pushed at me with his bayonet, which I put by with what
was in my hand.


Q. What was it?


A. A Highland broad sword.


Q. What occasion had you to carry it.


A. A young man that boarded with me, and was at the Rope-walks, told me
several of them had a spite at him, and that he believed he was in danger. I
had seen two soldiers about my house, I saw one of them hearkening at the
window, I saw him again near the house, and asked him what he was after; he
said he was pumping ship: Was it not you, says I, that was hearkening at my
window last night? what if it was, he said, I told him to march off, and he
damned me, and I beat him till he had enough of it, and he then went off. The
reason of carrying the sword, was, they spyed the young man in the lane, and
dogged him, for he had been very active in the affray at the Ropewalks, and
they said they would some time or other have satisfaction, and I looked upon
myself to be liable to be insulted likewise. When alarmed by the cry of fine,
and I had got below the house, my wife called after me, and said it is not
fire, it is an affray in King Street, if you are going take this, so I took it,
and run down, and I asked the soldier what I just now told you. I knocked the
bayonet with what I had in my hand, another pushed at me, I struck his gun; my
face was now toward the soldiers. I heard the first gun go off, and then the
second gun went off. As I was looking to see if any body was killed, I saw the
tall man standing in a line with me. I saw him fall.


Q. Whereabouts was you when you hit the gun?


A. Nigh the gutter, about the middle of the party.


Q. How long had the bells been ringing before you came from home?


A. I thought it was 9 o'clock, and did not think any thing else, till somebody
cried fire.


Q Did you strike before the firing?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you strike as hard as you could?


A. Yes, and hit the look of his gun, and if I had struck a little lower, I
should have left a mark that I could have swore to.


Q. Was the sword in your hand drawn?


A. I drew it when the soldier pushed at me, and struck at him as I have
mentioned.


Q. Which gun went off first?


A. I took it to be the right hand man.


Q. Where did that soldier you struck at stand?


A. I believe the fourth or fifth man from the corner of Exchange lane?


Q How many soldiers were there?


A. I did not count them, it appeared to me there were fix or eight.


Q. The man that said he would fire by the eternal God, where did he stand?


A. He was about the middle.


Q Was you there when the first gun was fired?


A. Yes.


Q. What was the immediate occasion of that?


A. I do not know, I had only walked over from Quaker-lane till I came to the
soldiers, that was all the time I had.


Q. Did you see any thing extraordinary, to induce them to fire that gun?


A. Nothing, but a stort stick was thrown, which seemed to go clear over all
their heads. I heard a clattering of their guns, but what was the occasion of
it I do not know.


Q. Might not their iron ramrods occasion it?


A. No, I suppose they knocked one gun against another in taking their places.
When the Molatto man was dead, I went up, and met Dr. Gardner and Mr. Brindley.
I asked them to come and see the Molatto, and as we stooped to take up the man,
the soldiers presented their arms again, as if they had been going to fire,
Capt. Preston came, pushed up their guns, and said stop firing, do not fire. I
went to them to see if I could know their faces again; Capt. Preston looked out
betwixt two of them, and spoke to me, which took off my attention from them.


Q. From where was that stick thrown?


A. From Royal-exchange-lane, and it flew over their head almost as high as the
sign.


Q What did you take to be the occasion of the soldiers answer to you?


A. I do not know, without he was affronted at my asking the question of him.


Q. Did you see any body strike the soldiers before you struck with the sword?


A. No, I had not time.


Q. What distance of time was there betwixt the first and second gun?


A. A very short space, I cannot say exactly.

Robert Williams, sworn. Coming from Corn hill I went down to Dock-square, I
saw a number of people together; I heard there had been an affray by Murray's
Barrack. Somebody said you had better all go home; some went to the North end,
some up Royal-exchange-lane, I came up to Corn hill: when I got to the Town
pump, I heard the Main-Guard had drawn a party off and gone to the
Custom-house, I run down the north side of the Town house, and saw a number of
people, twenty or thirty, collected. I tried to press into the midst of them to
know what they were about; I could not get in; I therefore stepped over the
gutter, and saw the soldiers, seven or eight of them, by the Sentry box. Some
of the people were leaning on their sticks, some standing with their hands in
their bosoms, and some were whistling. Numbers were crouding to get in as I
was. I had my eye on the right hand man. Somebody said, do not press on the
soldiers, I repeated the same words, do not press on the soldiers: when I said
that, I saw something like a flash at my left, and heard the report of a gun,
and the people opened from right to left; but I could not see where the gun was
fired from; it made a noise like a pistol, and I imagined it was nothing but
powder. As the people crowded to the lane, it took the view of the right hand
soldiers from me, but I had a view of the left. I heard another gun go off, and
saw a man fall.


Q. Where was the man when he fell?


A. He was about a foot over the south side of the gutte^


Q. Was he nearer to the right than to the left of the soldier?


A. They fired in a triangular manner.


Q How near did they stand together.


A. The width of a man asunder. I dropped on my knees, and saw the third gun go
off, and then I saw a man who seemed to come upon his heel, and wind round a
little and then fall on his back. The people were moving off, and the guns
seemed to move as the people run. The fourth gun went off quickly after.


Q. Was the second gun fired from the first right hand man?


A. The flash seemed to come from the second man from the right.


Q. Did the huzzaing increase, and a general pressing in upon the first gun
being fired?


A. No.


Q. Was there many sticks?


A. I saw but a few.


Q. Was there any sticks thrown?


A. No. I saw two or three snow balls, which seemed to come from a distance.


Q. Did the people stand close in with the soldiers bayonets?


A No, they appeared to be two feet from the bayonets.


Q. Did you hear a noise like striking on the barrels of the guns.


A. I did not.


Q. Did you hear a cry of the people, kill them, knock them over?


A. No, I was not there above a minute, I saw no blows given by any body, just
before the firing there was a huzzaing and whistling.


Bartholomew Kneeland, Merchant, sworn. Q. Where did you live the 5th March?


A. At my sister's Mrs. Torrey's, by the Town pump. I heard the bells ring
after nine, and went to the front door, I was followed by my sister and two
others of the family; I stood there about five minutes, and saw a number of
soldiers, about ten or a dozen, come toward the pump, they seemed to make a
noise, one of them got nearly opposite to me, and hollowed, damn you, what do
you do there? I made him no answer, he came up to me and pointed his naked
bayonet at my breast, and held it there some time, and told me to get in, I
told him to go along; he went toward the Post Office.


Q. Do you know what regiment he belonged to?


A. To the Twenty-ninth.


Q. Did he bid you get in when he asked you what you did there?


A. Yes. In a little while I heard a volley of small arms, which I took to be
in King Street.

Nathaniel Thayer, Sealer of Wood, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March I
heard a very great noise, my wife said you had better go to the door and see
what the matter is; I went, and saw about twenty people I believe, coming
through Boylston's alley, there was a terrible swearing, and they had clubs and
swords and one thing and another; there came seven soldiers from the Main Guard
without any coats on, driving along, swearing, cursing and damning like wild
creatures, saying where are they? Cut them to pieces, slay them all. They came
up to my door, I shut my door and went in, they went round the back lane to
King Street: -- this was after nine, before any guns were fired.


Q. Do you know if any of these prisoners were there?


A. No, I cannot six on any man.


Q. Had they any of them pouches on?


A. I cannot say for the pouches; but they had no coats. Those people below at
the alley, cried fire! which I took to be a watchword.


Q. Were those you saw before, soldiers or town's people?


A. They came from the Barracks, and they were both soldiers and town's people.


Q How long were they there?


A. Not two minutes, they went down toward the Market, and came up to
King Street by the back lane.

Nathaniel Appleton, Merchant, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March, a little
after nine, I was sitting in my house, I heard a considerable noise in the
street, I listened a little, and found it continued, I went to the door, I
found the chief of the noise was at the bottom of the street, I enquired the
reason, I was told the soldiers and inhabitants were fighting; I waited at the
door a minute or two, people were running down in two's and three's at a time,
at length the noise subsided, and seemed to be down by Dock-square; I heard the
bells ring and heard the cry of fire, I asked where it was? I was answered
there was none, but the inhabitants and soldiers fighting. Deacon Marsh came
out, and there came a party of soldiers from the southward, ten or twelve I
think, they had short cloths I think, I saw some white slieves amongst them
with bayonets in their hands, but I apprehended no danger from them; I stood on
the step of the door, they appeared to be pushing right down the street, when
they got a few rods from the door, their course began to bend toward us, still
I apprehended nothing but that they were coming to walk on the side of the way,
then they lifted up their weapons, and I began to apprehend danger, they said
something. I do not know what it was, but I went in as fall as I could, and
shut the door immediately. They were within half a foot of it, had it been open
a second longer they would have had the command of the door, but I was too
quick for them and bolted my door, went up chamber, looked out of my window,
and saw people flying here and there like pigeons, and the soldiers running
about like mad men in a fury till they got to the bottom of the street.

John Appleton, a young Lad son to Nathaniel Appleton, sworn. About nine I was
sent on an errand into King street, I had my little brother with me, I heard a
noise, I run out of the shop where I was, to see what was the matter, I went
into the middle of the street, and saw some talking to the Sentry, I thought
they were going to quarrel and came away. Coming by Jenkins's alley my little
brother with me, there came out about twenty soldiers with cutlasses in their
hands, my brother fell and they run past him, and were going to kill me, I said
soldiers spare my life, one of them said no damn you, we will kill you all; he
lifted his cutlass and struck at my head, but I dodged and got the blow on my
shoulder.


Q. Was the cutlass drawn?


A. I believe it was not, for it ratled on my shoulder as if it had been
sheathed.

Lieut. Col. Thomas Marshall, Tailor, sworn. I was at Col Jackson's a few
minutes after nine on the 5th of March. When I came out into Dock square, the
square was entirely quiet, I saw no persons in the whole square. I came up
Royal exchange-lane, I saw nobody there. I saw the Sentry at the head of it in
peace and quietness, nobody troubling him: I never saw King Street more quiet
in my life. I went into my house, where was a kinsman of mine; I asked him how
he did, and while I was speaking the young man in the shop knocked for me, I
went into the shop, and in a half a minute, I heard the cry of murder once or
twice; there is mischief said I, at a distance, so there is said he; I opened
the front door to see, I saw nobody. I heard a sad noise, which seemed to come
from Rowe's barracks. I stopped a little space, and the first I saw enter
King Street, was a party from the Main-Guard, ten or twelve came rushing out
violently, I saw their arms glitter by the moon light, hallowing damn them
where are they, by Jesus let them come. Some of them turned into Pudding-lane,
and some went by the Townhouse steps; I went in and told my family to keep
themselves easy, for there was no disturbance near the house. I went to the
door again, and saw a party about the head of Quaker-lane, and they used much
the same expressions as the aforesaid party, and hallowed fire. They passed
over the way, and the shade of the moon light hindered me to see if they went
down Royal-exchange-lane or went up toward the Townhouse Something strikes my
mind, I am not positive now, but I think it was that night, there were a few
boys round the Sentry. I went and said, boys you have no business with the
Sentry, go off, and they went off. I have often seen boys with the Sentry, and
heard words often. The bells were then ringing, and the people began to collect
as they do at the cry of fire, and I began to think it was fire. I had a mind
to get my staff and go out, but I had a reluctance, because I had been warned
not to go out that night: but while the people were collecting, I came to the
door, and saw them gathering thick from all quarters, forty, fifty or sixty.
When the party came down, I thought it was no more than I had seen every day, I
thought they had come to relieve the Sentry, they seemed to be in a posture of
defense, and came through the people. I saw no opposition. When they came up,
they passed out of the moon light into the dark, so that I could not see them,
but I wondered to find them tarry so long. I heard a gun go off, I thought it
was an accident, but in a little time another gun went off, and a third and
fourth, pretty quick, and then the fifth. There seemed to be a small stop in
their firing, I than had no concern, but before the smoke was well away, I saw
the people dead on the ground. I saw no opposition when they were drawn up, the
people were not near them; what opposition might be at the lane I could not
perceive, because the box covered that from my view.


Q. Are you certain that the soldiers came from the Main-Guard?


A. Yes, I am certain of it.


Q. You saw that party that fired, come from the Main-Guard, but the first
party of ten or twelve, did they come out from the Main-Guard?


A. Yes.


Q. How were they dressed?


A. I could not see their dress, but I saw their arms glitter.


SIX o'clock, P. M. the Court adjourned to Thursday morning Nine o'clock.
Thursday NINE o'clock the Court met according to adjournment, and proceeded.

Joseph Crosswell, Tailor, sworn. Next morning after the 5th of March, in
King Street, before the soldiers were apprehended, I saw Killroy, I have known
him by sight almost ever since he has been here, I saw his bayonet bloody, the
blood was dried on five or six inches from the point.

Q. How near were you to the bayonet?


A. About the same distance I am from the Judges, viz: six feet.


Q. Was it shouldered?


A. I forget the posture.


Q. Are you sure it was blood.


A. It appeared to be covered from the point five or six inches, it appeared to
me to be blood, and I thought then, it was blood dried on.

James Carter, Writing-school-master, sworn. The next morning I observed the
same with Mr. Crosswell, I do not know his name, but that is the man, ( pointing
to Killroy) his gun was rested on his right arm.


Q. Did it appear to you to be covered from the point with blood?


A. Yes, I am positive it was blood.


Q. How nigh was you to him?


A. As nigh as I am to you, Sir, viz. three feet off.


Jonathan Carry, Kegg-maker, sworn. Q. Did you know young Maverick, who was
killed by the firing in King Street, on the 5th of March?


A. Yes, very well.


Q. Did you see him that night?


A. He was at my house that night at supper with some young lads, and when the
bells rung, as we all thought for fire, he run out in order to go to it.


John Hill, Esquire sworn. Q. Did you see any thing of the affray at the Rope-walks?


A. I saw a party of the soldiers near the Rope-walks with clubs, ordered them
to disperse, commanded the peace, told them I was in commission for the peace,
they paid no regard to me or my orders, but cut an old man who was coming by,
before my face, and some of them struck at me^ but did not hit me.


Q. Were any of the prisoners among them?


A. I do not know that they were.


The evidence for the Crown being closed, Samuel Quincy, Esquire then addressed the
Court and Jury, as follows:

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.
HAVING gone through the evidence on the part of the crown, it is my province
to support the charge against the prisoners. The examination has been lengthy,
and from the nature of the transaction complex, and in some part difficult; I
shall apply it as distinctly as I am able, without endeavoring to misrepresent
or aggravate any thing to the prejudice of the prisoners on the one hand, or on
the other to neglect any thing that justice to the deceased sufferers, the laws
of my country, or the preservation of the peace of society demand.

There are two things necessary to prove, which I mentioned in the first
opening of this cause, namely, the identity of the prisoners, that is, that
they were that party of men who on the 5th of March last were in King Street,
and that they committed the facts mentioned in the indictments, and farther
gentlemen, the circumstances attending and aggravating the commission of those
facts.

As to the first point, to prove the identity of the prisoners, all of them
have been sworn to, and most of them by more than one witness.

To KILLROY gentlemen, you have Langford, Archibald and Brewer, who swear
positively; and farther you have the evidence of Ferriter and Hemmingway. The
one, of Killroy's being in the affray at the rope-walks, and the other to his
uttering a number of malicious and threatening expressions in regard to the
inhabitants of the town of Boston.

To WHITE gentlemen, you have four more, Simpson, Langford, Bailey and Clark.

To MONTGOMERY, you have Bailey, Palms, Bass, Danbrook and Wilkinson.

To HARTEGAN, you have Danbrook and Simpson.

To WEMMS, you have Simpson and Bridgham.

To CARROL, Bailey and Danbrook.

To WARREN, Bridgham, Dodge and Simpson. Bridgham indeed expressed some doubt,
and gave his reasons for it, which may be worthy notice hereafter.

To M'CAULEY, you have Mr. Austin.

And that Warren was at the Rope-walks, you have also the testimony of Mr.
Ferriter.

All these witnesses as I have mentioned them to you, have testified on oath to
the several prisoners, that they were that evening in King Street, and of the
party; the next thing to be enquired into gentlemen is as to the facts. In
order to ascertain these it will be necessary to have recourse to the testimony
of the witnesses. I could have wished I had been able, after the fatigue of
yesterday, to have ranged the evidence in the order of time as the facts took
place; but not being able to do this, I must take them up as the witnesses were
examined. I will however endeavor to state the facts in the best arrangement I
can.

The first witness Mr. Austin, says, that he was in King Street that evening,
near the Sentry-box which was placed at the Custom-house; that about a quarter
after nine he saw the party coming from the Main-guard; when they got down to
the Sentry box, they wheeled to the left and formed themselves round it; and in
coming round M'Cauley pushed at him with his bayonet, damned him, and bid him
to stand off, this was the first instance of their conduct. Mr. Austin was not
paticular who fired, his back being toward the soldiers when that happened. He
says there were five or six guns fired; and he saw M'Cauley after the firing.
These are the most material circumstances of his testimony.

The next witness is Bridgham, who says he was in King Street also; and the
next morning when he went to the goal to view the prisoners, he apprehended he
had seen Warren in King street the evening before, but afterward he saw a
person that looked very like him belonging to the same regiment, which
occasioned him to doubt whether he was the man or not; my remark upon this, is,
it was probable that the first impressions made on his mind were the strongest,
and therefore you cannot well doubt he was right in judging that Warren was in
fact the person he saw the evening before; he saw also Wemms the corporal
stationed on the left of the party betwixt him and the tall man; the Corporal
was on the left entire, if so gentlemen, Warren must have been the third man
from the left in that situation; there were a number of people he says round
the party huzzaing, some having sticks; his face was the other way when the
first gun went off, he heard a noise like the clashing of guns, he saw Gray
fall, and says the person that killed him, must have been near the center of
the party; when the left man fired there were but few in the street, they
divided and were passing off; the last man that fired, he says leveled his
piece, following a lad that was running down the street before he fired; he
also mentions a number of people coming down from the north side of the
Townhouse, collected as he supposed by the bells, and not disposed to commit
any injury whatsoever; he did not apprehend himself, or the soldiers in any
danger from any thing he observed; he says about seven guns were fired, and
there were about twelve people at that time before the party. -- These are the
most material circumstances in his evidence.

Dodge says, he saw Warren, but cannot swear to any of the rest, the man who
fired first he thinks stood toward the left, about two from the corner,
however he was over at Vernon's shop across the street, and perhaps not able to
make so good observations as some others; he saw about fifty people in the
street, but he saw nothing in their hands; he saw a number of snow balls
thrown, but none as he observed with violence or in anger; he saw the people
near the party of soldiers, and they pushing at them with their bayonets; he
does not imagine there was any thing besides snow balls thrown.

Clark the next witness, saw White the Sentinel at his station just before nine
o'clock, that he spoke to him, but saw no one at that time near or molesting
him.

Mr. Langford comes next, and this witness is perhaps as particular as any one
witness on the part of the Crown; it appears by the relation of his evidence
that he came down about nine o'clock as a watchman, in order to go to the
Watch-house next adjoining the Town house; when he came down, he was told the
people and soldiers were fighting at Murray's Barracks; upon this, he took his
course that way, but the matter being over by the time h^ got there, he
returned to King Street: there were a number of boys round the Sentinel, to
whom he spoke and told hi^ he need not fear, the boys would not hurt him; soon
after this the Sentinel without saying any thing to the people went up the
Custom-house steps and knocked at the door; a person within opened it and said
something, but what, the witness did not hear; upon that the Sentinel turned
round, and pointed his piece at the people opposite to him. Langford spoke
again, and told him there was no danger, the boys would not hurt him, and he
shouldered. The witness continued talking with the Sentry till the party came
down, and then he went into the street. About this time Gray, one of the
unhappy sufferers, came and clapped Langford on the shoulder, saying what is
here to pay? Langford replies, I do not know, but something I believe will come
of it by and by; his stand was half way as he said betwixt the Sentry-box and
Royal exchange-lane; the box being on the right corner of the lane, and he
opposite the center of the lane; the witness and Gray were standing together
talking familiarly, Langford leaning on his stick, and Gray standing with his
hands folded in his bosom, without a stick in his hand, neither saying or doing
any thing to the soldiers You cannot but recollect Gentlemen, that this witness
was expressly and repeatedly asked, if Gray had a stick, or said any thing to
the soldiers? he as often answered no. Langford spoke to Killroy, and after two
guns were discharged, seeing him present his piece, said to him, damn you are
you going to fire? Presently upon this, Killroy levelled his piece, and firing
directly at Gray, killed him dead on the spot! The ball passed through his
head, and he fell on Langford's left foot; upon which, not satisfied with
having murdered one of his fellow creatures in that cruel and inhuman manner,
he pushed with his bayonet, and pierced Langford through his great coat and
jacket; here Gentlemen, if any there can be, is evidence, and I think complete
evidence of a heart desperately wicked, and bent upon mischief, the true
characteristic of a wilful malicious murderer.

It could not be thought, at the distance the witness and Gray were standing
from him, without offering any violence, but Killroy the prisoner saw them
distinctly, and aimed to destroy them; if you compare this testimony with Mr.
Hemmingway's who swears to Killroy's uttering expressious importing, that he
would miss no opportunity of firing on the inhabitants, he had wished for it
ever since he landed, you certainly Gentlemen can have no doubt in your minds
but that he had that intention at heart, and took this opportunity to execute
it.

The crime of murder, Gentlemen, it will be agreed by all, necessarily involves
in it the malice of the heart, and that malice is to be collected from the
circumstances attending the action; but it is not necessary to constitute
malice, that it should be harbored long in the breast; a distinction is made
in the books betwixt malice and hatred, and a good distinction it is; I have it
in my hand and will read it;

KELYNCE 126, and 127. MAWGRIDGE's CASE. Some have been led into mistake by not
well considering what the passion of malice is; they have construed it to be a
rancour of mind lodged in the person killing, for some considerable time before
the commission of the fact, which is a mistake arising from their not well
distinguishing between hatred and malice, And a little after, Malice is a
design formed of doing mischief to another; cum quis data opera male agit, he
that designs and uses the means to do ill is malicious: 2 Inst. 42. He that
does a cruel act voluntarily, does it of malice propensed. 3 Inst. 62.

Though Gentlemen, it happens on a sudden occasion as this was, if the act is
in it is nature wanton and cruel, the law will presume it to be malicious,
unless that presumption is taken off by contrary evidence.

Ferriter, who testified to the same person, tells you, he was remarkably
active at the Rope walks amongst the rest of the soldiers; taking therefore all
the circumstances of this testimony together, it must remove every sort of
difficulty in your minds as to the purpose Killroy had at that time; it seems
apparent that there were strong marks of malice in his heart; the person you
can have no doubt of, the fact you can have no doubt of, nor can you I think
doubt of the species of crime.

The next witness, who also testifies to Killroy's going down, and being of the
party, swears that he was about twenty feet from the party when the first gun
was fired; that he also had been, previous to this, at Murray's barracks, when
the affray happened there, and tells you the behavior of the soldiers in that
scene.

Brewer, another witness also swears to Killroy. He saw the Sentinel on the
Custom-house steps; at that time there were about twenty people, boys chiefly
about fourteen, and some younger, round about him, but they made no great show;
he saw the Captain come down with the party, the Sentinel at this time had his
gun breast high; that while the witness was speaking to Monk, (a young lad who
was wounded) he lost sight of Preston and the guns went off: Monk complained of
being shot, but Brewer apprehended it was nothing but powder, and that he was
more frightened than hurt; the firing began at the right and extended to the
corner man on the left. Killroy attacked this witness in the same manner
M'Cauley did Austin, by pushing at him with his bayonet; a number were
collected by the ringing of the bells, but he heard nothing particular in
regard to abusive language; he saw no snow balls thrown, and when the soldiers
came down, he heard some of the people crying fire, and that was the general
cry; some crying fire because the bells rung, some, no doubt fire, to the
soldiers, daring them to it; but of this no great can be made in the present
case. There were seven guns he says fired, he was certain as to the number,
having counted them himself. He says further, he met Dr. Young in Dock-square
and that he had a sword; the witness said, let every man go to his own home,
and the Doctor replied, that is the best way, the soldiers are gone to their
barracks: perhaps something will be attempted to be made of this circumstance,
and therefore I shall make an observation upon it. -- If you attend to the
testimony of several of the witnesses, there were that evening in the streets
at all parts of the town, a number of soldiers; they failled out from Murray's
barracks and every where with clubs, cutlasses, and other weapons of death;
this occasioned a general alarm; every man therefore had a right, and very
prudent it was to endeavor to defend himself if attacked; this accounts for
the reason of Dr. Young or any one inhabitant of the town having a sword that
evening; the Doctor surely could not be supposed to have any intention of
mischief, because the same witness tells you his cry was, the soldiers were
gone to their barracks, and go every man to his own home.

Mr. Bailey the next witness, testifies as to the identity of some of the
party, that there were Montgomery, Carrol and White there; that he placed
himself at the post by the Custom-House, and stood there all the time; that
there were about twenty boys, some fourteen years old, and some under that; he
was near the Sentinel when the party came down; Carrol pointed at his breast
with his bayonet, and White said do not hurt him; that Montgomery discharged
his piece first; he thinks it was about half a minute before the second gun
went off; the gren^dier's gun he says was struck out of his hand by some person
near him, and that he recovered it, and then fired; that Carrol was the next
but one to him: he imagines Gentlemen, that Montgomery killed Attucks; Attucks
was about fifteen feet from him over the gutter: He continued in his station at
the corner from the time of the party's coming down till all was over; he did
not apprehend himself or the soldiers in danger, from clubs, sticks, snow
balls, or any thing else; he saw the person that struck Montgomery as he
supposed, at the corner of Royal exchange-lane; he was asked if Attucks was the
person, he answered no. From this witness you ascertain, Gentlemen, that
Montgomery fired first, and that he was on the right wing of the party.

The next witness is Mr. Palms, he saw the Sentry, and nobody near him: He had
come from Murray's barracks, and hearing a disturbance in King Street, he was
told he had better not go down, he said I will, and try to make peace; he also
saw Montgomery there; the stick that struck Montgomery was thrown as he
apprehended; Montgomery stepped back and then fired; he thinks he heard seven or
eight guns, but did not count them, and it was seven or eight seconds between
the first and second gun; as the last gun went off, Montgomery pushed at him
with his bayonet, and he struck him with his cane, and struck the gun down; the
bayonet stuck in the snow, and the gun fell out of his hand; Mr. Palms at this
time slipped and fell, but quickly recovered himself; Montgomery attempted again
to push him with his bayonet, and he threw his cane at him and run; not
satisfied with this, Montgomery attempted to push him a third time, and in that
attempt he slipped and fell, and thereby gave Palms an opportunity to get out of
his way, or else he says he had been run through the body; from the testimony
of this witness, you have further proof that Montgomery was the person who
fired first; that after firing, he continued to discover marks of malice and
malevolence, by pushing with his bayonet, and endeavoring to destroy not only
Mr. Palms, but all around him.

Next comes Mr Danbrook, he saw there Hartegan, Montgomery, and Carrol. Here is
another witness to three of the party; it was about a quarter after nine when
he came up; he stood about ten or twelve feet from Montgomery; he saw no stick
strke him, but a little stick he says flew over their heads, which he took to
be a piece of a rattan; he was looking on Montgomery when he fired; this is
another evidence as to the fact of firing, upon which, the witness thinks, two
men sell: if that was the case, there was execution indeed; by the discharge of
one gun two persons killed on the spot! He did not hear the second gun, but
supposes, that by one of the guns Attucks fell, he stooped to see if the
Molatto was dead, then turned round and saw another man fall; Attucks at that
time was near him, at his left, leaning on his stick; that circumstance I would
have you keep in your minds Gentlemen, that you may remember it when you have
the whole evidence together.

Jedediah Bass is the next witness, he came up Royal exchange-lane; when he got
into King street, he saw Montgomery there: here Gentlemen is another witness as
to the identity of one of the prisoners, and the witness saw him push his
bayonet at a man that stood near him; he drew back into the lane, and in a
minute Montgomery fired: the number of guns he took to be six, but did not
count them: the people began on the firing of the first gun to run, some one
way and some another. As he came up Dock square, the people were saying let us
go home, there is no fire, the soldiers are gone to their barracks.

After this witness comes Mr. Wilkinson, who gave a very regular account; he
tells you he was at his own house when the bells rung for nine as usual; a
little while after that he heard Dr. Cooper's bell, on which apprehending it
was for fire, he put on his surrour, and went out; he came toward the
Townhouse, went past it as far as the town-pump, and the people from the
windows were cautioning those in the street not to go down, for they would be
killed; the night was so bright that he was able where he was to see down the
street as far as Boyston's alley, and there he saw a number of soldiers
sallying out, brandishing their swords, and contending with the people; there
were about thirty or forty round them with buckets and bags, thinking as he
supposed that the bells rung for fire; after this he went to the Guard-house,
intending to wait there, to learn if any mischief had been done at the
barracks; he presently saw Capt. Preston come down, as he imagined from behind
the Old Brick meeting house, and call to the guard, and ordered them to turn
out; then he saw the party come out, and saw the Captain draw his sword and
march down with them; at that time there were about thirty or forty people in
King street; he went a little lower, and turned back again round the north side
of the Town house, and placed himself at the Royal-exchange-tavern; and the
party was formed when he got there: he tells you he was not at all apprehensive
of danger, consequently he was capable of making observations, and placed
himself in such a situation as to do it* the party formed in a circle, and he
stood about four or five minutes, before he heard the word given to fire: that
he heard it twice: on the first command they did not fire; it was repeated, and
then the guns went off one after another, like the striking of a clock, he was
about two yards from them and thinks the firing began at the right. This
corresponds with the the testimony of several witnesses. He saw the flash of
each gun seven went off, and one flashed. There Gentlemen you have evidence of
all the party's firing save one: the witness was asked if he saw snow balls,
ice, oyster shells, or any thing else thrown by the people, to which he
answered No; he said if he had, he should have thought himself in danger, and
have retreated; he heard two or three cheers before the party came down, but
none afterward. Now, Gentlemen, if you recollect that circumstance, and the
manner of his relating it, you will remember he expressed himself very
emphatically: from this testimony you have further express evidence of the fact
of firing, that it came from the right, and from thence followed on to the
left: he did not see the persons who were killed, therefore there is nothing in
his evidence relating to that.

From the next witness, Mr. Simpson, you have proof of White, Wemms, Warren,
and Hartegan, four of the prisoners, that they were all of the party that
evening; and after relating a number of minute circumstances, he swears to the
discharge of eight guns, which if you give credit to his testimony, will prove
to you that the whole party fired; from him you have also further evidence of
the killing Attcks, Gray and Caldwell.

Mr. Fosdick, deposes that upon his going down King Street, the first
salutation he had, was the pressing of soldiers behind him with the points of
their bayonets, crying out, damn your blood stand out of the way! this
Gentlemen, was the conduct of the party as they came down along. From Mr.
Fosdick also you have evidence of their maneuvers both before and after they
formed; when the first gun was fired, the second man from the right pushed his
bayonet at him, and wounded him in the breast, you saw Gentlemen the mark in
Court: before this two different men pierced him in the arm and elbow quite to
the bone; here Gentlemen were three thrusts given to a person innocently
passing down upon the cry of fire! he knew not as he swears to you, what was
the occasion of the party's coming down. The right hand Grenadler fell after he
had fired, occasioned by pushing at a person who went down Royal-exchange-lane,
this probably was Mr. Palms, in whose evidence if you remember, you have this
circumstance related, that on his pushing at him the third time, Montgomery's
foot slipped, which gave him an opportunity to escape down the lane.

Hemmingway, the next witness, swears, that being in company with Killroy, he
beard him say he never would miss an opportunity to fire on the people of the
town, for he had wanted it ever since be landed; that Killroy was not then in
liquor nor appeared to be in anger; he told him he was a fool, for saying so,
he said I do not care, I will not miss an opportunity for all that; these
expressions Gentlemen speak for themselves, they are of such a nature as you
cannot but draw from them the temper of the man's heart who spoke them, which
you will consider at your leisure.

Mr. Hillier, came from the North end, was told there was no fire, but the
soldiers were insulting the inhabitants; a number of people in Dock square
seemed afraid to go up to King Street, another circumstance which accounts for
the appearance of the inhabitants, at that time in Dock-square; the witness
went up to King Street, saw the Sentry with his bayonet charged breast high,
about twenty or thirty boys about him; he had often seen many more in that
street in such a night as that was; it was bright moon light: the people on the
party's coming down seemed to collect in a body in Royal-exchange-lane; as he
passed the last man, he heard a gun from the right, thinks it was about twenty
seconds before the second gun fired; be observed a little boy running a cross
the street crying fire, and the left hand man followed the boy with his gun;
there was nothing passed he observed to induce them to apprehend any danger; he
says, had even the soldiers pointed at me, I should not have thought myself in
danger; he thinks there were six guns fired; he saw no snow balls thrown, if
there had been, he must have seen them. When the soldiers came down, there was
a sure of shouting, and a short time after, the first gun fired. I need not
dwell longer on this testimony for you must remember it yourselves.

Nicholas Ferriter was next sworn, who knew Killroy and Warren; he swears to
their being at the Rope-walks before this affair happened; be relates the
circumstances of three several attacks in the Rope-walks, the first was a
single person who challenged him out to fight; a squ^ble ensued, and the
soldier took to his heels; he soon collected a dozen more, came again, and had
a farther battle, in which the soldiers were again worsted; they then collected
a large number, to the amount of thirty, and in about three-quarters of an hour
they came back, and went at it again; in this last squabble the soldiers were a
third time worsted. From this affair perhaps may be dated a good deal of the
proceedings of the Monday-evening; you have heard from the witnesses that the
soldiers of that regiment, remembered the grudge, and discovered a malicious
disposition; were frequently seen in parties, and when single, with arms,
attacking the people passing the streets. Killroy one of the prisoners, and
Warren, are expressly sworn to, that they were in this affray; Gray and
Ferriter went into King Street, Gray had no stick; Ferriter left Gray in
King Street; it appears he did not go down with a disposition to commit any
assault at all.

Burdick is the next witness, he says when he came down to King Street he spoke
to a soldier, he thinks it was Montgomery, he asked him if he was loaded and
intended to fire; yes, by the eternal God! was the answer he received. -- The
intention of that soldier, whoever he was, you clearly discover; the witness
thinks it was Montgomery; he says further, a soldier pushed at him with his
bayonet, and he struck his gun; he saw nothing flung but a small stick, which
hit nobody; as he was stooping to take up the dead, they cocked their guns and
presented at him again; thus you see the same disposition continued, they were
^iming to push at every body round about them; and after they had killed these
persons, they were not satisfied with that but attempted to push those that
were taking them away.

Mr. Williams who was next sworn, has nothing material in his testimony, but
that of the guns following the people as they ran after the first gun was
fired; that seven guns were fired, that he saw no sticks or snow balls fall
near them, that all the snow balls he did see seemed to be light, and not hard.

It has been asked from the bench, Whether there may not be voluntary
manslaughter? ^readily grant there may; it has also been observed, that
homicide which includes murder, must be committed with coolness and
deliberation, I allow it, and my application of this rule, is, that it comes
within the evidence you have of the particular facts related by the witnesses
with regard to Killroy; there is no manner of doubt with me, but the fact was
done in the manner which the law calls sedato animo; he was doing a deliberate
action, with a cool and calm mind; it appears, if you believe La^gford, he was
not molested; it appears the person he killed, and at whom he aimed, and the
person whose cloths he pierced with his bayonet, were standing peaceably, one
leaning on a stick, and the other with his arms folded.

After the witnesses we have gone through, a number of gentlemen were examined,
most of whom lived in Cornhill, who have testified to the conduct of the
soldiers, that evening the affair happened.

I will not take them in order, for I apprehend, by recuring to Colonel Marshal
first, the rest will come in more naturally; he says, he came from Colonel
Jackson's in Dock-square, about a quarter after nine o'clock; that the street
was quite still, no body passing through Dock square; he came up to his own house
next the Custom house, he passed the Sentinel, and there was no body near him;
King Street was quite still, fewer people passing than he had usually seen on
such a fine night; he went into his own house, and soon after heard a distant
cry of murder, what part of the street it came from he did not know: He,
gentlemen, you will remember, intimated also this circumstance, that he had
been warned not to go out that evening; this gave him an apprehension there was
some mischief to be betwixt the soldiers and the inhabitants; he mentioned it
to the person in the strop, and went out; looking toward the Guard-house, he
saw a number of soldiers issue from thence in an undress, with naked swords,
cutlasses, etc. crying out "Damn them where are they? By Jesus let 'em come."
As to the situation of the Moon, whether she was north or south, which has been
much altercated, I cannot see it will make much one way or the other, it is
sufficient that Colonel Marshall, whose credibility and capacity will not be
disputed, has sworn that from his door he observed a party of soldiers come
down in undress, armed with cutlasses and other weapons, the cutlasses he
swears he particularly saw glittering in the Moon light; the expressions he
said he plainly heard, while they were brandishing their swords; when this
party passed off, he saw a second party come up Quaker-lane, armed in the same
manner, and making use of the same kind of language, and that party he said
cried fire; in his testimony on the trial of Captain Preston, he said the bells
rung on that cry; he expressed some doubt of this yesterday, but it was
certainly just about that time; the use I would make of this is, to compare it
with what the other witnesses say of the conduct of the soldiers in Cornhill;
as Mr. Thayer expresses it, it is probable the word fire was a watchword; it
appears to me, that if we can believe the evidence, they had a design of
attacking and slaughtering the inhabitants that night, and they could have
devised no better method to draw out the inhabitants unarmed, than to cry fire!

Mr. Thayer, was sitting at his fire, in Cornhill, near Boylston's alley, he
heard a great noise, and went to the door, he saw seven soldiers in an undress
coming down like wild creatures, with cutlasses in their hands, crying damn
them, where are they? upon this he heard a cry of fire, and supposed it to be a
watchword.

Mr. Kneeland, who lives by the town-pump, came out and stood at his door; saw
a number of soldiers pass by him armed; one of them came up to him and said,
damn you what do you do here? and pointed his bayonet to his breast, telling
him to go in.

Mr. Appleton who lived opposite, tells you he was standing by his neighbor
Mr. Marsh, they were both at the door; a number of soldiers came running down,
armed with cutlasses, in an undress, and they seemed to come out of their way,
(observing them at the door) with uplifted weapons, intending as it appeared,
to strike them: but they fortunately got into the doors.

Then gentlemen, comes the son of Mr. Appleton, the young master who was sworn
yesterday, whose story, with his manner of telling it, must strike deep into
your minds; I (...) sure it did in mine; a child of his age, with a younger
brother sent of (...) errand a few steps, and on returning home, struck at by a
party of soldiers, nay ruffians, with cutlasses, he innocently crying, soldiers
spare my life! No damn you we will kill you all, or words to that purpose,
attended with a blow, was the answer the little victim received! what can
indicate malice if this does not? cruelty almost equal to that of a Pharoh or
Herod. I remember at the ^t trial, my brother Adams made this observation, that
"Man is a social creature, that his feelings, his passions, his imaginations
are contagious," I am sure if in any instance it is so, here was food enough
for such passions, such imaginations to feed upon.

But Gentlemen, as it does not immediately relate to the prisoners, all the use
I mean to make of it is, to show you that from the conduct and appearance of
the soldiery, in different parts of the town, the inhabitants had reason to be
apprehensive they were in danger of their lives; children and parents, husbands
and wives, masters and servants, had reason to tremble one for another. This
apprehension, together with the ringing of the bells, collected numbers of
people in different quarters, as is commonly the case when there is any
appearance of fire; and the center of the town, when there is a doubt where
fire is, becomes naturally the place of rendezvous: this accounts for the
number of people that were there, and for some having sticks and canes. I
mention this only to take off the force of any evidence or pretense that may be
made, that there was an intention of the people to assault, or as it has been
expressed, swallow up the soldiers.

I have now gone through the evidence on the part of the Crown, in support of
the charge against the prisoners, I shall make a very few observations, and
leave it with the prisoners and their Council to make their defense, and Mr.
Pain who is on the side of the Crown with me, to close the cause.

I think Gentlemen upon the whole evidence, you can, in the first place, have
no doubt but that all the prisoners at the bar were of that party of soldiers,
headed by Capt. Preston, who went down to the Custom-House, on the 5th. March,
the evening mentioned in the indictments; that the five persons named in those
indictments were killed by some or other of that party, but who they were that
killed those several persons, may not be precisely ascertained, except in the
case of Killroy, against whom I think you have certain evidence.

It is a rule of law Gentlemen, when the fact of killing is once proved, every
circumstance alleviating, excusing, or justifying, in order to extenuate the
crime must be proved by the prisoners, for the law presumes the fact malicious,
until the contrary appears in evidence.

There is another rule I shall mention also, and that is, that it is imaterial,
where there are a number of persons concerned, who gave the mortal blow, all
that are present, are in the eye of the law, principals. This is a rule settled
by the Judges of England upon solid argument. The question therefore then will
be, what species of homicide this is? and the decision of that question must be
deferred, until the defense comes out by the evidence on the other side

The laws of society, Gentlemen, lay a restraint on the passions of men, that
no man shall be the avenger of his own cause, unless through absolute
necessity, the law giving a remedy for every wrong: If a (...) might at any
time execute his own revenge, there would be and end of law.

A person cannot justify killing, if he can by any means make his escape; he
should endeavor to take himself out of the way, before he kills the person
attacking him.

Here one of the Court judging it improper for the Council in opening the cause
to anticipate the defense, and this being determined by the whole Bench, Mr
Quincy then closed, with saying.

I was about to make some farther remarks, but it is thought by the Honorable
Court improper to anticipate what may be urged on the other side. I shall
therefore rest the case as it is, and doubt not but on the evidence as it now
stands, the facts, as far as we have gone, against the prisoners at the bar,
are fully proved, and until something turns up to remove from your minds, the
force of that evidence, you must pronounce them GUILTY.

Mr. JOSIAH QUINCY. jun.
May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.
THE prisoners at the bar stand indicted for the murder of five of his
Majesty's liege subjects, as set forth in the several indictments, which have
been read to you: the persons slain, those indictments set forth, as " being in
the peace of God and our Lord, the King," at the time of the mortal wounds
given.

To these indictments, the prisoners have severally pleaded Not Guilty: and for
their trial have put themselves on God and their country; which country you
are. And by their pleas, thus severally pleaded, they are to stand or fall, by
the evidence, which shall respectively apply to them.

By their plea of Not Guilty, they throw the burden of proof, as to the fact of
killing, upon the Crown; but, upon which being proved, the matters, they allege
to justify, excuse, or extenuate, must be adduced by them, and supported by
legal evidence. The truth of the facts, they may thus allege, is your sole and
undoubted province to determine; but upon a supposition, that those facts shall
appear to your satisfaction, in the manner we allege, the grand question then
to be determined, will be, -- whether, such matters so proved, do in law
extenuate, excuse, or justify. The decision of this question, belongs to
another department; namely, the Court. This is law so well known and
acknowledged, that I shall not now detain you by a recital of authorities, but
only refer to Judge Foster's Crown Law, where this point is treated with
precision, and fixed beyond controversy. It may not be amiss; however, to
assure you, that as certain as the cognizance of facts is within your
jurisdiction, as certain does the law, resulting from these facts, in cases of
the present kind, seem to reside solely in the Court: unless cases where
juries, under the direction of the Court, give general verdicts, may be
denominated exceptions.

I take it, that, in the cause now before us, it will not be contested, that
five persons were unfortunately killed, at the time the indictments charge; and
this ease will naturally enough divide itself, into three main divisions of
enquiry.

I. Whether any homicide was committed? II. By whom was it committed? III. Is
there any thing appearing in evidence, which will justify, excuse, or extenuate
such homicide, by reducing it to that species of offense, called manslaughter?
Before we enter upon these enquiries, permit me, Gentlemen, to remind you of
the importance of this trial, as it relates to the prisoners -- It is for their
lives! If we consider the number of persons now on trial, joined with many
other circumstances which might be mentioned, it is by far the most important,
this country ever saw.

Remember the ties you are under to the prisoners and even to yourselves: The
eyes of all are upon you. Patience in hearing this cause is an essential
requisite; candor and caution are no less essential. It is tedious and painful
to attend so lengthy a trial; but remember the time which has been taken up by
the Crown, in the opening. By every bond of humanity and justice, we claim an
equal indulgence: pay, it is of high importance to your country, that nothing
should appear on this trial to impeach our justice, or stain our humanity.

And here, let me remind you of a notion, which has certainly been too
prevalent, and guard you against it is baneful influence. An opinion has been
entertained by many among us, that the life of a soldier, was of very little
value: of much less value, than others of the community. -- The law Gentlemen,
knows no such distinction; -- the life of a soldier is viewed by the equal eye
of the law, as estimable, as the life of any other citizen.

I cannot any other way account, for what I mention, but by supposing, that the
indigence and poverty of a soldier, -- the toils of his life, -- the severity
of discipline to which he is exposed, -- the precarious tenure by which he is
generally thought to hold his life, in the summary decisions of a
court martial, have conspired to propagate a sentiment of this kind; but a
little attention to the human heart, will dissipate this notion.

The soldier takes his choice, like all others, of his course of life: -- he
has an equal right, with you or me, so to do. It is best we should not all
think alike. Habit makes all things agreeable. What at first was irksome, soon
becomes pleasing. But does experience teach, that misery begen in general an
hatred of life. By no means; we all reluct at death; -- we long for one short
space more -- we grasp, with anxions solicitude, even after a wretched
existence. GOD and Nature has implanted this love of life. -- Expel therefore
from your breasts, an opinion so unwarrantable by any law, human or divine; let
not any thing so injurious to the prisoners, who value life as much as you; let
not any thing so repugnant to all justice have an influence is this trial. The
reputation of the country depends much on your conduct, Gentlemen, and, may I
not add, Justice calls aloud for candor in hearing, and impartiality in
deciding this cause, which has, perhaps, too much engrossed our affections --
and, I speak for one, too much excited our passions.

The law, by which the prisoners are to be tried, is a law of mercy -- a law
applying to us all -- a law, judge Blackstone will tell us founded in
principles, that are permanent, uniform and universal, always conformable to
the feelings of humanity and the indelible rights of mankind. Sec 4, 13. Cap. 3.

How ought we all, who are to bear a part in this day, to aim at a strick
adherence to the principles of this law -- how ought we all to aim at utterly
eradicating every undue biass of the judgment -- a bias subversive of all
justice and humanity.

Another opinion equally foreign to truth and law has been adopted by many.

It has been thought, that no possible case could happen, in which a soldier
could fire, without the aid of a civil magistrate. This is a great mistake -- a
very unhappy mistake indeed! -- one, I am afraid, that had it is influence, on
the fatal night, which we all lament. The law, as to the present point, puts
the citizen and soldier under equal restraint. What will justify and mitigate
the action or the one, will do the same to the other. -- Let us bear this
invariable in mind, in examining the evidence. But before we proceed to this
examination, let us take a transient view of some occurences, proceeding and
subsequent to the melancholy fifth of March.

About some five or six years ago, it is well known, certain measures were
adopted by the British parliament, which gave a general alarm to this
continent. Measures were alternately taken, in Great Britain, that awakened
jealosy, resentment, fortitude and vigilance. -- Affairs continued long
stactuating. A sentiment universal prevailed, that our dearest rights were
invaded. It is not our business here to enquire touching these delicate points.
These are concernments, which however interesting or important in themselves,
we must keep far away from us, when in a Court of law. It poisons justice, when
politics tinctures it is current.

I need not inform you, how the tide rose, as we were advancing toward the
present times. The general attention became more and more roused people became
more a like in opinion and practice. A vast majority thought all that was dear
was at stake -- sentiments of liberty -- property -- ignominious bondage -- all
conspire to increase the ferment. -- At this period, the troops land. -- Let us
here pause, and view the citizen and soldier.

The causes of grievance being thus spread far and wide, the inhabitants viewed
the soldiery as called in, foreign from their prime institution, to force
obedience to acts, which were, in general, deemed subversive of natural, as
well as constitutional freedom. With regard to the universal prevalence of
ideas of this kind, it does not fall within our present plan, to give you
direct, positive evidence. It would be too foreign to the present issue, though
pertinent enough, when considered as a clue to springs and motives of action,
and as an additional aid to form a just judgment in our present enquiry. You
Gentlemen who come from the body of the county, are presumed to know these
facts, if they are true; nay their notoriety must be such, provided I am not
mistaken in my conjecture, that the justice of my observation on this matter,
must be certainly confirmed by your own experience. I presume not in this, or
any other matter of fact, to prescribe to you; if these sentiments are wrong,
they ought to have no influence; if right, they ought certainly to have their
due weight.

I say, Gentlemen, and appeal to you for the truth of what I say, that many on
this continent viewed their chains as already forged, they saw fetters as
prepared, they beheld the soldiers as fastening, and riveting for ages, the
shackles of their bondage. With the jus^ness of these apprehensions, you and I
have nothing to do in this place. Disquisitions of this sort, are for the
Senate, and the Chamber of Council -- they are for statesmen and politicians
who take a latitude in thoughts and actions; but we. Gentlemen, are confined in
our excursions, by the rigid rules of law. -- Upon the real, actual existence
of these apprehensions, in the community, we may judge -- they are facts
falling properly within on^ cognizance -- and hitherto may we go, but no
further. It is my duty, and I ought to impress it on your minds, and you,
Gentlemen, ought to retain the impression -- You are to determine on the facts
coming ^ your knowledge; -- You are to think, judge, and act, ^ Jurymen, and not
as Statesmen.

Matters being thus circumstanced, what might be expected. No room was left for
cordiality and friendship. Discontent was seated on almost every brow. Instead
of that hospitality, that the soldier thought himself entitled to, scorn,
contempt and silent murmurs were his reception. Almost every countenance
lowered with a discoutented gloom, and scarce an eye, but flashed indignant
fire.

Turn and contemplate the camp. Do we find a more favorable appearance?

The soldier had his feelings, his sentiments, and his characteristick passions
also. The constitution of our government has provided a stimulus for his
affections. -- The pride of conscious virtue, the sense of valor, the point of
honor.

The law had taught him to think favorably of himself. Had taught him to
consider himself, See Blackstone's Commentaries, Vol. I. p. 407.
as peculiarly appointed for the safeguard and defense of his country. He had
heard, that he put not off the citizen, when he entered the camp; but because
he was a citizen, and wished to continue so, he made himself for a while a
soldier.

How stinging was it to be stigmatized, as the instrument of tyranny and
oppression? how exasperating to be viewed, as aiding to enthrall his country?
He felt his heart glow with an ardour, which he took for a love of liberty and
his country, and had formed to himself no design fatal to it is privileges. He
recollected no doubt, that he had heretofore exposed himself for it is service.
He had bared his bosom in defense of his native soil, and as yet felt the sma^t
of wounds received in conflict for his King and Country. Could that spirit,
which had braved the shafts of foreign battle, brook the keener wounds of civil
contest? -- The arrows which now pierced him, pierced as deep, and rankled
more, than those of former times. Is it rational to imagine much harmony could
long subsist?

We must take human nature as we find it, and not vainly imagine, that all
things are to become new, at such a crisis.

There are an order of men in every commonwealth who never reason, but always
act from feelings. That their rights and liberties were filched away one after
another, they had often been told. They had been taught, by those whom they
believed, that the ax was now laid to the root of the tree, and one more stroke
completed it is fall. It was in vain to expect to silence or subdue these
emotions by reasons, soothings, or dangers. A belief, that nothing could be
worse than the calamities which seemed inevitable, had extended itself on all
sides, and arguments drawn from such sources had little influence. Each day
gave rise to now occurrences which increased animosities. Heart-burnings, heats
and bickerings became more and more extensive. Reciprocal insults lowered the
temper, mutual injuries imbittered the passions.

Can we wonder, that when every thing tended to some important action, the
period so soon arrived? Will not our wonder be increased, to find the crisis no
sooner taking place, when so many circumstances united to hasten it is approach?
To use an allusion somewhat homely, may we not wonder, that the acid and the
alcali, did not sooner ferment?

A thought here imperceptibly forces itself on our minds, and we are led to be
astonished, that persons so discordant in opinion, so opposite in views,
attachments and connections, should be stationed together. But here, Gentlemen,
we must stop. If we pursue this enquiry, at this time, and in this place, we
shall be in danger of doing great injustice. We shall get beyond our limits.
The right of quartering troops in this province must be discussed at a
different tribunal. The constitutional legality, the propriety, the expediency
of their appointment are questions of state, not to be determined, nor even
agitated by us, in this Court. It is enough for us, if the law takes notice of
them when thus stationed; if it warrants their continuance; If it protects them
in their quarters. They were sent here by that authority, which our laws know;
they were quartered here, as I take it, agreeable to an act of the British
Parliament; they were ordered here, by your Sovereign, and mine. I expect
hereafter, to be more particular on this head.

Let me here take a method very common, with another order of men. Let me
remind you of what is not your duty.

Gentlemen, great pains have been taken by different men, with very different
views, to involve the character, the conduct and reputation of the town of
Boston, in the present issue. Boston and it is inhabitants have no more to do
with this cause, than you or any other members of the community. You are,
therefore, by no means to blend two things, so essentially different, as the
guilt or innocence of this town and the prisoners, together. The inhabitants of
Boston, by no rules of law* justice of common sense, can be supposed answerable
for the unjustifiable conduct of a few individuals hastily assembled in the
streets. Every populous city, in like circumstances, would be liable to similar
commotions, i^ not worse. No rational or honest man, will form any worse
opinion of this metropolis, for the transactions of that melancholy night. Who
can, who will, unnecessarily interest themselves, to justify the rude behavior
of a mixed and ungovernable multitude? May I not appeal to you, and all who have
heard this trial, thus far, that things already wear a different aspect from
what we have been, heretofore, taught to expect? Had any one told you some
weeks ago, that the evidence on the Crown-side, would have appeared in it is
present light, would you have believed it? Can any one think it his duty, to
espouse the part acted, by those assembled in King Street? -- I think not, but
lest my opinion should not have any weight, let me remind you of an author,
whom, I trust, and wish in the hands of all of you. One whom I trust you will
credit. I am sure you ought to love and rev^re him. I wish his sentiments were
engraven in indelible characters on your hearts. You will not suspect him of
being unfriendly to liberty; if this cause and it is event must, at all hazards,
be held as interwoven with a matter so foreign to it. I allude to the third
Letter of the FARMER of Pennsylvania to his countrymen.

The cause of liberty, says, that great and good writer, is a cause of too much
dignity, to be fullied by turbulence and tumult. It ought to be maintained in a
manner suitable to her nature. Those who engage in it, should breathe a sedate,
yet fervent spirit, animating them to actions of prudence, justice, modesty,
bravery, humanity, and magnanimity.

What has there transpired on this trial, savouring of any of these virtues?
Was it justice or humanity to attack, insult, ridicule and abuse a single
Sentinel on his post? Was it either modest, brave or magnanimous to rush upon
the points of fixed bayonets; and trifle, vapor, and provoke at the very
mouths of loaded muskets. It may be brutal rage, or wanton rashness, but not
surely any true magnanimity.

I hope, says the same eminent writer, my dear countrymen, that you will in
every colony be upon your guard against those, who AT ANY TIME endeavor to
stir you up, under pretenses of patriotism, to any measures DISRESPECTFUL to
your Sovereign and our mother country

By this it should seem, as though the Farmer never expected any period would
arrive, when such measures would be warrantable. Now what more disrespectful to
our parent country, than to treat with contempt a body of men stationed most
certainly by the consent of her supreme legislative, the parliament of Britain?
What more disrespectful of our common sovereign, than to assume the sword of
justice, and become the avengers of either public or private wrongs? Though the
soldiers, who appeared in the earlier part of the evening, in Cornhill, acted
like barbarians and savages, they had now retired, and were now confined in
their barracks: what though an impertinent boy had received unjustifiable
correction from the Sentinel; the boy, and the persons in Cornhill, must have
recourse only to the law for their redress. Courts of law are styled " ^indices
injuriarum," the avengers of injuries, and none others are to assume this
prerogative. The law erects itself as the supreme, dernier resort, in all
complaints of wrongs; and nothing could more essentially s^p our most important
interests, than any countenance to such dangerous encroachments on the domains
of municipal justice.

But finally, to finish with the justly celebrated Farmer -- Hot, rash,
disorderly proceedings, injure the reputation of a people as to wisdom, valor,
and virtue, without procuring the least benefit. Thus have you the sense of
this great authority with us. And let me ask all those, who have thought the
cause of their country connected with the agents of the assembly in
King Street, whether the proceedings of that unhappy night, were hot, rash, or
disorderly? If they were, have they not, in the opinion of this great friend of
liberty, injured our reputation, as to wisdom, valor, and virtue; and that
too, without procuring the least benefit? Who then would sacrifice his judgment
and his integrity, to vindicate such proceedings?

To what purposes the soldiers were sent; whether it was a step warranted by
sound policy or not, we shall not enquire; we are to consider the troops, not
as the instruments for wresting our rights, but as fellow citizens, who being
to be tried by a law, extending to every individual, claim a part in it is
benefits -- it is privileges -- it is mercy. We must steel ourselves against
passions, which contaminate the fountain of justice. We ought to recollect,
that our present decisions will be scanned, perhaps through all Europe. We must
not forget, that we ourselves will have a reflective hour -- an hour, in which
we shall view things through a different medium -- when the pulse will no
longer beat with the tumults of the day -- when the conscious pang of having
betrayed truth, justice, and integrity, shall bite like a serpent and sting
like an adder.

Consider, Gentlemen, the danger which you, and all of us are in, of being led
away by our affections and attachments. -- We have seen the blood of our fellow
men flowing in the streets. We have been told that this blood was wrongfully
shed. That is now the point in issue. But let it be borne deep upon our minds,
that the prisoners are to be condemned by the evidence here in Court produced
against them, and by nothing else. Matters heard or seen abroad, are to have no
weight: in general they undermine the pillars of justice and truth. It has been
our misfortune, that a system of evidence has appeared in the world against us.
It is not our business to blame any one for this. It is our misfortune, I say.
It should be remembered, that we were not present to cross examine: and the
danger which results from having this publication in the hands of those who are
to pass upon our lives, ought to be guarded against. We say we are innocent, by
our plea, and are not to be denounced guilty upon a new species of evidence,
unknown in the English system of criminal law.

But as though a series of ex part evidence was not enough, all the colors of
the canvass have been touched in order to freshen the wounds, and by a
transport of imagination, we are made present at the scene of action. The
prints exhibited in our houses have added wings to fancy, and in the fervor of
our zeal, reason is in hazard of being lost. For as was elegantly expressed, by
a learned Gentleman at the late trial, "The passions of man, nay his very
imaginations are contagious." The pomp of funeral, the horrors of death have
been so delineated, as to give a spring to our ideas, and inspire a glow
incompatible with sound, deliberative judgment. In this situation, every
passion has alternately been predominant. They have each in it is turn,
subsided, in degree, and they have sometimes given place to despondence, grief
and sorrow. How careful should we be, that we do not mistake the impressions of
gloom and melancholy, for the dictates of reason and truth. How careful, lest
borne away by a torrent of passion, we make shipwreck of conscience.

Perhaps, you may be told. Gentlemen, as I remember it was said, at the late
trial, that passions were like the flux and restux of the sea -- the highest
tides always producing the lowest ebbs. But let it be noticed, that the ^de, in
our political ocean, has yet never turned; certainly the current has never set
toward the opposite quarter. However similies may illustrate, they never go
for proof. -- Though I believe, that it will be found, that if the tide of
resentment has not risen of late, it has been because, it had reached the
summit. -- In the same mode of phraseology, if so homely an expression may be
used; perhaps, as the seam^n say, it has been high water slack -- but I am
satisfied the current has not as yet altered it is course, in favor of the
prisoners at the bar.

Many things yet exist sufficient to keep alive the glow of indignation. I have
aimed at securing you against the catching flame. I have endeavored to
discharge my duty, in this respect: -- What success will follow those
endeavors, depends on you, Gentlemen. If being told of your danger will not
produce caution, nothing will. If you ^e determined in opinion, it is in vain
to say more, but if you are zealous enquirers after truth; if you are willing
to hear with impartiality -- to examine and judge for yourselves -- enough has
been said to apprize you of those avenues, at which the enemies of truth and
justice are most likely to enter -- and most easily to beset you.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

I shall now, for argument's sake only, take it for granted, that the fact of
killing, had been proved upon all the prisoners: you are sensible this is not
really true; for as to this point, there are several of the prisoners upon whom
this fact is not fixed. But as I shall hereafter take occasion to consider the
distinct case of each prisoner, as he is affected by the evidence, I at present
choose to avoid confusion, and apply myself to the full strength of the crown;
and, upon a supposition, that all the prisoners were answerable for the act of
any one, see how the prisoners are chargeable, by the evidence already offered,
with the crime of Murder: -- or rather endeavor to point out to you those
facts, appearing by the evidence on the crown side, which will amount, in law,
to a justification, an excuse, or, at least, an extenuation of their offense.
-- For we say, that give the evidence for the king it is full scope and force,
and our offense is reduced, at least, to Manslaughter: in which case, we claim
the privilege of that law, by the sentence of which, if guilty, we must suffer
the pains of death: -- a privilege we can never again claim -- a privilege,
that by no means implies exemption from all punishment: the offender becomes
liable to imprisonment, for a year -- incurs a forfeiture of all goods and
chattels; and, till he receives the judgment of law, is to all intents a felon
-- subject to all the disabilities and other incidents of a selon. Without
taking up time, in attending and discussing points, no way pertinent to the
present issue; without a tedious recapitulation of circumstances, with which, I
take it, we have no more concern, than either of you, Gentlemen; I say passing
over all these matters as foreign to this trial: -- let us state evidence
appearing even from the crown witnesses.

These witnesses, (whose testimony I shall not consider in the order they were
produced) inform you, that in the former part of the evening a number of
soldiers rushed from some of the lanes near the Guard house, or as Col.
Marshall supposes, from the Guard house itself. But some circumstances he
relates, as to their dress, may render it doubtful, whether he is right in this
point. Soldiers on guard have a peculiar regimental habiliment, which they
never dare put off; and if I am rightly instructed, no soldiers, but those on
duty, are suffered to be at the Guard-house at those hours. However thus much
is certain, that being dressed in short jackets or working coa^s, proves them
not to be of that particular party who had mounted guard at this time.

The cry was "where are they -- damn them where are they!" They brandish their
weapons, and proceed to Cornhill. What those weapons were the witnesses say
differently. But it should be mentioned, as we go along, that the soldiers of
the twenty-ninth, are never allowed to wear swords or cutlasses.

As these soldiers pass down Cornhill, they assualt, abuse and attack people.
The soldiers in their turn are beaten. One has his wrist broke -- and the
general cry soon after was -- "they are beaten -- they are drove into the
barracks!"

Some part of this conduct may hereafter be accounted for, and other parts of
it may stand in a very different light. But we are ready to admit, that their
behavior was altogether unjustifiable -- for we don't look upon ourselves as
any way concerned in their conduct. -- Conduct which, if some of the witnesses
are not mistaken, seems more like that of madmen and barbarians, than like
reasonable creatures. If they acted like savages or ruffians, what is that to
us? This evidence, therefore not applying to this case, we are injured if it
has any influence to our prejudice. Being foreign to the issue, we humbly
conceive it ought never to have been introduced; -- or being introduced, it
ought to be rejected, in our determining the guilt or innocence of the
prisoners.

Mr. Josiah Quincy then proceeded to a minute detail of the crown evidence,
pointing out, as he went along, those circumstances that favored the
prisoners; and commenting chiefly on those facts, which served to refute or
invalidate the positions of the Council for the Crown; by showing an assult and
attack upon the Sentry. He then reviewed those parts of the evidence, which had
a tendency either to prove insult, abuse, or assault and battery of the party:
he pointed out the various quarters, from which all these, but especially the
assault and battery proceeded: and from the facts, time and circumstances
testified, inferred the attack to have been on various sides at the same
instant. From the noises, violence and rattling of the guns he drew other
consequences useful to his cause. From the inattention of some, and the
forgetfulness of others; from the tumult, fright, confusion and passions in the
scene, he made such deductions as might account for the contrariety and seeming
incompatibility of the evidence.

He next very particularly stated the Evidence for the prisoners, as he had
been instructed it would turn out on examination; and as he opened his
evidence, he carefully remarked its conformity to, and connection with, many
parts of that already exhibited by the Council for the King. -- He then called
the witnesses, who swore as follow.]

James Crawford, Truckman, sworn. Q. Did you observe on the evening of the 5th
of March last, any of the inhabitants armed, or any commotions in the streets
before the firing?


A. On the night of the 5th of March last, a little after dark, as I went home,
I met uncommon numbers of people with sticks; at Calef's corner there were more
than a dozen inhabitants. I met some also in Quaker-lane, and by Mr. Dalton's,
going toward King Street. I looked upon it to be more than what was common.
Their sticks looked not to be common walking canes, but pretty large cudgels.


Archibald Gooll, Merchant, sworn. Q Did you observe any such commotions at
that time?


A. Going over the Swing bridge, the evening of the 5th of March, I saw people
running from all corners, with sticks and instruments in their hands; I being a
stranger was afraid to go home; when I came to Faneuil hall I met with a young
man, he said he would conduct me home: as I came to Green's lane, I met great
numbers, twenty or thirty together, and the streets were as full of commotion
as ever I saw in my life.


Q. What sort of sticks were they that they had?


A Uncommon sticks, like what are pulled out of hedges.


Q. What part of the town was you in when you first noticed these commotions?


A. I was crossing the Swing bridge. This was before any bells rang.


Archibald Wilson, Merchant, sworn. Q Give the Court and Jury an account of the
transactions in Dock square, on the evening of the 5th March last?


A. On that evening I was in company with some gentlemen in Mr. William
Hunter's house near Dock square, a certain gentleman came in, and asked how we
came to be sitting there, so contented, when there was such trouble betwixt the
soldiers and inhabitants; this was betwixt 8 and 9 o'clock. Some of the company
went and looked out of the window at the foot of Exchange-lane; I came into the
Vendue-room and went to the balcony, there were so many in it I was afraid it
would fall down; I withdrew from thence and looked ^nt of the window; I saw a
great number of people assembled there before the bells rung; I saw a number of
people come from the north end; they made two or three ^dry attacks up that
lane where the barracks which are called Murray's, or Smith's batracks were.


Q. How we^ they armed that came from the North-end?


A. They had sticks or staves, I do not know what they are called.


Q. Was it a Moonlight night?


A. I do not remember seeing the Moon, but it was very light.


Q. Wat number of persons did you see in Dock square?


A. I cannot say, I judge there might be about two hundred in all; they left
the square and went three different ways, some up the main street, some up
Royal-exchange-lane, and some up the other lane; they gave two or three cheers
for the main guard; about the space of five or six minutes after the cheers I
withdrew from that house, and went up Royal-exchange-lane; and when I was about
the middle of the lane the guns went off. I turned, and came down the lane, and
went home.


Q. Did you hear the bells ring?


A. I heard the bells ring, but what time it was I do not know.


Q Was it before you went up the lane?


A. Yes.


Q. Did numbers cry for the main guard, or but one or two?


A. Numbers did. They also cried fire. I said it was very odd to come to put
out a fire with sticks and bludgeons.

William Hunter, Vendue-master, sworn. I was in my own house, and Mr. Wilson,
the former witness, with me; we heard a noise, and Mr. Michalson came in and
told us there was a disturbance amongst the inhabitants and soldiers; I went to
the Vendue balcony, and saw great numbers coming up from the North-end, with
large sticks in their hands, most of them I saw went in parcels up to the
barracks, and then came down in numbers. This they did several times, as they
gathered from the North end.


Q Were the bells ringing?


A I do not remember; a gentleman came up with a red cloak, they gathered round
him, and he stood in the middle of them, and they were all very quiet; he spoke
to them a little while, and then he went off, and they took off their hats, and
gave three cheers for the Main guard; they went up Royal-exchange-lane as fast
as they could went after them, and some of the company at my house went up the
lane also.


Q. Was the man who spoke to these people a tall or short man?


A. Pretty tall.


Q. How was he dressed?


A. He had a white wig and red cloak, and instantly after his talking a few
minutes to them, they made huzzas for the main guard.

David Mitchelson, Seal-engraver sworn. I am the person that came up stairs and
told the witness examined before me, that there was a disturbance in the
street. The whole I have to say is this. -- Coming home that evening from a
friends house in Fore-street, I called at a house in Union street. Turning the
corner of Fore-street, I heard a noise which drew my attention immediately, it
seemed to come from the Post Office, or thereabouts: Immediately I went to see
what the matter was. At the bottom of Royal Exchange lane, I asked a man that
was at a distance what the matter was? He said it was a squabble betwixt the
inhabitants and soldiers; I then stood at the bottom of the lane, I had not
stood long there, till I was obliged to go away, the party, engaged with the
soldiers, having been routed as I thought, came rushing down toward where I
stood. I went into Mr. Hunter's, found some gentlemen there; I told them they
were very q^ indeed, considering these was such a number of people in the
street. We went into the balcony and stood there, to see the transactions
below; and the only thing material I can recollect, that passed, was this: I
saw a pretty large number of people assembled together, drawn together, I
apprehended, by the noise of them that were first engaged with the soldiers. It
was proposed by severals of them, to call out fire! -- Fire was called several
times, and then the bells were set a ringing. This drew a great concourse of
people, not knowing but it was fire. -- The greatest part had sticks of various
sorts; they made several attempts to get up a lane leading to Murray's
barracks, but I suppose meeting with opposition there, they came down as if
they had been pursued. After making several such attempts, they assembled in
various little knots, with various leaders, I suppose every party had a leader.
I heard them propose, let us go up and attack the Main-Guard.


Q. Recollect the words as near as you can.


A. I cannot recollect the precise words, but they were to that very effect.
Some of them went up Royal-exchange-lane, part of them through the other lane
(called Boylston's- alley,) and part up Cornhill.


Q. Who led the party that went up Cornhill?


A. I cannot tell, it was not light enough, and the confusion together, I could
not tell which was leader, or which was follower.


Q Did the bells ring then?


A. Yes.


Q. What bells?


A. I do not know what bells they were.


Q. Did you notice if the largest party went up Cornhill?


A. Yes, they did. After they went from that place of the street which I could
see from the balcony, the street was then particularly clear of them, except
the people coming from Union-street and the other streets. Anxiety to know what
might happen in King Street, led me to take my hat and go to see: When I was
about half way up the lane, the guns were fired, and I saw the flashes of some
of them. I then turned and came down.


Q. How many people do you imagine were assembled in Dock-square, when the
greatest number was together?


A. I imagine two hundred.


Q. Did you see a man with a red cloak and white wig?


A. Yes, he made a considerable figure there?


Q. Was he in the attitude of speaking, and they of attention?


A. Yes.


Q. Could you hear what he said to them?


A. No, but after he had harrangued them about three minutes, they huzza'd for
the Main-Guard.


John Short, Merchant, sworn. Q. Give the Court and Jury an account of any
commotions you saw that evening.


A. The evening of the 5th March, after the nine o'clock bell had rung, I heard
the bells ring again, I supposed for fire, the people in the neighborhood
asked where it was! I said, I would go see; I went up as far as Faneuil Hall,
and to Mr. Jackson's shop, there were a number of people in Cornhill at the
time; I immediately came down again, and went on board an oyster-boat, staid
there about a quarter of an hour, and heard the guns go off.


Q Did you see any body at the Market, take out the feet and break the stalls?


A. No I did not.


Q. Did you see any collection of people there?


A. Yes, I asked what was the matter? I was told, a soldier had hurt an oyster
man.


Q. Did you see a number of people with any body at their head?


A. I did not.


Bejamin Davis, Merchant, sworn. Q. Give the Court and Jury an account of what
you saw that evening.


A. The evening of the 5th of March, I spent at the North End; a little after
nine I left the house to go home, I live in Green's lane, and my nearest way
lay through Dock square; I heard a number of people and great noises. I soon
found it was a quarrel, I stopped at the corner of Jenkins's- lane some time; I
saw the people collected close to Boylston's alley, I learned, that is was the
town's people and soldiers a quarreling, I plainly heard that the sound was
like people fighting with clubs. Two young men came up to me, and said, will
you go and help us to fight the soldiers? I said no, I do not intend to, one of
them had a cloak, and threw it off into my arms, and then said, if you will not
go, hold my cloak, and went away with the other, enquiring where were any clubs
or cordwood sticks, they hollowed fire! fire! And that collected a few people,
about one dozen or so, presently the little knots of people passed up the
passage way by the pump, and there was a general run down the street as fast as
they could run, I went into Mrs. Elliot's gate, and I saw seven, eight, or ten
soldiers run up the alley that leads from her house to King Street, they had
something in their hands, whether it was clubs or other weapons, I cannot tell;
whether the bells had begun to ring before that I cannot say, it was the
Brick-meeting bell I first heard; I staid in Mrs. Elliot's till the bells were
done ringing, I left the cloak with her.


Q. Which way were these nine or ten soldiers going?


A. They came down from the alley by the barracks, and run up Jenkins's alley
by Mrs. Elliot's house, I passed through this alley and went into King Street,
and saw some with buckets, the engine was in King Street, but nobody with it:
-- I went up by the north side of the Town house and they several knots of
people collected, some a^ Jackson (...) some by the Town House, and all round
in little (...) I went from one knot to another, to see if I could (...) what
the matter was, I walked to the south side of the Town House, and the next
thing I heard, was hazzaing in King street, and then these little knots that
were con^cted answered the huzza, and went down toward King street, I went by
the south side of the Townhouse, and stopped at Mr. Price's office and had an
opportunity of seeing what passed on the other side of the way. Col. Marshal I
think, must be mistaken in what he says relative to the shade of the moon's
being on the north side, for I remember well, I went to the south side of the
Townhouse, on purpose that I might be in the shade and see more clearly what
was doing on the opposite side of the way. I saw the Sentinel standing with his
back to the Custom-house door, and a number of people round him, boys and men.


Q. Was the Sentry in the shade?


A. No, I saw him very plain standing on the Custom-house steps, I heard a
considerable noise, the boys were laughing and saying fire! and why do you not
fire? I saw the Sentinel bring his piece upon a level as if to fire, and the
people gave back, and he put it up again. I found the numbers were increasing,
and, while I was standing there, two men without hats on, came up to the Main
Guard, and said, you must send assistance directly, or the Sentry will be
murdered, the officer I observed was quite a young officer, and there were a
number of soldiers standing with their watch coats on, whether they or any
soldiers went into the Main-Guard I cannot say, I heard very soon the word
given, " Guard," and bid take off their watch coats; there came out about
seven, I think their guns were not shouldered, but they had them in their right
hands, walked across the street, and took their stand near the Sentry-box, but
whether in a half moon or circle I cannot tell, the people crowded round them,
I heard a great deal of confused no^, a general confusion of noises, and there
I stood till the guns were fired.


Q. Did these men one of which gave you the cloak, go toward the Market?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you hear a noise like the breaking of the stalls?


A. No.


Shubal Hughes, Tallow-chandler, sworn. Q. Give the Court and Jury an account
of what you saw in the streets, on the 5th of March last?


A. That night I spent the evening with an acquaintance near the Town-a^ok,
sitting in the room, the master of the house came into the room, and said, fire
was cried, and the bells a ringing: as I belonged to the engine, I was the
first out of the door, with my surtout and stick, when I came out, I saw a man
running to where the Porters stand, I thought I should met our engine coming
down the lane or Cornhill, and when I came round by the Market, I saw a cross
the Market a number of people coming from the northward; I thought the fire was
out, and that it had been at the North end. I stopped by Col. Jackson's a
considerable time, at last somebody came along; I asked where is the fire, they
said there is no fire but a dispute betwixt the inbitants and soldiers by
Murray's barracks. I went up a little farther and saw nothing; I moved down
again and stopped where I had been before; the street was middling full, as
generally when fire is cried: at last I saw a number of young people get foul
of the stalls in the Market, pulling out the legs of them, I do not remember
whether I said any thing to them or not: I stayed there a while, I saw no
disturbance, nor heard no great noise; the man who was with me said, we have no
business with the soldiers nor with their disputes, and we returned to the
place we came from, and staid there till the guns were fired.


Q. Where did they come from that got foul of the stalls?


A. Some from the northward, and some by Hubbard's warehouse.


Q How many were of them?


A. Six or seven.


James Selkrig, Merchant, sworn. Q. Was you at Mr. Hunter's house, the 5th of
March last?


A. I was that evening there in company with some gentlemen, and to the best of
my remembrance betwixt eight and nine o'clock, some of the company said there
is some noise in the street; Mr. Hunter said it is an alley that there is noise
enough in very often. A gentleman soon after came in and said there is
something bad in the street, you had as good go and see what it is, three of
the company went to the balcony, I went to the window fronting the street. I
saw considerable numbers of people coming from the North-end, all armed, or the
greatest part of them, in the same manner, with white sticks. They made attacks
on the barracks, and were always drove back; always as a new fresh party came
from the north part of the town, they made a new attack, there were about five
or six different attacks made. In the middle of the street I saw a large man,
with a red cloak and white wigg, they gathered round him, and he spoke two or
three minutes, and they gave some different cheers for the Main-guard, and I
think for the Nec^; they said they would do for the soldiers; when they turned
round that corner where the stone store is, they beat the stone with their
weapons, and said they would do for the soldiers. Some went up Royal exchange
lane, some went up Jenkin's lane, and some by the Post office.


Q. How many people do you think there might be in the whole?


A. Betwixt two and three hundred.


Q. Were the bells a ringing?


A. I cannot tell, I saw them all go away, I came down and found the gentlemen
gone, I went into the alley and heard the first gun fired, I then went home,
and know no more of it.


Q. Was that expression, we will do for the soldiers, uttered by a number or by
a few?


A. By a great number, and they struck their weapons against Simpson's stone
store, as they said it.


Archibald Bowman, Auctioneer, sworn. Q. Was you at Mr. William Hunter's on the
evening of the 5th of March last?


A. Yes. That evening I was at his vendue-room, at the foot of the
Royal-exchange-lane, I heard some noise; I cannot say who came up; but a little
after dark there came up two gentlemen, who said there was a disturbance in the
street. I immediately went to the front window, some of the company into the
balcony, where I afterward went, I saw numbers of people hallowing fire, fire,
in different quarters. Numbers enquiring where the fire was; they gathered in a
large body; some went up by way of the Post Office, some went up the lane by
the pump, and some came down forcibly as if chased: they whistled through their
fingers and cried fire: Among the rest I observed a Gentleman with a red cloack
and white wigg, the crowd gathered round him, they staid a little while with
him, and then drew off and huzzaed for the Main-Guard, they then dispersed,
some went up Royal-exchange-lane, some went up Jenkin's alley, and some went up
Cornhill, I saw no more of them.


Q. How many people were there when they were talking with the gentleman?


A. I cannot say how many there were, there was a great number.


Q. Where did they stand?


A. They stood opposite Mr Lewis Deblois shop.


Q Did you see them strike with their sticks at Mr. Simpsons store?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear them say they would do for the soldiers?


A. No.


William Dixon, sworn. Q. Was you of the company at Mr. Hunter's?


A. Yes, I was there that evening; a gentleman came in and said there was a
disturbance in the street, I went down to the lower room, and went to the
balcony, and saw people going up that alley where the barracks are.


Q Did you hear the last witness examined, do you confirm all he mentioned?


A. No, not all of it, the people went up to the alley, and ran down quick as
if they had met with opposition, they stood about the pump, they increased from
the North end to pretty large numbers, they gathered together in a crowd
opposite to where I stood, and huzzaed for the Main guard.


Q. Are you certain they huzzaed for the Main guard?


A. I am certain of it, I went with one or two more into the lane, intending
for King street, when we heard the guns, I turned and went home.


John Gillespie, Merchant, sworn. Q Did you know of any disturbance or
commotion that evening?


A. On the evening of the 5th of March I went from my own house in
Queen Street, about seven o'clock, to spend the evening with some company at
Mr. Slyvester's at the South-end; in my way I met not less then fifty people,
with white sticks in their hands, in small parcels, and the company all
observed they met with numbers of people, and said they were apprehensive of
the consequences. Somebody came in and said there was fire, Mr. Fleeming said
he would send his man to see where the fire was, and desired us not to be
uneasy, for he had heard it was only to gather people to fight the soldiers, or
to this effect: I was uneasy however, and came away to go home. I met a good
many people with sticks, and bags, and some other things. I met Mr. Fleeming's
man coming back, and he said it was no fire, but the soldiers and inhabitants
fighting: I saw two engines, and the people putting their buckets and bags in
people's houses. I enquired where the fire was; I got the same answer, no fire,
but the soldiers and inhabitants fighting. I heard some say come let us go
back, others, said no by God we will go and help them. I saw Mr. Knight
standing at his own door, I stopped but very little time, left him and came to
the head of King Street. I heard somebody say damn them why do not they break
the glass. I imagined somebody had got into the Guard-house, and that they
wanted to break the glass to get them out. I went home, and in about ten
minutes, I heard the guns go off.


Q. Was it soldiers or inhabitants that wanted to break the glass?


A. It was the inhabitants.

Thomas Knight, Merchant, sworn. On the 5th of March I came up King Street soon
after the bells had rung for nine. I came by the Main-guard, saw the Sentinel
as usual, and saw no disturbance; I went home, took up the news-paper, and read
about half of an hour; by and bye I heard the bells ring, which I took for
fire. I run to the door, when I came there, the people were passing pretty
thick, some with buckets, some with bags, and numbers with sticks and clubs;
they said there was no fire, but some disturbance with the soldiers and
inhabitants; I returned into the room sometime, but feeling uneasy, I went to
the door again, and saw several companies of people pass, six or eight in a
company; one company consisting of eight or ten, had white sticks or clubs in
their hands; one of them hallowed out, damn their bloods lets go and attack the
Main guard, and knock them to hell first. There was one in the same company
made a stop, and either said I will go back and get my gun, or let us go back
and get our guns, I cannot tell which.


Q. Was this before the firing?


A. Yes, this stopped my curiosity from going to King Street. I thought it was
best to stay in the house. I shut the door and went in; I told my wife if she
heard any firing not to be afraid, for I was apprehensive there would be blood
shed from what I had heard. I tarried about two or three minutes in the room; I
felt very uneasy, and walked to the door again, and being there about a minute
or two, I heard one gun fired, in about two seconds I heard another, and so on
till five, six or seven were discharged. It was all in about twelve or fourteen
seconds at the fartherst.


John Coekson, Trader, sworn. Q Was you at the Green Dragon, on the evening of
the 5th of March, in company with some gentlemen there?


A. Yes.


Q. What observation was made on the ringing of the bells, by any of the
company?


A. Some one in the room said it was not fire, but a rumpus.


Q. Did any particular person of that company there, say it is no fire but a
rumpus with the soldiers, and I am prepared for them, and immediately take a
pistol or pair of pistols out of his pocket?


A. Some one observed there was a rumpus, but I saw no pistol.


William Strong, Clerk in the Custom-House, sworn. Q Was you in King street on
the evening of the 5th of March last?


A. On the evening of the 5th of March I was at Mr. Marstons, several of us
were standing by the fire: we heard the cry of fire, some said we will go out
and see where the fire is. I went and I saw several people running to and fro,
I asked what the matter was, they said a soldier had killed a boy. I was
answered in that manner by another; some people said we will go back again and
get our sticks: I did not see any number of people, but a few running up to
King Street, one of them struck the ground with his stick and shivered it. I
then went into King street and was coming away again, when I heard a huzza and
a number of feet behind me, and I stood to let them pass; there might be about
ninety; they run up King Street huzzaing. I walked after them, when they came
opposite the Custom house, they stopped, and some said that is the fellow that
used the inhabitants ill; another contradicted them and said it was not him;
upon that the people encroached on the Sentinel; I was in the midst of the
people, and he retreated back and they went forward, at last I saw him go on
the steps of the Custom house, and they went closer, and he set his back to the
door and loaded. I heard the ball go down distinctly.


Q. How many people were there then?


A. About ninety or more.


Q. Were they boys?


A. The generality of them were young men. He presented his gun, and said keep
of or I will fire upon you; the reply was, fire, God damn you fire, fire and be
damned. I went about fifteen yards below, there was a man standing by me, he
had the butt end of a bat in his hand, and said he would throw it at the
Sentinel, I said do not, for he will fire at whatever place it comes from.
Whether he threw it or not I do not know, for I left him and went to Mr.
Sherwin's door. I was saying it was imprudent to attack a Sentinel on his post,
somebody said he was disarmed; I thought so too, for I saw the glittering of
arms; I walked to the Custom house steps, curiosity led me to see if they were
so prudent as to fasten the Custom-house door; I tried the latch, and it was
fast; a fellow said to one of the soldiers, damn you why do you turn your
bayonet this way, turn it the other way. I thought I was not safe there, but
went to my old place, and stood there a few minutes; I thought I heard two guns
cock, immediately I heard one go off, soon after another, and I think four
more. I think six in all. The people said where I was standing, they fired
nothing but powder. I thought to go up to an acquaintance's house, and went in
the middle of the street, and coming opposite to the soldiers, I saw two men
lay, one on the right and one on the left, on their backs; I concluded they
were dead.


Q. Did you see any thing hit the Sentinel?


A. I believe there were snow balls thrown, but they fell short of him.


Q. These people that were round the Sentiel, had they clubs?


A. Yes, some of them.


FIVE o'Clock P. M. the Court adjourned till next morning, Friday, nine
o'clock. Friday, NINE o'Clock, the Court met according to adjournment, and
proceeded. Doctor Richard Hirons, sworn. Q. Do you know any thing of the
proceedings at Murray's barracks on the evening of the 5th March last, previous
to the firing in King Street.


A. I live opposite the barrack-house, and was at home that evening. A little
after eight I heard a noise and disturbance in the street, I went out to know
what it was, and was told there was a difference between the towns people and
soldiers. I saw several soldiers pass and repass, some with bayonets, some with
clubs and one thing and another. I stood at my own door; I observed the noise
seemed to come from toward the market; I saw a number of people running to and
fro across the bottom of the street. I shut my door and went in about eight or
ten minutes. I heard a noise like a single person running through Boylston's
alley with great violence; he ran as I took it toward the barrack gate, and
cried out, town born turn out, town born turn out, then turned to the side of
the lane, and said town born turn out, town born turn out. I heard this
repeated twenty or thirty times, I believe, it was the constant cry. I remember
after coming out the second time, to hear the voice of a person which I took to
be Ensign Maul, say, who is this fellow, lay hold of him. I did not hear a word
pass betwixt the people that passed backwards and forwards, and the Sentinel at
the barrack gate, nor from the Sentinel to them; this cry of town born turn
out, was repeated for seven or eight mintes, when I heard the voice of a great
many more.


Q Were they soldiers?


A. I do not know, they might be soldiers; from the first of that cry it might
be a quarter of an hour or more, they seemed to retreat and come on again, and
struck their sticks very hard against the corner of the house. The collection
of such a number, with the noise of the clubs, induced me to lock my door, put
out my light in the fore part of my house, and to go up stairs into the chamber
fronting the barracks; when there, I observed four or five officers of the
29th, standing on their own steps, and there might be betwixt twenty or thirty
of the town's people surrounding the steps. About that time came a little man,
who he was I do not know; he said, why do you not keep your soldiers in their
barracks, they said they had done every thing they possibly could, and would do
every thing in their power, to keep them in their barracks, on which he said,
are the inhabitants to be knocked down in the street, are they to be murdered
in this manner; the officers still insisted they had done their utmost, and
would do it, to keep the soldiers in their barracks; the same person then said,
you know the country has been used ill, you know the town has been used ill, we
did not send for you, we will not have you here, we will get rid of you, or we
will drive you away; which of the last expressions I cannot say, but it was one
or the other: the officers still insisted they had done their utmost, and would
do it, to keep the soldiers in their barracks, and begged the person to use his
interest to disperse the people, that no mischief might happen; whether he did
address the people or not, I cannot say, for the confusion was so great I could
not distinguish.


Q. How was that man dressed?


A. He was a little man, I think in a surtout; immediately the cry of home,
home, was mentioned; I don't recollect seeing any person go away at the first
cry, and there was such confusion I could not tell what was said, but in five
minutes afterward the cry home, home, was repeated, on which the greatest part
of them, possibly two thirds, went up Boylston's alley toward the Townhouse,
huzzaing for the Main Guard,


Q. What number were there?


A. A considerable number. I then observed more of the towns people come from
toward the Market; there was a good deal of squabble and noise betwixt the
people and the officers, but what was said I could not bear. The next thing I
recollect in the affair was, a little boy came down the alley, clapping his
hand to his head, and cried he was killed, he was killed; on which one of the
officers took hold of him, and damned him for a little rascal, asking him what
business he had out of doors; the boy seemed to be about seven or eight year
old. Some little time after that, I saw a soldier come out of the barrack gate
with his musket, he went directly facing the alley, in the middle of the
street, and kneeled down on one knee, and said now damn your bloods, I will
make a lane through you all; while he was presenting, Mr. Maul an Ensign, with
either Mr. Dixon or Mr. Minchin, I do not know which, came after him,
immediately laid hold of him, and took the musket from him, shoved him toward
the barrack, and I think gave him the musket again, and charged him at his
peril to come out again. I do not recollect any discourse that passed between
the towns people and officers, there was still such clamor and confusion, that
I could not hear what passed; but in a little time either the soldier who came
out before, or another, came out again, he repeated much the same words as the
other, he had his gun in his hand, he did not offer to kneel down, but used the
same expressions.


Q. Did he present his firelock?


A. He was presenting when Mr. Maul knocked him down, took his muskuet from
him, drove him into the baracks, and I think the barrack gate was then shut;
about this time I recollect I heard Dr. Cooper's bell ring, I heard some
officer say, go and stop that bell from ringing, whether any body went or not,
I cannot say, but it did not ring a great while: About this time I saw Capt.
Goldfinch of the fourteenth, on the steps with the officers of the
twenty-ninth; there came up another little man, who he was I do not know, but
in a much different manner from what the other did.


Q. How was he dressed?


A. He had on a great coat or surtout of a light brown, he requested the
soldiers might be kept in their barracks, and that the officers would do every
thing in their power to keep them there, the officers said, they had, and would
do so; and as the soldiers were in their barracks, begged the people might go
away; this little man said to the people, gentlemen, you hear what the officers
say, that the soldiers are all in their barracks, and you had better go home;
on which the cry was, home, home, home.


Q. Do you suppose this was after you heard the bell ring?


A. Yes: on which a great many went up the alley again, and I heard the
expression, Let us go to the Main-Guard: Capt. Goldfinch was still on the
steps, and I heard his voice still talking, and I think he desired every person
would go away; while he was talking, I heard the report of a musket.


Q. How long was that after the cry of home, home.


A. It was not many minutes; in a few seconds I heard the report of a second
gun, presently after that a third; upon the firing of the first gun, I heard
Capt. Goldfinch say, I thought it would come to this, it is time for me to go.
-- I then saw a soldier come down the alley from Cornhill, and went up to the
steps where the officers stood, and said, they fired from or upon the Main
guard. I then heard the drum at the Main-Guard beat to arms, I came down stairs
and did not go out till I was sent for to some of the wounded people.


Q At the time when the first soldier came out, were there a body of people in
the street before the barracks?


A. There were some, but I suppose the most part were in the alley, there were
several about the meeting house.


Q. Did they say or do any thing to the soldiers who came out with their
muskets?


A. The officers immediately took hold of them and turned them in.


Q You was sent for to Maverick?


A. Yes.


Q Did he say any thing to you?


A. Yes, about two hours before his death, I asked him concerning the affair,
he went he said up the lane, and just as he got to the corner, he heard a gun,
he did not retreat back, but went to the Townhouse, as he was going along, he
was shot: It seems strange by the direction of the ball, how he could be killed
by the firing at the Custom-House; it wounded a portion of the liver, stomach
and intestines, and lodged betwixt the lower ribs, where I cut it out, the ball
must have struck some wall or something else, before it struck him.


Q. Where did he say he was when he was wounded?


A. He was betwixt Royal exchange-lane and the Townhouse, going up toward the
Town house.


Captain John Goldfinch, sworn. Q. Was you at Murray's barracks that evening?


A. The 5th of March, about nine in the evening, I was passing over Cornhill, I
saw a number collected by the passage to the barracks, I went toward it and
two or three people called me by name, and begged me to endeavor to send the
soldiers to their barracks, or else there would be murder, with difficulty I
got to the entrance of the passage, the people were pelting the soldiers with
snow-balls, the soldiers were defending themselves at the entrance.


Q. Had the soldiers cutlasses?


A. No by no means, I think one of them had a fire-shovel, as soon as the
soldiers knew me, they with my persuasion went to the bottom of the passage,
when I got there, I saw some officers of the twenty-ninth, I told those
officers I suspected there would be a riot, and as I was the oldest officer I
ordered the men to the barracks, and they were immediately confined; the mob
followed me and came to the gate of the barracks, and abused the men very much
indeed, with bad language, so that the men must have been enraged very much,
but by the vigilence and activity of the officers, the men were kept within
bounds; the mob still insulted the men, dared them to come out, called them a
pack of scoundrels, that dared not come out to fight them, and it was with
difficulty they were kept in their barracks, I never heard such abuse in my
life, from one man to another. A little man came up and spoke to the people,
and desired them to go home, as they saw the officers used their best
endeavors to keep the men in their barracks; immediately the best part made
toward the passage to Cornhill, I suppose a body of about forty or fifty
people. I thought it necessary to stay some time to assist the officers in
keeping the men in their barracks, in a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes
after the people had moved off, I heard some guns fire, and the Main-Guard drum
beat to arms; I told Mr. Dixon it was necessary for me to move off, to join my
own regiment. The same evening, about half an hour before this affair happened,
I was in King Street, and was accosted by a barber's boy, who said, there goes
the fellow who has not paid my master for dressing his hair, fortunately for
me, I had his receipt in my pocket, the Sentinel said, he is a gentleman, and
if he owes you any thing he will pay it: I passed on without taking any notice
of what the boy said.

Benjamin Davis, jun. son to Mr. Davis a former witness sworn. On the evening
of the 5th March last, near the bottom of Royal exchange-lane, I saw a mob by
Mr. Greenleaf's, I went right along into King street, I saw the Sentinel; a
barber's boy was there crying, and said the Sentry had struck him, and asked
him what business he had to do it: I went home and staid at the gate in Green's
lane some time, Samuel Gray (one of the persons killed that night in
King Street) came along, and asked where the fire was? I said there was no
fire, it was the soldiers fighting, he said, damn it, I am glad of it, I will
knock some of them on the head; he ran off, I said to him, take heed you do not
get killed in the astray yourself, he said, do not you fear, damn their bloods.


Q. Had he a stick in his hand?


A. He had one under his arm.


Q. What sort of a stick was it?


A. I did not take notice.


Q. How long was this before the firing?


A. I do not suppose he could have got into King Street two minutes before the
firing.


James Thompson, sworn. Q. What did you hear or see passing through Quaker-lane
or Green's lane, on the 5th of March last in the evening!


A. I came out of the Green Dragon tavern about nine o'clock, I went up to
King Street, I heard no noise, nor saw any person, I went through Quaker lane
into Green's lane, had a person with me hand in hand, I met about fifteen
persons walking on different sides of the street, and they had sticks in their
hands.


Q. What sort of sticks were they?


A. They seemed to be pretty large sticks, rather too large for walking-sticks,
just as they passed, I turned about and heard them say, we are rather too soon,
I passed on and went on board a vessel at Grissin's wharf, when I came on
board, I said to the people, I believed there would be mischief that night, for
I had met several people armed with sticks, and what the consequences would be
I did not know, for they seemed to be after something; just as I spoke, we
heard the bells ring, and some said it could not be the usual bell for nine
o'clock, they had heard that ring before, they all went on deck, and hearing a
noise and cry of fire, together with the bells, every person went off and left
me alone.


Q. How many people were on board the vessel?


A. Four went away; I went aloft to see where the fire was, I heard the engines
going along the street and then stop, I heard Mrs. Marston who keeps tavern at
the head of the wharf, say, Good God! this is not fire, there will be murder
committed this night; a little after I heard a huzzaing and guns go off in King
street, I think seven.


Q. Did you count them?


A. Yes, I think there were seven, I think there were no more; I remained there
till a person came down the wharf, and I asked him what was the matter? He told
me there were some people killed in King Street.

Alexander Cruckshanks, Jeweller, sworn. On the 5th of March, I was in Royal
exchange lane, as the clock struck nine I came up the lane, and at the head of
the lane hearing some abusive language by two boys, I stoped at Stone's tavern,
they were abusing the Sentinel; before the box stood about twelve or fourteen
lads, I often saw the boys go toward them and back to the Sentinel with a
fresh repetition of oaths, they said to him, damn you, you son of a bitch,
called him lobster and rascal, wished he was in hell's flames, often and often
lowly rascal; I neither heard, nor saw the Sentinel do any thing to them, only
said it was his post, and he would maintain it, and if they offered to molest
him, he would run them through, upon his saying this, two boys made up some
snow balls, and threw them at the Sentinel.


Q. Did they hit him?


A. I cannot say, but on their throwing snow balls, the Sentinel called out
guard, guard, two or three times.


Q Did he call loud?


A. Yes, very loud, upon that, there were some soldiers came from toward the
Main Guard, seven or eight I believe, they were not of the guard by their
having surtout coats on, they came toward the Sentinel, some had bayonets,
some swords, others sticks in their hands, one had a large kitching tongs in
his hand, on their approach, these people and the boys who stood before the box
went up to the back of the Town House by the barber's shop; I then crossed
King Street and intended to go in by Pudd^ng lane, and I heard a noise in the
Main-street, three or four of these soldiers came down to me, and damned me,
and asked who I was, I said, I was going home peaceably, and interfered with
neither one side or another, one of them with a bayonet or sword gave me a
light stroke over my shoulder, and said, friend you had better go home, for by
all I can foresee, there will be the devil to pay or blood shed this night:
they turned and went toward the Sentinel at the Custom House.


Q. Did you know these soldiers?


A. I did not; I then, instead of going by Pudding-lane, went up by the Guard
house, and when I had passed it a little way, I saw the soldiers who went down
before the Custom house returning back, with a mob before them, driving them up
past the Guard house. I stepped on pretty quick and endeavored to get into Mr.
Jones shop the Apothecary:


Q. What number of people were there before the soldiers?


A. Sixteen or eighteen.


Q. Were they men or boys?


A. Some of them were boys, but the most of them were men from twenty to five
and twenty years of age I believe; Jones's people shut the door and would not
let me in; I went to the side of the Brick-meeting, and saw two or three boys
or lads, pushing at the windows to get in and ring the bell. I went home.


Q. Did you take the stroke you received from the soldier to be in anger?


A. No, it was not in anger, it was very light.


Q. Did you hear a noise in the street at that time?


A. Yes, I heard a great deal of noise, I took it to be about Queen Street, and
toward the Post^ office.

Lieutenant William Carter, sworn. On the evening of the 5th of March I was at
my lodgings in Blind lane at the south part of the town, I heard a bell ring,
which I took at first for nine o'clock, but recollecting I had heard the best
ring for nine before, I thought it must be for fire. I went to the top of the
house but could see no fire; hearing by this time several bells ring, I came
down and found the family at the gate; I asked what the matter was, I was
answered, there was a riot in King Street. I saw several men pass, not in a
body, but in two's and singly; they walked faster than people generally do on
business, they went up Hogg-lane; I observed that not a man passed but what had
either a club, sword, hanger, cutlass, or gun; as I had reason to believe
people in a military character were not agreeable, I went in and ordered my
servant not to go out. I went a second time to the gate, and saw more men
passing by in the same manner as before; presently after that, I heard the
report of several guns. I heard the drum beat to arms, which I knew to be
customary when a riot happens, but as the drum come nearer, I discovered a
peculiarity in the beating, which made me imagine it was not a regular drum. I
did not go from my lodgings that night.

Patrick Keaton, sworn. On the evening of the 5th of March I was at my
lodgings, I heard a noise, and went out toward Union-street, and saw people
coming from the North-end, with sticks and clubs in their hands; it was about
nine o'clock. I followed them to Dock-square, somebody asked what was the
matter, he was answered, that a boy and soldier had been foul of one another;
they hallowed King Street; I went up to the foot of Jenkin's lane, and there I
saw a tall Molatto fellow, the same that was killed, he had two clubs in his
hand, and he said, here take one of them, I did so.


Q. What sort of clubs were they?


A. They were cord wood sticks; I went up to the head of the lane, and I dropped
the stick in the snow; he went on cursing and swearing at the soldiers, down
toward where the people surrounded the soldiers; I stood by the stone steps at
the Custom-house, there were people coming from all parts, calling out bloody
back, and one thing and another; I could not distinguish what one half of them
said; I had not been long there 'till three or four guns went off, and I went
home.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the soldiers?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body strike upon their guns?


A. No, but I heard the soldiers say keep off, keep off.


Q. What number of people was there in Dock square?


A. About two hundred.


Q. Did you hear any body say kill them, kill them, knock them over?


A. No.


Q. Did the people appear to be pressing o^ the party?


A. Yes, they were as I thought.

William Davis, Serjeant-major of the 14th Regime^, sworn. Monday evening the
5th of March, about eight o'clock, I was going toward the North-end in
Fore-street, near Wentworth's wharff, I saw a number of people in the street
before me.


Q. What number?


A. About two hundred, I then stepped aside, and when they came up, I saw several
armed with clubs, and large sticks, and some had guns; they came down regularly
in two's and three's a breast; they were a minute in passing me.


Q. Were they soldiers that had guns?


A. No, I saw no soldier in the street; I heard them saying damn the dogs knock
them down, we will knock down the first officer, or bloody backed rascal we
shall meet this night; some of them then said they would go to the southward,
and join some of their friends there, and attack the damned scoundrels, and
drive them out of the town, for they had no business here. Apprehending danger
if I should be in my regimentals, I went into a house at the North end and
changed my dress, and in my return from the North-end, about nine, coming near
Dock square, I heard a great noise a whistling and rattling of wood; I came
near the Market place, and saw a great number of people there, knocking against
the posts, and tearing up the stalls, saying damn the lobsters, where are they
now; I heard several voices, some said let us kill that damned scoundrel of a
Sentry, and then attack the Main-guard; some said, let us go to Smith's
barracks, others said let us go to the rope-walks; they divided: -- The largest
number went up Royal-exchange-lane, and another party up Fitch's alley, and the
rest through the main street, up Cornhill. I passed by the Golden-Ball, I saw
no person there but a woman, persuading a man to stay at home; he said he would
not, he would go amongst them, if he lost his life by it. I went into
King Street, looking toward the Custom house, I saw a number of people
seemingly in great commotion; I went toward my barracks, and near the fish
stall at Oliver's dock, I met a great number of people coming toward King
street, with clubs and large sticks.


Q. What time was this?


A. It was past nine, for I heard bells ring before. One of them was loading
his piece by Oliver's dock, he said he would do for some of these scoundrels
that night. The people were using threats against the soldiers and
Commissioners, damn the scoundrels and villains of soldiers and Commissioners,
and damn the villain that first sent them to Boston, they shall not be here two
nights longer. I went to my barracks; the roll had been called, and there was
not a man absent, except some officers that quartered in the town, and their
servants. Immediately after I heard as it were a gun fired in King Street, and
afterward two or three more.

Nathaniel Russel, Chairmaker, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March, betwixt
nine and ten o'clock, I was at my own house and heard the bells ring, I run out
to know where the fire was; I got from Byles's meeting down to the South
meeting; I saw a number of men and boys armed with clubs, and fifteen or twenty
more coming along, some were damning the soldiers that they would destroy them,
and sink them, and they would have revenge for something or other I could not
tell what, that they would drive ^m before them: some of the people there said
they had been to Rowe's barracks, and had driven the soldiers or the Sentinel
into the barracks. I went to the Townhouse, there I saw Mr. Cox; I saw a
number of people with clubs; I saw at a distance, a parcel of soldiers at the
Custom house; I went down to the right of them, where Capt Preston stood; I had
not been there a minute before the guns were fi^ed, previous to which, I saw
several things but don't know what they were, thrown at the soldiers, as they
stood in a circle by the Custom house. I was at the west of the soldiers; I was
looking over the Molatto's shoulder: I saw Samuel Cray there. Upon these things
being thrown, I intended to retreat as fast as I could; I had not got three
yards before the guns were fired, first one, then another, and so on, I think
there were seven in all.


Q Before you turned, did you see any thing strike the guns?


A. I did not see, but I heard something strike, and the guns clatter. There
was a great noise, the cry was fire, damn you fire.


Q. Was the cry general?


A. Yes, it was general.


Q. How many people do you imagine were then gathered round the party?


A. Fifty or sixty able bodied men.


Q. Did they crowd near the soldiers?


A. So near, that I think you could not get your hat betwixt them and the
bayonets.


Q. How many people do you think there might be in the whole?


A. About two hundred.


Q. Did the soldiers say any thing to the people?


A. They never opened their lips; they stood in a trembling manner, as if they
expected nothing but death. They fired first on the right. I was looking on the
whole body, no one between me and the soldiers that interrupted my sight; I saw
no blows given, or any of the soldiers fall.


Q. Might not their trembling proceed from rage as well as fear?


A. It might proceed from both.

John Cox, Brick layer, sworn. Note. This witness was called on the part of the
Crown, if invalidate the testimony of Russel the former witness.


Q. Did you come down from the South end with Mr. Russel?


A. No, I met him at the Townhouse. I saw three soldiers, two belonging to the
Neck, and one to the MainGuard, by Liberty tree, I was at Mr. Gore's shop
opposite the Tree; one said to the other, bring half your guard, and we will
bring half ours, and we will blow up this damned pole; I said, so sure as you
offer ye scound^els to blow up that pole, you will have your brains blown out.


Q. How were these soldiers dressed?


A. In their regimentals, one was a drummer.


Q. Was he a black man?


A. No, he was a white man.

Henry Knox, Stationer, sworn. I was at the North-end, and heard the bells
ring, I thought it was fire; I came up as usual to go to the fire; I heard it
was not fire, but the soldiers and inhabitants were fighting; I came by
Cornhill, and there were a number of people an hundred and fifty, or two
hundred; I asked them what was the matter, they said a number of soldiers had
been out with bayonets and cutlasses, and had attacked and cut the people all
down Cornhill, and then retreated to their barracks; a fellow said they had
been cutting fore and aft. The people fell gradually down to Dock-square. I
came up Cornhill, and went down King street, I saw the Seninel at the
Custom-house steps loading his piece; coming up to the people, they said the
Sentinel was going to fire.


Q. How many persons were there at that time round the Sentinel?


A. About fifteen or twenty, he was waving his piece about, and held it in the
position that they call charged bayonets. I told him if he fired he must die
for it, he said damn them, if they molested him he would fire; the boys were
hallowing fire and be damned.


Q. How old were these boys?


A. Seventeen or eighteen years old. I endeavored to keep one fellow off from
the Sentinel, I either struck him or pushed him away.


Q. Did you hear one of the persons say, God damn him, we will knock him down
for snapping?


A. Yes, I did hear a young fellow, one Usher, about eighteen years of age say
this.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the Sentinel?


A. No, nothing at all.


Q. Did you see the party come down?


A. Yes.


Q. What was the manner of their coming down?


A. They came down in a kind of a trot, or a very fast walk.


Q. Did they come down in a threatening posture?


A. Very threatening, at least their countenances looked so, they said make
way, damn you make way, and they pricked some of the people.


Q. Did you see the Corporal?


A. I saw a person with the party, whom I took to be the Corporal.


Q. Had he a surtout on?


A. Yes, he had.

John Bulkely, Clerk to Mr. Josiah Quincey, sworn. Hearing the bells ring I
went out, and imagined it had been for fire, but found I was mistaken. I went
to Mr. Quincy's office near the Main Guard, there was a prodigious noise in
King Street. I apprehended the Sentinel was in danger, and stood in expectation
of seeing the guard turned out. Capt. Preston was before the office, and
appeared in a great flutter of spirit. I knew not he was Captain of the day. A
very young officer commanded the guard, I pitied his situation.


Q. What induced you to believe the guard would be turned out?


A. By the Sentinel's being surrounded, and the noise.


Q. What number was about him?


A. About fifty or sixty.


Q. Did you stand in the shade, or was the shade on the other side of the way?


A. I did stand in the shade. A person came to Capt. Preston and said they were
killing the Sentinel; Capt. Preston said damn you why do you not turn out; he
spoke roughly to them, then some soldiers came out, and he and they went down
to the Custom-house.


Q. Do you know who it was came up to Capt. Preston?


A. No.


Q. Did you expect they would carry off the Sentinel?


A. I did not know what would be the consequence, I thought if he came off with
his life he would do very well.

Benjamin Lee, an Apprentice, sworn. On the 5th of March there were four of us
in a house together, I heard that there was fire; I went to Dock square, when I
came there I heard some in the crowd say, that the towns people had been
fighting with the soldiers, and then they huzzaed for King Street.


Q. How many people were there in Dock-square at that time?


A. Between fifty and sixty. I went up Royal exchange-lane and came to the
Custom house.


Q. Did you go alone?


A. No, several went up beside me, they went up as thick as they could, and
some went up the next lane, and some went up Cornhill. As I stood by the
Sentinel, there was a barber's boy came up and pointed to the Sentinel, and
said there is the son of a bitch that knocked me down; on his saving this, the
people immediately cried out kill him, kill him, knock him down.


Q. What number of people was there then?


A. I cannot tell, I believe there were as many as in this Court, some boys,
some men; the Sentinel went up the Custom house steps and knocked at the door
with the butt of his gun, but could not get in; then he primed and loaded, and
levelled it with his hip, and desired the people to stand off, and then called
to the Main-Guard to come down to his assistance.


Q. Did he call loud?


A. Yes, pretty loud.


Q. What was the expression he used?


A. Turn out Main-Guard. -- Then Capt. Preston and nine or ten soldiers came
down, and ranged themselves before the Sentry-box.


Q Had these people that stood round the Sentinel clo^ or sticks?


A. I saw no clubs, some had sticks, such as people generally walk with.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the Sentinel?


A. No


Q Did you hear the people hollow or shout?


A. They whistled with their fingers and huzzaed.


John Frost, an Apprentice, sworn. Q Did you meet some boys that evening, who
said they had drove some soldiers to their barracks?


A. In Dock square some people said so, and huzzaed for King Street. I went up
there, and saw a barber's boy, who said this is the son of a bitch that knocked
me down; the people crowded in upon the Sentinel, and he drew back to the
Custom house steps.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the Sentinel.


A. No, he knocked at the Custom house door with the butt end of his gun, as I
thought to get in, and then I saw him prime and load his piece, and level it
with his hip.


Q Were they pressing on him?


A. Yes they were, they said fire, damn you fire, you dare not fire.


Q. How many people were there?


A. About fifty or sixty young men and boys.


Q. How old were these young men?


A. About twenty or twenty two.


Q. What do you call boys?


A. Such as myself, about eighteen.

William Botson, an Apprentice, sworn. I was at the Market and went up
Royal Exchange lane, I saw no soldier but one, and he was the Sentinel, he got
on the steps and loaded, by and by I saw a party come down from the Main-guard,
and all that stood round cried fire! fire! -- by and by they did fire, as soon
as I saw a man drop, I went away.


Q. Did you see any ice thrown at the soldiers?


A. I saw snow balls, but no ice.


Q. Did you see any thing strike upon their guns?


A. No.


Q. Did you hear their guns rattle?


A. No, I saw snow balls thrown both at the Sentinel and at the party.


Q. Did you see any clubs thrown?


A. No.


Q. What number of people were there about the Sentinel?


A. Near two hundred boys and men.


Q. Was the Custom-House door opened?


A. Not that I minded, they hollowed fire! fire! you dogs.


Q. Was any considerable number of snow balls thrown at the Sentinel?


A. A dozen before the party came down.


Q. And when they came down, did they throw?


A. Yes, as fast as ever.


Q. Did you hear any huzzaing?


A. Not in particular.

James Waddel, Mariner, sworn. On the 5th March I was in King Street at the
Main-Guard, I saw the soldiers going down to the Custom house, I saw the
soldiers very much molested by the people of the town throwing snow balls,
sticks, and more rubbish than I can mention, I saw also the Sentinel molested
at the Custom-house door; when the party came down, he fell in amongst the rest
of the soldiers; I saw a soldier knocked down, but who he was I cannot tell.


Q. Where did you stand?


A. Betwixt the soldiers and the Sentry-box.


Q. Do you know who knocked the soldier down?


A. No, I do not, I am not certain whether it was a stick that struck him down,
or a brick bat.


Q. Did his firelock fly out of his hand?


A. Yes, the firelock flew out of his hand, and he took it up again and fired,
and I think he was the first that fired.


Q. Which way did the stick or bick batt come that knocked him down?


A. It came as if thrown from toward the Townhouse.


Q. How near did the people stand to the soldiers, when the first gun was fired?


A. The mighest might be about ten or a dozen yards from the soldiers.


Q. When you stood there, did you see any one strike at any soldier with a
stick in his hand?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any of the prisoners there that night?


A. Yes, I saw Hartegan, I was acquainted with him in Halifax, and I kept my
eye upon him more than upon any of the rest.


Q. Whereabout did he stand?


A. I came up the Royal-exchange-lane, and he was then the nearest man to me.


Q. How many guns did you hear fired?


A. I believe about seven.

Daniel Cornwall, Barber, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March I was in
Milk-street, I heard the bells ring, and ran down to the Townhouse, I saw
diverse of the inhabitants there, I enquired the reason of the bells ringing? A
young man told me, a rascally soldier had struck one of the inhabitants with a
cutlass, I replied, where is the damned villain gone? He gave me no answer,
presently they turned round and gave two or three cheers.


Q. How many people were there?


A. About thirty or forty: They went to the alley leading to Murray's barracks,
some were for going down the alley, some were not, I staid at the head of the
alley, presently they went to the bottom of Royal-exchange-lane, and huzzaed
and went up the lane, I myself went up the main-street, the bell at this time
had stopped; as I got to the Town house, they had all got into King Street, I
went down to see what they would do, there were several gentlemen persuading
them to go off, and I believe they would all have gone in a few minutes, had
not the soldiers come. -- I saw them throwing oyster shells and snow balls at
the Sentry at the Custom house door, he was on the steps.


Q. Are you sure you saw them throw oyster-shells at him?


A. Yes.


Q One or two, or a number?


A. I think two or three.


Q. Did they hit him?


A. I do not think they did. Some were hollowing out, let us burn the
Sentry-box, let us heave it overboard, but they did neither; I stood then
opposite the Custom House door, presently I saw a party of soldiers come down,
who placed themselves before the Custom-House.


Q. Before the party came down, did you hear any person say, kill him?


A. No. I observed Capt. Preston standing by the Sentry-box, I saw him talking
with a man, I do not know who he was, I went to hear what they said, but I
could not; in the space of two or three minutes, I heard a stick, club, or
something else strike a soldier's gun, immediately the gun went off, and then I
run.


Q. Did you hear any thing rattle on the pavements?


A. Yes, I heard a bayonet, or something like it, rattle on the pavements.


Q How many people were there, when the soldiers came down?


A. I believe sixty or seventy.


Q. Where did you stand?


A. I stood at the head of Royal-exchange-lane, about three yards and a half
from the Sentry box.


Q. Could you see all the soldiers?


A. No: just before they fired, I heard the people say, Damn you fire, you
bloody backs.


Q. Did you hear the expressions, Rush on, knock them over, knock them over?


A. No.


Q. How long was you there?


A. About seven or eight minutes.

John Ruddock, Esquire sworn. As I went home that evening, I met a number of boys
with clubs, they went so for several months before, they chused to do so,
because they had been so often knocked down by the soldiers, some said the
soldiers were going to fight with the people.


Q. What number did you meet?


A. They were in two's or three's, three's or four's in a bunch, in the whole
there might be about twenty.


Q. What time of night was that?


A. About eight o'clock.

Newtown Prince, a free Negro, sworn. When the bells rung I was at my own
house, I run to the door and heard the cry of fire, I put on my shoes, and went
our, and met two or three men, asked them where the fire was; they said it was
something better than fire. I met some with clubs, some with buckets and bags,
and some running before me with sticks in their hands; I went to the
Townhouse, looked down the street, and saw the soldiers come out with their
guns and bayonets fixed: I saw Capt. Preston with them; there were a number of
people by the west door of the Townhouse, they said lets go and attack the
Main-Guard, some said for God's sake do not meddle with them; they said by God
we will go, others again said do not go. After a while they huzzaed and went
down King Street; there was a number of people came down Prison-lane, and some
from the Post office; they went down to the Custom-house, and I went down. The
soldiers were all placed round in a circle with their guns breast high. I stood
on the right wing, when the Captain came the people crowded in to him to speak
to him, and I went behind them, I went next to the Custom-house door, there
were people all round the soldiers.


Q. How near were the people to the soldiers?


A. About three or four feet from the point of their bayonets, the thickest
part was by Capt. Preston. When I got to the corner I saw people with sticks
striking on their guns at the right wing. I apprehended danger and that the
guns might go off accidentally. I went to get to the upper end toward the Town
house, I had not got to the center of the party, before the guns went off; as
they went off I run, and did not stop till I got to the upper end of the
Townhouse.


Q. How many did you see strike upon their guns?


A. I cannot tell how many of them did it.


Q Did you hear at that time they were striking, the cry of fire, fire?


A. Yes, they said fire, fire damn you fire, fire you lobsters, fire, you dare
not fire.


Q. Did you see any thing thrown at the soldiers?


A. Nothing but snow balls, flung by some youngsters.

Gregory Townsend, Esquire Merchant, sworn. Just after the bell rung nine, hearing
the bell ring again, I went out thinking it was fire; I saw numbers of people
running from the South-end some had buckets, the principal number had clubs in
their hands. I asked where is the fire, I received for answer, at the
Rope-walks and in King Street. Numbers were coming with buckets, and the rest
said Damn your bloods do not bring buckets, bring clubs.


Q. Was this before the firing?


A. Yes.

Andrew, (Mr. Oliver Wendall's Negro,) sworn. On the evening of the 5th of
March I was at home, I heard the bells ring, and went to the gate; I staid
there a little and saw Mr. Lovell coming back with his buckets, I asked him
where was the fire, he said it was not fire; after that I went into the street,
and saw one of my acquaintances and we run down to the end of the lane and saw
another acquaintance coming up, holding his arm; I asked him what is the matter,
he said the soldiers were fighting, had got cut lasses, and were killing every
body, and that one of them had struck him on the arm, and almost cut it off; he
told me I had best not go down; I said a good club was better than a cutlass,
and he had better go down and see if he could not cut some too. I went to the
Townhouse, saw the Sentinels placed at the Main-Guard standing by Mr. Bowes's
corner; numbers of boys on the other side of the way were throwing snow balls
at them; the Sentinels were enraged and swearing at the boys; the boys called
them lobsters, bloody backs, and hallowed who buys lobsters; one of my
acquaintance came and told me that the soldiers had been fighting, and the
people had drove them to Murray's barracks; I saw a number of people coming
from Murray's barracks who went down by Jackson's corner into King Street;
presently I heard three cheers given in King Street, I said we had better go
down and see what is the matter; we went down to the Whipping-post and stood by
Waldo's shop, I saw a number of people round the Sentinel at the Custom house,
there were also a number of people who stood where I did, and were picking up
pieces of sea coal that had been thrown out thereabout, and snow balls, and
throwing them over at the Sentinel. While I was standing there, there were two
or three boys run-out from among the people, and cried we have got his gun
away; and now we will have him; presently I heard three cheers given by the
people at the Custom house; I said to my acquaintance I would run up and see
whether the guard would turn out. I passed round the Guard house, and went as
far as the west door of the Townhouse. While I stood there one of my
acquaintance said he would go round the corner of the Townhouse, and see if
the guard had turned out; he went to the corner and called me, and told me the
guard was come out. I went and looked down the street, I saw a file of men,
with an officer with a laced hat on before them; upon that we all went to go
toward him, and when we had got about half way to them, the officer said
something to them, and they filed off down the street: upon that I went in the
shade toward the Guard-house, and followed them down as far as Mr. Peck's
corner; I saw them pass through the crowd, and plant themselves by the Custom
house. As soon as they got there the people gave three cheers. I went to cross
over to where the soldiers were, and as soon as I got a glimpse of them, I
heard somebody huzza and say here is Old- Murray with the riot-act, and they
began to pelt show balls; a man set out and run, and I followed him as far as
Philips's corner, and I do not know where he went. I turned back and went
through the people until I got to the head of Royal-exchange-lane, right
against the soldiers; the first word I heard was a Grenadier say to a man by
me, Damn you stand back.


Q How near was he to him?


A. He was so near that the Grenadler might have run him through if he had
stepped one step forward. While I stopped to look at him, a person came to get
through betwixt the Grenadier and me, and the soldier had like to have pricked
him; he turned about and said, You damned lobster, bloody back, are you going
to stab me, the soldier said by God will I; presently somebody took hold of me
by the shoulder, and told me to go home; or I should be hurt; at the same time
there were a number of people toward the Townhouse, who said, come away and
let the guard alone, you have nothing at all to do with them. I turned about
and saw the officer standing before the men, and one or two persons engaged in
talk with him. A number were jumping on the backs of those that were talking
with the officer, to get as near as they could.


Q. Did you hear what they said?


A. No. Upon this I went to, go as close to the officer as I could; one of the
persons who was talking with the officer turned about quick to the people, and
said, Damn him he is going to fire; upon that they gave a shout, and cried out
Fire and be damned, who ca^es, damn you, you dare not fire, and began to throw
snow balls, and other things, which then flew pretty thick.


Q. Did they hit any of them?


A. Yes, I saw two or three of them hit, one struck a Grenadier on the hat, and
the people who were right before them had sticks; and as the soldiers were
pushing with their guns back and forth, they struck their guns, and one hit a
Grenadier on the fingers. At this time, the people up at the Townhouse called
again come away, come way; a stout man who stood near me, and right before the
Grenadiers, as they pushed with their bayonets the length of their arms, kept
striking on their guns. The people seemed to be leaving the soldiers, and to
turn from them, when there came down a number from Jackson's corner, huzzaing
and crying, Damn them they dare not fire, we are not afraid of them; one of
these people, a stout man with a long cord wood stick, threw himself in, and
made a blow at the officer; I saw the officer try to send off the stroke,
whether he struck him or not I do not know: the stout man then turned round,
and struck the Grenadier's gun at the Captain's right hand, and immediately
fell in with his club, and knocked his gun away, and struck him over the head,
the blow came either on the soldiers cheek or hat. This stout man held the
bayonet with his left hand, and twitched it and cried kill the dogs, knock them
over; this was the general cry; the people then crowded in, and upon that the
Grenadier gave a twitch back and relieved his gun, and he up with it and began
to pay away on the people. I was then betwixt the officer and this grenadier, I
turned to go off, when I had got away about the length of a gun, I turned to
look toward the officer; and I heard the word fire; at the word fire I thought
I heard the report of a gun, and upon my hearing the report, I saw the same
grenadier swing his gun, and immediately he discharged it.


Q. Do you know who this stout man was, that fell in and struck the grenadier?


A. I thought, and still think, it was the Molatto who was shot.


Q. Do you know the grenadier who was thus assaulted and fired?


A. I then thought it was Killroy, and I told Mr. Quincy so the next morning
after the affair happened, I now think it was he from my best observation, but
I cannot positively swear it.


Q. Did the soldiers of that party, or any of them, step or move out of the
rank in which they stood to push the people?


A. No, and if they had they might have killed me and many others with their
bayonets.


Q. Did you, as you passed through the people toward Royal-exchange-lane and
the party, see a number of people take up any and every thing they could find
in the street, and throw them at the soldiers?


A. Yes, I saw ten or fifteen round me do it.


Q. Did you yourself pick up every thing you could find, and throw at them.


A. Yes, I did.


Q After the gun fired, where did you go?


A. I run as fast as I could into the first door I saw open, which I think was
Mr. Dehones, I was very much frightened.


Oliver Wendell, Merchant, sworn. Q Is the witness last examined your servant?


A. Yes^


Q. How long has he lived in your family?


A. Above ten years.


Q. What is his general character for truth?


A. It is good, I have heard his testimony and believe it to be true, he gave
the same relation of this matter to me on the same evening, in a quarter of an
hour after the affair happened; and I then asked him whether our people were to
blame, he said they were.


Q. Can Andrew read and write?


A. Yes, very well, he has been well educated.


Q. Pray Sir, is it not usual for Andrew to amplify and embellish a story?


A. He is fellow of a lively imagination, and will sometimes amuse the servants
in the kitchen, but I never knew him tell a serious lie.

FIVE o'Clock, P. M. the Court adjourned till next morning, Saturday, nine
o'Clock. Saturday, NINE o'Clock, the Court met according to adjournment, and
proceeded. William Whitington, sworn. I was in King Street a quarter after nine
o'clock on the 5th of March, and two others with me, I crossed King Street at
Oliver's- Dock, and I met a few people, but did not mind them, and the people
with me did not; in a little time I heard the bells ring, and I made a stop and
asked what was the matter? They said fire, I saw several people with buckets,
etc. and I asked them where they were going? They said there is fire somewhere.
I came up by Pudding-lane, and went in betwixt the guard and Guard house, for
at this time the Main-Guard was turned out, I saw Mr. Basset the officer, and
Capt. Preston, while I was standing there, some person in the crowd fronting
the soldiers, cried out to the guard, will you stand there and see the Sentinel
murdered at the Custom house? Capt. Preston and Mr. Basset were both together,
Mr. Basset said to Capt. Preston, what shall I do in this case? Said Preston,
take out six or seven of the men, and let them go down to the assistance of the
Sentry; I think there were six men ordered out of the ra^ks, they formed
themselves by files, the Corporal marched in the front, and the Captain in the
rear, I was at this time on the outside of the soldiers on the left hand, and I
kept on the outside from the time they marched from the parade till they came
to the Custom-house, but how they formed themselves when they came there I did
not see, but when I saw them they were formed in a half circle, I was about two
or three yards distance from them, I heard Capt. Preston use many entreaties to
the populace, begging they would disperse and go home, but what they said I
cannot tell; but I heard them hollow, damn you fire! You dare not fire, we know
you dare not fire: Capt. Preston desired them to go home many times; I departed
and saw no more of them, and went to Wheelwright's wharf.

Joseph Hinkley, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March I heard the bells ring,
I was in Mr. Hall's house, I went out in order to see where the fire was, I
heard the drum beat, I went to the shop and got a stick, and went down to the
Conduit, I saw thirty or forty people with sticks in their hands.


Q Were they walking sticks?


A. Some were short clubs, some were walking sticks. -- Then they hollowed,
King Street forever, and huzzaed, some went up Royal Exchange lane, I went with
a number up Jenkin's- alley, I went toward the Sentinel, he was walking
backwards and forwards with his firelock on his shoulder; some of the people
said, kill him; I had not been there long, before the party came down, and then
a good many more people gathered round before the Sentinel-box, some from
Quaker-lane, some from the Townhouse, and some from the bottom of King Street,
some with sticks, some without, they came close to the Sentinel, the bells were
ringing, I had not been there long before they loaded, I was close to them when
they loaded.


Q. Who gave orders to load?


A. I did not hear, there was such huzzaing, hollowing and whistling, that I
could not hear, they had their bayonets about breast high, shoving and pricking
with their bayonets to make the way clear, then the people hollowed fire! why
do you not fire? Damn you fire! you bloody backs.


Q. Did they tell the people to keep off?


A. Yes.


Q. And did the people go back when desired?


A. No, they pressed more upon them, while the people were thus pressing on the
party, they fired, I did not hear any orders given.


Q. How near did you stand to the soldiers?


A. I fell back to the middle of the street when the first gun was fired.


Q. To which wing did you fall?


A. To the center, I was right facing them.


Q. How many guns were fired?


A. I think six or seven, I did not count them.


Q. Did you see the people come close up to the soldiers, and strike on their
guns?


A. No, they held their sticks up over their heads, flourishing and brandishing
them, saying, damn you fire? you dare not fire.


Q. Did you see any sticks thrown?


A. No, nor any thing else, Samuel Gray who was shot that night, clapped me on
the shoulder, and said, do not run my lad, they dare not fire, and he ran back
and forth among the people and clapped others also on the back as he did me.


Q. Had he any thing in his hand?


A. I think he had not; I looked to my left soon after the guns were fired, and
saw him upon the ground, and with the help of some others, carried him to Dr.
Loring's shop, but could not get in, and left him there.


Q. Do you know Langford in this town?


A. No.


Q. Did you see any body go up to Gray, and thrust at him with a bayonet?


A. No I did not see it.


Q. How near did he fall to the soldiers?


A. He was in the middle of the street.


Q. Did you see any of the soldiers move out of the ranks?


A. No.


Q. How near was you to Gray?


A. About three or four yards distance.

Harrison Gray, junr. sworn. That evening upon returning home, I saw a number
of people round the Sentinel, making use of opprobious language and
threatenings, I desired them to go off, and said the consequence would be fatal
if they did not; some few snow balls were thrown, and abusive language
continued, they said damn him, let him fire, he can fire but one gun.


Q. Were they men or boys?


A. They were a mixture, about eighteen or nineteen years old, and some men.


Q. How many were there of them?


A. There might be from seventy to an hundred, I did not particularly observe;
when I could not prevail to take them off, I went to Mr, Pain's, in a little
while the party came down, I saw nothing afterward; soon after I heard the
guns fired, and Mr. Pain was wounded with one of them.


Q. Did the Sentinel call out for the guard?


A. I did not hear him, he retreated to the steps of the Custom-house.


Q. Was you standing at Mr. Pain's door when the guns were fired?


A. I was, but was not looking that way, nor did I observe when the party came
down; I told the people, the Sentinel was on duty, that was his post, and that
he had a right to walk there, and that he could have enough to relieve him, if
he stood in need of it, as he was so near the Main Guard,

Charles Willis, an Apprentice, sworn. I know nothing worth the telling; I was
not in Kingstreet, I heard there was no fire, but I heard the soldiers were
fighting. I went to Dock square, and saw a number of people there, I came up
Royal-exchange-lane, and saw the firing, but was not near enough to see any
thing the people did.

Matthew Murray, sworn. That evening I was at home, and heard the bells ring, I
went into the street and asked the occasion, I was told it was not fire, but
the soldiers fighting with the inhabitant; I went into the house and could find
no stick, but I cut the handle of my mother's broom off, with this I came to
Kingstreet, but there were no soldiers; some people were coming from
Royal-exchange-lane, some from the Townhouse, some said, damn it, they are
only making fools of us, it is best to go home: I went to the head of Royal
exchange lane, and saw a cluster of people there, and I saw a boy who said that
the Sentry had knocked him down with the but-end of his gun; I saw the Sentry
on the steps, and the people after he loaded, said, fire! Damn you fire!
Presently after the party came down, I stood close to them, they were swinging
their bayonets, telling the people to make way, I saw a man talking with Capt.
Preston, I went to hear what he said, I could not hear, the grenadier on the
right was struck some where on his right side, but I do not know with what, but
directly he fired.


Q. Was that the right hand man? A. Yes.


Q. Was you close to the soldiers?


A. Yes, I was quite close to them.


Q. Did you see any snow balls thrown before this?


A. I think I saw two or three.

Thomas Symmonds, Victualler, sworn. Betwixt eight and nine o'clock of the 5th
March, I was in my own house near Murray's barracks, the people were running
backwards and forwards, and there was a great mob and riot by the barrack gate;
I heard the people as they went along declare, if the soldiers did not come out
and fight them, they would set fire to the four corners of the barracks, and
burn every damned soul of them.


Q. Did you see the people?


A. I was standing at my own door, I saw them pass and repass me, but I knew
none of them.


Q. Was there any disturbance before that?


A. Yes, there was a disturbance half an hour before that.


Q. What sort of a disturbance was it before?


A. I saw a good number of towns people had cutlasses, clubs, and swords, there
was knocking down, riot and disturbance, and this declaration of theirs was
after that, and before the bells rung.


Q Was that said by one, two, or a number?


A. I cannot tell indeed how many said so.


Q. Did you at that time keep a victualling-house!


A. Yes, I did.


Q. Did the soldiers frequent your house?


A. Yes, they did.

William Parker, Bricklayer, sworn. On the evening of the 5th March, I was at
Mr. Coleman's at the north side of the Market, I came from thence through the
Market on the south side, I saw seven or eight people, the chief were boys,
three or four of them were on the inside the rails, pulling the butchers stalls
to pieces.


Q. How old did these boys appear?


A. About a dozen of years old, or smaller, some about eighteen, I went up to
them and observed they were geting sticks; about half a minute after, came
along a soldier, I took him to be an officer's servant, some said here is a
damned soldier, and got soul of the man, and I got the soldier away from them,
and he went off, and I went toward home round by the Golden-ball, and up into
King Street; I met one Mr. James Bayard he and I walked together, and I did not
see a single soul in the street; we passed the Sentinel (I think that was he
pointing to White) it was cold under foot, and we stood upon Stone's steps; in
a few minutes there were three or four boys round the Sentinel, they got soul
of him; one of them said the Sentinel had struck him with his gun, and they
kept pushing one another against him, and pushed him into the box; I said to
Mr. Bayard there will be trouble by and bye. About two minutes after there came
a parcel of boys and young fellows together, in number about fifteen or
sixteen, the chief of them with sticks in their hands.


Q. What sort of sticks were they?


A. They looked like the sticks they took at the Market, like pieces of the
stalls split. When they got the head of the lane, there was a little talking
and whistling amongst them, and they said lets go up to the Main guard, and
they went up by the foot of the Townhouse; about one minute after there were
five or six boys made their appearance out of Royal-exchange-lane, from that I
went to go up round Jackson's corner, when I came to the watch-house, I met a
number of people coming round by Jackson's corner.


Q. How many people?


A. Twenty or thirty.


Q. Had they sticks?


A. Some had sticks, some had none, some had short sticks some had walking
canes.


Q. What sized people were these?


A. They were a mixture of men and boys running together; I asked them what had
been the matter, they said there had been a squabble by Murray's barracks, and
they had drove the soldiers in; they said it was all over; then I left Mr.
Bayard and they all came down into King Street, and betwixt Quaker-lane and
Royal-exchange-lane they made a stop, and met in a eluster, and not long
afterward dispersed; I did not leave above twelve or fifteen in King Street,
when I came out of it. I went down Quaker-lane, and a number that lived that
way went down with me; as I got home and listed the latch of the door I heard
some bell ring, and I heard a gun and then another, I heard them all fired, I
came back as far as the bottom of the lane and no further.


Q. What said the boy^ in the Market to the soldier who passed by?


A. They said here is a damned soldier, some said they are all a like, this is
as bad as any of them. I believe they would have bent him if I had not rescued
him; he was passing quietly along.

John Gridley Merchant, sworn. On the evening of the 5th of March, I passed my
time at the Bunch of Grapes in King Street, in company with three gentlemen of
the town; betwixt the hours of nine and ten we were alarmed with the bells, and
a cry of fire, they said to me come Gridley we had better go and enquire where
the fire is, I said I had rather sit where I was, there might be some
disturbance, and I did not want to be in it; however, I agreed, and we went. I
saw Mr. Davis particularly, he said to me what do you make of this, I told him
I believed there was no fire, but rather a tumult. I said to Mr. Davis I will
go up the street and see what the matter is, and return again and let him and
the rest that were on the steps of the door know what the matter was. I went up
the street into the middle of it, and I stopped just before the Sentinel placed
at the Custom House, there were a large number of boys, and some men amongst
them, about ten young men, the boys were in the front, and the men in the rear;
I believe about twenty five, boys men and all.


Q. How big were these boys?


A. Little trisling boys. The Sentinel had his gun and bayonet charged,
levelled with his hip. I went from thence up to the south end of the Townhouse
opposite to the Main-Guard.


Q. Was the Sentinel at that time in the box or on the steps?


A. He was retreating toward the steps with his bayonet charged. I then found
the Main-guard to be in confusion. I went up to the head of the Townhouse,
where were a number of gentlemen collected together, I asked them what was the
matter, they told me that the soldiers had rushed from Murray's barracks, and
had cut several of the inhabitants with their cutlasses; several people were
running about the streets, and the cry was God damn the rascals. Some said this
will never do, the readiest way to get rid of these people is to attack the
Main guard, Strike at the root, there is the nest.


Q. Was this particularly spoken by one or two only?


A. No, it was general, they joined in with one another as they met. I went to
the north-side of the Townhouse, with a view to return to the place from
whence I came: I stopped at Mr. Kent's door, and while I was standing there,
aparty of the guard came down from the Main guard a cross King Street. I turned
round and saw a non commissioned officer (as I took him to be by his
appearance) leading the party, which I at first thought was to relieve the
Sentinel at the Custom-House as usual, but perceiving this guard was going down
to support the Sentinel, I thought it time to go where I came from, to tell the
gentlemen what I had seen according to promise. I proceeded down street on the
Custom house side, on the flat stones; the soldiers were drawn up in two ranks
front and rear, as I thought it, they had not had time to form as I came down;
I walked betwixt the two ranks, they were then loading their pieces.


Q Did you hear any orders given for loading?


A. No. Passing betwixt the ranks, their guns being on a loading position, I
passed leisurly through, and they put their guns and bayonets up to let me go
through. I returned to the Bunch of Grapes from whence I came, I saw Mr. Davis
and the other gentlemen on the steps, Mr. Davis asked me to give an account of
this matter, I told him (...) could give no account, except a general one, that
the soldiers had come out of their barracks, and that they had been a
quarreling, and the Sentinel had been inturrup^ in his duty. Mr. Davis asked me
what was that collection of people (...) fore the Custom-House, who did they
consist of; they are nothing said he, but a parcel of boys; I hastily replied,
yes, Mother Tapley's boys.


Q. What did you mean by that?


A. I meant boys as big as I am.


Q. When you passed betwixt the soldiers, was any thing thrown at them; or did
any body strike them.


A. No, not that I saw. When I was at the Bunch of Grapes, I saw some snow
balls thrown, some from the rear, some from the middle of the street, and some
from Quakerlane, all thrown toward the Custom house.


Q. Was there any noise just before the string?


A. As I stood on the steps of the Bunch of Grapes tavern, the general noise
and cry was why do you not fire, damn you, you dare not fire, fire and be
damned. These words were spoke very loud, they might be heard to the Long
wharff. The noise was very great indeed. There was about fifty before the
soldiers, and about half the number before the Sentinel, before the party
joined him.


Mrs. Catherine Field, sworn. Q. Did you know Patrick Car, who was killed by
the firing in King street on the 5th of March last? A. Yes.


Q. Was he in your house that evening? A Yes.


Q. Did you hear any thing he said, when he was told there was an affray with
the soldiers?


A. When the bells rung, he went up stairs and put his surtout on, and got a
hanger and put it betwixt his coat and sureout; my husband coming at that time,
gave him a push and felt the sword; he wanted to take it from him, but he was
unwilling to let it go, my husband told him he should not take it with him. I
do not know what he said, but one of the neighbors was in the house and coaxed
the sword out of his hand, and he went out without it. He Said on his death
bed, he saw a parcel of boys and negroes throwing snow balls at the guard. He
thought the first or second man from the Sentinel box was the man that shot him.


John Mansfield, sworn. Q. Do you know Patrick Carr?


A. Yes. On the night of the 5th of March, when the bells rung he would go out;
I persuaded him much to stay at home, he did not mind me but took his sword
betwixt his coat and surtout. Mr. Field coming in felt it, and said he should
not take it out with him; with much coaxing a woman who lived next door got it
from him.


Q. Did you hear any acknowlegement by him on his death bed?


A. I was often at his bed side, and all that I ever heard him say, was, he
thought he knew the man that shot him, but he never made it known to me.


Doctor John Jeffries, sworn. Q, Was you Patrick Carr's surgeon?


A. I was, in company with others. I was called that evening about eleven
o'clock to him, I was engaged with Mr. Pain and could not go; next morning I
went; after dressing his wounds, I advised him never to go again into quarrels
and riots; He said he was very sorry he did go. -- Dr. Lloyd who was present,
turned round to me and said, Jeffries, I believe this man will be able to tell
us how the affair was, we had better ask him: I asked him then how long he had
been in King Street when they fired? He said he went from Mr. Field's when the
bells rung, when he got to Walker's corner, he saw many persons coming from
Cornhill, who he was told had been quarreling with the soldiers down there,
that he went with them as far as the stocks, that he stopped there, but they
passed on: While he was standing there he saw many things thrown at the Sentry.
I asked him if he knew what was thrown? He said he heard the things strike
against the guns, and they sounded hard, he believed they were oyster shells
and ice; he heard the people huzza every time they heard any thing strike that
sounded hard: that he then saw some soldiers going down toward the
Custom-house, that he saw the people pelt them as they went along, after they
had got down there, the crosed over toward Warden and Vernon's shop, in order
to set what they would do, that as he was passing he was shot, -- that he was
taken up and carried home to Mr. Field's by some of his friends. I asked him
whether he thought the soldiers would fire? He told me he thought the soldiers
would have fired long before. I then asked him whether he thought the soldiers
were abused a great deal, after they went down there? He said, he thought they
were. I asked him whether he thought the soldiers would have been hurt, if they
had not fired? He said, he really thought they would, for he heard many voices
cry out, kill them. I asked him then, meaning to close all, whether he thought
they fired in self defense, or on purpose to destroy the people? He said, he
really thought they did fire to defend themselves; that he did not blame the
man whoever he was, that shot him. This conversation was on Wednesday. He
always gave the same answers to the same questions, every time I visited him.


Q. Was he apprehensive of his danger?


A. He was told of it. He told me also, he was a native of Ireland, that he had
frequently seen mobs, and soldiers called upon to quell them: whenever he
mentioned that, he always called himself a fool, that he might have known
better, that he had seen soldiers often fire on the people in Ireland, but had
never seen them bear half so much before they fired in his life.


Q. How often did he repeat this conversation?


A. Almost every day I saw him, though he was more particular, the day but one
after he was shot.


Q. How long did he live after he received his wound?


A. Ten days.


Q. When had you the last conversation with him?


A. About four o'clock in the afternoon, preceding the night on which he died,
and he then particularly said, he forgave the man whoever he was that shot him,
he was satisfied he had no malice, but fired to defend himself.


Q. Did you yourself see any of the transactions at Murray's barracks on that
evening?


A. On the evening of the 5th March, I was at my father's, opposite Mr.
Cooper's meeting; about nine, one of the neighbors run in, (a woman) she said
to my father, pray (...) come out, there will be murder, the soldiers and
people are fighting: I went directly toward Murray's barracks, before I got to
them I found the passage way stopped up so that I could not pass; by a number
of people of all sorts, I saw no soldiers just at that minute; I got upon Dr.
Hyron's steps, I saw several soldiers toward Mr. Greenleaf's, I think there
were three, one of them had a pair of tongs in his hand, another had a stick I
think, he was the second, he that had the tongs was the first, behind them were
several officers driving the soldiers toward the barrack gate, ordering them
to go in, I saw them strike them, they turned them into the gate, they then
shut the barrack gate entirely, I think the officers did that themselves; as
they, were putting them in, there were a great many snow balls thrown at them,
they were called cowards, cowardly rascals, and that they were afraid ^ght.


Q What number of people do you think were there?


A. There were as many as could stand betwixt the steps and the side of the
way; I took the alley to be as full as it could be, for others were pressing to
get into that street and could not; I judge not less than seventy or eighty
could ^ill that space of ground: the office is told the people not a soldier
should come out, at that time I saw a gentleman speak to some of the officers,
who I then took to be Mr. Palms, I asked the person next me if he knew the
names of either of the officers? He pointed to one, and said that was Capt.
Goldfinch; while the gentleman was talking with Capt. Goldfinch (it was some
time, about seven or eight minutes I stood on the same spot) there was a great
deal of abusive language given to them, they were repeatedly called lobsters;
they promised the gentleman who was speaking to them, that if any body had been
injured, enquiry should be made next day, and the persons should be punished, I
heard this repeated four or five different times, they spoke also to the people
in general; while they were talking I saw snowballs thrown at the officers,
which struck the door before which they stood; they begged the people would go
away; they said they would not; the officers said, they had done all they
could, they had turned the soldiers in and shut the gate, that no soldiers
should come out that evening; some body replied, you mean they dare not come
out, you dare not let them out; many persons cried let us go home, others said
no, we shall find some soldiers in King street, a number of them then passed up
the alley; as they went up they hazzaed and made a noise against the fences and
side of the walls; I then passed up the alley myself into Cornhill, as soon as
I go^ out of the alley I heard the Old-Brick bell ring.


Q. Did you hear Dr Cooper's bell ring before?


A. I think not, I heard it afterward. There were many in the street running,
some with buckets enquiring when the fire was? There were many answers given in
the street it is not fire, it is the soldiers fighting, I do not know from who,
but from several quarters behind and before me; I went up Cornhill and saw a
number of persons collected betwixt Mr. Jackson's shop and the Townhouse.


Q How many?


A. About twenty, I thought many of them were the persons that had just left
the alley, I had followed them with my eye and saw them stop there, many of
them had sticks, they did not use them to walk with, as they went up they
flourished them about.


Q. What number of sticks did you see flourishing in that manner?


A. I thought about two-thirds of them had sticks.


Q. Was there a general cry?


A No, the chief was huzz^ng. As they went up several of them struck against
Jackson's shop windows and said, dam^ it, bear lives an importer, o^ here ran
more toward the Town house and took up pieces of ice and threw at Jackson's
windows and broke four pa^es of glass, I stood and counted them; at that time
Mr. Caz^eau came up and said, do not meddle with Mr. Jackson, let him alone, do
not break his windows, and they left of throwing; the bigger part of them
immediately pushed down King Street by the north side of the Town house, others
of them went betwixt the west door of the Townhouse and Cornhill, and said, we
will go to the guard; I then went over to the opening betwixt the south side of
the Townhouse and the Guard house, to look down to see if they did stop there,
at that time I heard a huzz; I thought lower down King Street, it was not from
any of the people I had then view, these persons did not stop by the Guard
house, but run directly down King Street; I then turned back, and returned by
Cornhill through B^ylston's- alley, I found a small circle of people talking
with the officers on the steps, about twelve; at that time Dr. Cooper's bell
began to ring, one of the officers immediately cried out, pray stop that bell,
I then left them and went to my father's.


Q. Did you see any person ring the bell?


A. No, I saw no person, but I saw a window open.


Q Was any thing done to stop it?


A. I saw nothing done, I had been but a little while in the house, I had just
took off my cloak when the girl ran in from the kitchen, and said there is a
gun fired, I replied to the company, I did nor believe it, for I had seen the
officers put in the soldiers and shut the gate.


Captain Edmund Mason, sworn. Q. By whom is the Sentry at the Custom-house
placed?


A. The Sentinel at the Custom-house is placed by order of a commanding
officer, the commanding officer was then Lieut. Col. Dalrymple, by his order a
Sentry was placed at the Custom-house to take care of the money in the
Cashier's office, books, etc. that is the duty of a Sentinel stationed at the
Custom house.


Q. Had a Sentry alternatly been placed there for some months before the 5th
March?


A. Yes, for many months before, ever since I came to the town, and the
Sentinel there cannot stir till the commanding officer relieves him.


Q. Did you see the first order for placing the Sentinel at the commissioners
office when they kept at Concert-hall?


A. I did not, I was not then in the country.


Thomas Hall, sworn. * Produced on the part of the Crown. Q. Do you know any of
the prisoners?


A. Yes, White, Killroy, Wemms, and Carrol.


Q. Did White say any thing to you on the 5th of March last?


A. Yes. I went down King Street just after the bells began to ring, and he
said Hall, I am molested and imposed on on my post, I cannot keep my post
clear; Hall take care of yourself, there will be something done by and bye. I
moved away to the corner of Stone's house and there stood.


Q. Were any number of people about the Sentinel at that time?


A. Yes, there were about twenty, he said he could not keep his post clear.
They said he dared not fire. He cocked his gun on the steps, then he presented
his gun, and they drew off again.


Q. What did he say to the people?


A. He desired them to keep off. Some were throwing snow balls, some oyster
shells at him.


Q. Did you see any of them hit the Sentinel?


A. No; I saw them hit his gun two or three times; then he hollowed for the
guard, and the guard came down.


Q. What expression did he use?


A. He hollowed soldiers come here, and they came seven men and the officer.


Q. What followed upon that?


A. As soon as they come down the people pressed in upon them; and they pushed
with their bayonets to keep them off, but did not move out of their ranks.


Q. Were any snow balls, sticks, or stones, thrown at the party after they came
down?


A. No.


Q. Did the soldiers tell them to keep off?


A. Yes; but they still pressed on. Then one man fired, and ^ run down Royal
exchange lane as fast as I could.


Q. How near did you stand to the party?


A. About twelve or fourteen feet off.


Q. Were there people between you and the party?


A. Yes, ten or twelve.


Q. What was the general cry?


A. Fire, fire, you dare not fire, fire and be damned.

John Stewart, sworn. Betwixt eight and nine o'clock on the 5th of March as I
was going home to Green's lane, I met five or six men with sticks in their
hands, about the middle of it I met with much the same number, and at the end
of it of it I met with much the same number.


Q Which way were they going?


A. They were going into town toward King street.


Captain Barbason O Hara, sworn. Q. Do you know Carrol one of the prisoners?


A. I have known him these four years by a particular circumstance. I landed at
a battery where he was on duty, and entered into conversation with him; and I
have took particular notice of him ever since.


Q. What is his general character?


A. That of a discreet sober orderly man.


Q. Do you know If a Sentinel was constantly placed at the Custom house?


A. Yes, for several months before last March, by order from the Commanding
officer.

Theodore Bliss, Carpenter, sworn. On the evening of the 5th of March I was in
my own house, betwixt nine and ten I heard the bells ring for fire, I went out
of the house and came into King Street; I there saw the soldiers and the
officer. I went to the officer and asked him if his men were loaded, he said
they were; I asked him if they were loaded with ball he made me no answer, I
asked if they were going to fire, he said they could not fire without his
orders; directly I saw a snow ball and stick come from behind me which struck
the grenadier on the right, which I took to be Warren, he fended in off with
his musket as well as he could, and immediately he fired.


Q Where did he stand?


A. He was the first man on the right, and the third man from the officer;
immediately after the first gun, the officer turned to the right and I turned
to the left and went down the lane; I heard the word fire given, but whether it
was the town's people or the officer, I do not know.


Q. Were any blows given to the soldiers before the firing?


A. I saw none.


Q. Were any blows given after the first and before the second gun fired?


A. No.


Q Did you, or did you not, after the first gun was fired see a blow aimed?


A. I did not.


Q. Did you not aim a blow yourself?


A. Yes, when I was going away.


Q. How large was that stick you saw thrown?


A. About an inch diameter.


Q. Did the soldier sally or step back when the stick struck him?


A. I saw only his body, I did not see his feet.


Q. Directly on the first gun's going off, did any close in upon the soldiers,
and aim a blow or blows at them?


A. I did myself, whether any one else did or not I cannot tell. When I was
about three or four rod from my own house, I heard the soldiers were
quarrelling with the inhahitants, some inhabitants said, We had better go and
see it out.


Q. What number was coming down along with you?


A. Six or eight, in some places eight or ten, in others one after another, all
the way along from the South-end; the people were saying, the soldiers were
quarrelling with the inhabitants -- breeding a rumpus -- going to beat the
inhabitants. Some said we had better go home -- others lets go now and see it
out -- it is the best time now -- and now is the only time.


Q. Had they buckets?


A. Yes.


Q. Had all of them buckets?


A. No.


Q What had the rest?


A. Some had nothing at all, some had walking canes.


Q. What was the general cry before the firing?


A. Fire, damn you, why do you not fire, you dare not fire.


Q. Are you sure it was the man nighest to the Custom-house that fired first,
and that the stick struck?


A. Yes, I think I am certain of it.

H^^^ Bass, Merchant, sworn. * Produced on the part of the Crown. On the
evening of the 5th of March I left my house in Winter street, and went to see a
friend in the neighborhood of Dr. Cooper's meeting. I went down the
main-street, and coming near Boylston's alley, I saw a number of boys and
children from twelve to fifteen years old, betwixt Mr. Jackson's and the alley;
some of them had walking canes. A number of soldiers, I think four, fallied out
of the alley.


Q. How many boys were there?


A. Six or eight.


Q What time of night was it?


A. About five minutes after nine. I took the soldiers for grenadiers, all of
them had cutlasses drawn.


Q. Did they come out of the barracks?


A. They came out of the alley, and I imagine from the barracks; they fell on
these boys, and every body else that came in their way, they struck them; they
followed me and almost overtook me, I had the advantage of them and run as far
as Col. Jackson's, there I made a stand, they came down as far as the stone
shop.


Q Did you see that their cut lasses were drawn?


A. Yes, it was a very bright night, these lads came down, some of them came to
the Market square, one got a stave, others pieces of pine, they were very
small, I do not know whether any of the lads were cut. -- I turned and then saw
an oyster-man, who said to me, damn it here is what I have got by going up;
(showing his shoulder wounded) I put my finger into the wound and blooded it
very much. -- This oyster man made a stand, and several people got round him
asking him questions.


Q. What time was this? A. About 7 minutes after nine.


Q. Was it before the bells rung as for fire or after?


A. It was some time before. My way lay through that alley where the barracks
were, but I did not think it safe to go up that way, I returned home by the way
of Royal exchange lane.


Q. When you got to Dock-square, were there a number of people there?


A. This affair of the oyster-man gathered numbers, before that there were not
above eight, all little lads, in a little time I imagine about twenty gathered.
I passed up Royal-exchange-lane by the Sentinel, quite near him, I suppose
there were not above fifteen persons in King Street, very few for such a
pleasant night; it was then about fifteen minutes after nine.


Q. Where was the Sentinel?


A. Close to the corner of the Custom house, I came quite near him.


Q. Did you see no boys by him?


A. None at all.


Q. Did the bells ring then?


A. No. I went up from Royal exchange-lane to the northside of the Town house,
and when I came there the Old Brick meeting house bell began to ring.


Q. Did this gather a great many?


A. Yes. I proceeded toward home, I met several of my acquaintance and told
them there was no fire, but there had been a quarrel with the soldiers and
inhabitants, but that it was all over, in paticular I met Mr. Chase, presently
after another bell rung.


Q. What bell was that?


A. Dr. Cooper's.


Q. What else did you see?


A. Nothing more. I had got to Winter street when I heard the guns fire.


Q. Did you know previous to the Old Brick bell's ringing, that it was to ring
to alarm the inhabitants?


A. I did not, but after it had rung I knew it.


Q. At the time when you saw the soldiers run out of the alley, did you hear
any body say there had been a great number of people at the barracks?


A. No.

Edward Pain, Merchant, sworn. * Produced on the part of the Crown. On Monday
evening the 5th March I went to Mr. Amory's, while I was there the bell rung,
which I supposed was for nine o'clock, Mrs. Amory said she imagined it was
fire, I looked at the clock, it was twenty minutes after nine; I was going out
to enquire where the fire was, Mr. Tailor came in, he said there was no fire,
but he understood the soldiers were coming up to cut down Liberty-tree; I then
went out to make enquiry, when I came out of the door, before I had got into
King Street, I met Mr. Walker the ship carpenter, I asked him what the matter
was? He said the solers had sallied out from Smith's barracks, and had fell on
the inhabitants, and had cut and wounded a number of them, but that they were
drove into the barracks: I then went to my house to ^ form Mrs. Pain that it
was not fire, apprehending she m^t be frightened; I immediately went out again,
and when came into the street, there was nobody in the street at all; the
Sentry at the Custom House was walking by himself as usual nobody pear him; I
went up toward the Town house, and stood by the watch-house, where were a
number of people, I enquired of them what the matter was? They gave me the same
account Mr Walker did. While I stood there, I heard a considerable noise in
Cornhill, and presently I heard a noise of some people coming up Silsby's-
alley, at first I imagined it was soldiers coming up that alley, and had some
thoughts of retiring up the Townhouse steps, but soon found they were
inhabitants, I stood till they came up to me, I believe there might be twenty
at the extent, some of the persons had sticks, some had not, I believe there
were as many with sticks as without, they made a considerable noise, and cried,
where are they? -- Where are they? At this time there came up a barber's boy
and said the Sentry at the Custom house had knocked down a boy belonging to
their shop; the people then turned about and went down to the Sentry; I then
was left as it were alone: I proceeded toward my own house, when I had got
about half way, I met Mr. Spear the cooper, he said, Mr. Pain do not go away,
I am afraid the Main-guard will come down; I told him I was more afraid of
those people that had surrounded the Sentry, and desired him if he had any
influence over them to endeavor to take them off; I then proceeded toward my
own house, and when I got as far as Mr. Davis's, directly opposite to the
Custom-house; I saw a number of persons going up the steps at the Custom-house,
and heard a violent knocking at the door, the Sentry stood by the box as I took
it, I stopped to see if they opened the Custom house door to let them in, I found
they did not open the door; I then retired to my own house, and stood on the
fill of my door.


Q. Was there a noise by the Sentry?


A. Yes, a confused noise, five or six were upon the steps* I remained at my
door, and Mr. Harrison Gray came (...) and stood there talking with me; the
people were crying out fire! fire! Damn you, why do you not fire?


Q. Was this before the soldiers came down?


A. Yes. Mr. Gray and I were talking of the foolishness of the people in
calling the Sentry to fi^e on them; in about a minute after, I saw a number
(...) soldiers come down from the Main guard, and it appeare^ ^o me they had
their muskets in a horizontal posture, they went toward the Custom house, and
shoved the people from the house, I did not see in what manner they drew up: at
this time Mr. Beth^ joined us on my steps at the door, and the noise in the
street continued much the same as before, fire! fire! Damn you, fire! why do
you not fire? Soon after this, I thought I heard a gun snap, I said to Mr.
Gray, there is a gun snapped, did you not hear it? He said yes; immediately a
gun went off, I reached to see whether it was loaded with powder, or any body
lying dead, I heard three more, then there was a pause, and I heard the iron
rammers go (...) their guns, and then there was three more discharged, one
after another; it appeared to me there were seven in all, as soon as the last
gun was discharged I perceived I was wounded, and went into the house.


Q. Was it the last gun wounded you?


A. I do not know, I did not feel it before the last gun went off.


Q. Did you see any body throw any thing at the soldiers!


A. No, I was not near enough to see whether the people struck or threw any
thing at the soldiers


Q. How many people were about them?


A. From fifty to an hundred.


Q. Were they near to them?


A. Pretty nigh.


Q. Could you see all the soldiers?


A. Yes.

FIVE o'clock, P. M. the Court adjourned till Monday morning, nine o'Clock.
Monday, NINE o'Clock, the Court met according to adjournment, and proceeded.
Mr. JOSIAH QUINCY, junr.
May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
WE have at length gone through the evidence in behalf of the prisoners. The
witnesses have now placed ^^fore you, that state of facts, from which results
our defense. The examination has been so lengthy, that I am afraid some painful
sensations arise, when you find that you are now to fit and hear the remarks of
council. But you should reflect, that no more indulgence is shown to the
Prisoners now on trial, than has ever been shown in all capital can see: the
trial of one man has often taken up several days, when you consider, therefore,
that there are eight li^es (...) issue, the importance of the trial will show
the necessity of its length. To each of the prisoners different evidence
applies, and each of them draw their defense from different quarters.

I stated to you, Gentlemen, your duty, in opening this muse -- do not forget
the discharge of it. You are paying a debt you owe the community for your own
protection* and safety: by the same mode of trial are your own rights to
receive a determination; and in your turn, a time may come, when you will
expect and claim a similar return from some other jury of your fellow subjects.

In opening, I pointed out the dangers to which you were exposed; I trust your
own recollection will now preclude a recapitulation of them. The reasons of
what I then said, I trust have in some measure appeared: the propriety of some
of those observations has been corroborated by succeeding evidence; and you
must have traced yourselves, some of these consequences, turning out in
evidence, which have had an intimate relation, if not their origin, with some
or all of those opinions, notions, sentiments or passions (call them what you
will) which I too^ occasion to observe, as clues, aids, and leading strings, in
our intended examination and decision.

How much need was there for my desire, that you should suspend your judgment
till the witnesses were all examined? How different is the complexion of the
cause? Will not all this serve to show every honest man, the little truth to he
attained in partial hearings? We have often seen communities complain of ex
part testimonies: individuals, as well as societies, of men, are equally
susceptible of injuries of this kind: this trial ought to have another effect*
it should serve to convince us all, of the impropriety, nay injustice, of
giving a latitude in conversation upon topics, likely to come under a judicial
decision; the criminality of this conduct is certainly inhanced, when such
loo^e sallies and discourses are so prevalent as to be likely to touch the life
of a citizen. Moreover there is so little certainty to be obtained by such kind
of methods, I wonder we so often find them practiced. In the present case, how
great was the pr^possession against us? And I appeal to you, Gentlemen, what
cause there now is to alter our sentiments* Will any sober, prudent man
countenance the proceedings of the people in King Street -- can any one justify
their conduct -- is there any one man, or any body of men, who are interested
to espouse and support their conduct? Surely no. But our enquiry must be
confined to the legality of their conduct* and here can be no difficulty. It
was certainly illegal, unless many witnesses are directly perjured: Witnesses
who have no apparent interest to falsify -- witnesses, who have given their
testimony with candor and accuracy -- witnesses, whose credibility stands
untouched -- whose credibility, the council for the king, do not pretend to
impeach; or hin^ a suggestion to their disadvantage.

I say, Gentlemen, by the standard of the law are we to judge the actions of
the people who were the assailants, and those who were the assailed, and ^hen
on duty. And here* Gentlemen, the rule, we formerly laid down, takes place. To
the facts, Gentlemen, apply yourselves. Consider them as testified: weigh the
credibility of the witnesses -- balance their testimony -- compare the several
parts of it -- see the amount of it: -- and then according to your oaths --
"Make true deliverance according to your evidence." That is Gentlemen, having
settled the facts -- bring them truly to the standard of the law; the king's
judges who are acquainted with it, who are presumed best to know it, will then
inspect this great standard of right and wrong, truth and justice; and they are
to determine the degree of guilt to which the fact rises.

But before we come to those divisions of enquiry, under which I intend to
consider the evidence, let me once more carefully distinguish between the
transactions in Cornhill and those by the Custom House.

The conduct of the soldiers in Cornhill may well be supposed to have
exasperated the minds of all who beheld their behavior. Their actions
accumulated guilt as it flew -- at least, we may well suppose, the incensed
people who related them, added new colors to the scene. The flame of
resentment imperceptibly enkindles, and a common acquaintance with human nature
will show, that it is no extravagant supposition, to imagine many a moderate
man might at such a season, with such sentiments, which I have more than once
noticed; -- hearing such relations and complaints; I say do I injure any one,
in supposing, that under all these circumstances, a very moderate person, who
in ordinary matters acted with singular discretion, should now be drawn
imperceptibly away, or rather transported into measures, which in a future
moment he would condemn and lament. What more natural supposition, than to
suppose many an honest mind might at this time fluctuate thus. -- The soldiers
are here -- we wish them away: we did not send for them -- they have cut and
wounded the peaceable inhabitants, and it may be my turn next. At this instant
of time, he has a fresh detail of injuries -- resentment redoubles every
successive moment -- huzza! for the Main-guard: we are in a moment before the
Custom-House. No time is given for recollection. We find, from the king's
evidence, and from our own, the cry was "Here is a soldier!" Not here is the
soldier who has injured us -- here is the fellow who wounded the man in
Cornihll. No, the reasoning or rather ferment seems to be, the soldiers have
committed an outrage, we have an equal right to inflict punishment -- or rather
revenge, which they had to make an assault. -- They said right, but never
considered, that, those soldiers had no right at all. These are sentiments
natural enough to persons in this state of mind -- we can easily suppose even
good men thinking and acting thus. Very similar to this is the force of Dr.
Hirons's testimony, and some others. But our enquiry is -- What says the law?
We must calmly enquire, whether this, or any thing like it, is countenanced by
the law. What is natural to the man, what are his feelings are one thing: what
is the duty of the citizen is quite another. Reason must resume her seat -- and
then we shall hear, and obey the voice of the law.

The law indulges no man in being his own avenger. -- Early, in the history of
jurisprudence, we find the sword taken from the party injured, and put into the
hands of the magistrate. Were not this the case, punishment would know no
bounds in extent or duration. Besides, it saps the very root of distributive
justice, when any individual invades the prerogative of law, and snatches from
the civil magistrate the balance and the rod. How much more are the pillars of
security shaken, when a mixed body, assembled as those in King Street, assume
the province of justice, and invade the rights of the citizen? For it must not
be forgot, that the soldier is a citizen, equally entitled with us all to
protection and security. Hence all are alike obliged to pay obedience to the
law: For the price of this protection is that of obedience.

Let it not be apprehended, that I am advancing a doctrine, that a soldier may
attack an inhabitant, and he not allowed to defend himself. No Gentlemen! if a
soldier rush violently through the street and presents a weapon of death, in a
striking posture; no doubt the person assailed may defend himself, even to
taking the life of the ass^lant. Revenge and a sense of self preservation
instantly take possession of the person thus attacked; and the law goes not
upon the absurd supposition, that a person can in these circumstances, unman
himself. Hence we find a husband, taking his wife in the act of adultery,
instantly seizes a deadly weapon and slays the adulterer; -- it is not murder.
Nay a fillip upon the nose or forehead, in anger, is supposed by the law to be
sufficient provocation to reduce killing to Manslaughter. It is, therefore,
upon principles like these, principles, upon which those, who now bear the
hardest against us, at other times, so much depend; it is, I say, upon the
right of self-defence and self-preservation we rely for our acquittal.

Here again it should be kept in view, that whenever the party injurying has
escaped by flight, and time sufficient for the passions to cool, in judgment of
law, has elapsed; however great the injury, the injured party must have
recourse to law for his redress. Such is the wisdom of the law; of that law,
than which we are none of us to presume ourselves wiser; -- of that law, which
is sonned in the experience of ages, and which in condescension to the
infirmities of flesh and blood (but to nothing else) extenuates the offense.
For no man, says the learned Judge Foster, under the protection of the law is
to be the avenger of his own wrongs. If they are of such a nature for which the
laws of society will give him an andequate remedy, thither he ought to resort.
But be they of what nature soever, he ought to bear his lot with patience, and
remember, that vengeance belongs to the Most High. Crown Law 296.

Now, Gentlemen, those, whoever they were, who committed the outrage in
Cornhill, had absconded -- the soldiers, who are supposed to have done them,
were confined in their barracks. People were repeatedly told this, and assured
by the military officers, that they should not go unpunished. But what
followed? Are all present appeased? We are constrained, by the force of the
evidence, to affirm they were not. But to get regular and right ideas, we must
consider all the commotions of the season, and endeavor to come at truth by
analyzing the evidence, and aranging it, under distinct heads of enquiry.

[ Mr. Quincy now entered, at large, upon a review of the appearances in
several parts of the town: he was copious upon the expressions and behavior
sworn to.

He, then, more particularly recapitulated the evidence touching Murray's
Barracks, Dock-square, and the Marketplace.

He next pursued several parties, through the several lanes and streets, till
they centered at the scene of action.

The testimonies of the witnesses, who swore to the repeated information given
the people; -- that the Sentry and party were on duty; -- that they were
desired to withdraw and warned of the consequences; -- were in their order
considered.

Under the next three heads, was remarked "the temper of the Sentry, of the
party of soldiers, and of the people surrounding them."

The words, insult and gestures of the same persons were next pointed out: and
from thence was collected the designs of the persons assaulting, and the
reasonable apprehensions of those assaulted.

Mr. Quincy then came to the attack itself; -- considering who the persons were
(namely some sailors;) remarking minutely the words and actions immediately
preceding the onset; the weapons used; the violence of the assualt and
battery; and the danger of the soldiers.

Mr. Quincy next exhibited those parts of the testimonies, which evidenced the
attack continued after the firing.

Under all these heads, there was methodically stated the number of the
witnesses to each point, and by a comparative view of all the proofs,
conclusions drawn as to the force of the whole.

The next consideration, in this mode of enquiry, was the evdience as severally
pertaining to each prisoner; with such observations, on the one hand, as served
to show a defect of legal proof as to fact; on the other, such matters a served
to justify, execuse o^ extenuate the offense, in law.

And particularly with regard to Kellroy, Mr. Quincy cited and commented on the
following passages from judge Foster's Crown law, and the Marquess of
Beccaria's Essay on Crimes and punishments.

"WORDS are often misrepresented, whether through ignorance, inattention, or
malice, it mattereth not the defendant, he is equally effected in either case;
and they are extremely liable to misconstruction. And withal, this evidence is
not in the ordinary course of things to be disproved by that sort of negative
evidence by which the proof of plain facts may be and often is confronted."
Crown Law, 243.

"Finally, the CREDIBILITY of a witnesses is NULL, when the question relates to
the WORDS of a criminal; for the tone of voice, the gesture, all that preceds,
accompanies and follows the different ideas which men annex to the same words,
may so alter and modify a man's discourse, that it is almost impossible to
repeat them precisely in the manner in which they were spoken. Besides, violent
and uncommon actions, such as real crimes, leave a trace in the multitude of
circumstances that attend them, and in their effects; but Words remain only in
the memory of the hearers, who are commonly negligent or prejudiced. It is
infimitely easier then to found an accusation on the Words, than on the actions
of a man; for in these, the number of circumstances, urged against the accused,
afford him variety of means of justifications."] Essay 48, 9.

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
AFTER having thus gone through the evidence, and considered it as applicatory
to all and every of the prisoners, the next matter in order seems to be the
consideration of the law pertinent upon this evidence.

And here, Gentlemen, let me again inform you, that the law which is to pass
upon these prisoners, is a law adapting itself to the human speices, with all
their feelings, passions and infirmities; a law which does not go upon the
absurd supposition, that men are stocks and stones; or that in the fervor of
the blood, a man can act with the diliberation and judgment of a philosopher.
No Gentlemen: -- the law supposes that a principle of resentment, for wise and
obvious reasons, is deeply implanted in the human heart; and not to be
eradicated by the efforts of state policy. It, therefore, in some degree
conforms itself to all the workings of the passions, to which it pays a great
indulgence, so far as not to be wholly incompatible, with the wisdom, good
order and the very being of government.

Keeping therefore this full in view, let us take once more, a very brief and
cursory survey of matters supported by the evidence. And, he ^, let me ask
sober reason -- What language more approbrious -- What actions more
exasperating, than those used, on this occasion? Words, I am sensible are no
justification of blows, but they serve as the grand clues to discover the
temper and the designs of the agents: they serve also to give us light in
discerning the apprehensions and thoughts of those who are the objects of abuse.

"You lobster," "You bloody-back," "You coward" and "You dastard," are but some
of the expressions proved. -- What words more galling? What more cutting and
provoking to a soldier? To be reminded of the color of his garb, by which he
was distinguished from the rest of his fellow citizens; to be compared to the
most despicable annimal, that crawls upon the earth, was touching indeed a
tender point, To be stigmatized with having smarted under the lash, at the
halbert, to be twited with so infamous an ignominy; which was either wholly
undeserved, or a grievance which should never have been repeated: -- I say to
call up and awaken sensations of this kind, must sting even to madness. But
accouple these words with the succeeding actions, -- "You dastard," -- "You
coward!" -- A soldier and a coward! This was touching, (with a witness) " The
point of honor, and the pride of virtue." -- But while these are as yet
fomenting the passions, and swelling the bosom, the attack is made: and
probably the latter words were reitterated at the onset; at lest, were yet
sounding in the ear. Gentlemen of the jury, for heaven's sake, let us put
ourselves in the same situation! Would you not spurn at that spiritless
institution of society, which tells you to be a subject at the expense of your
manhood?

But does the soldier step out of his ranks to seek his revenge? Not a witness
pretends it: Did the people repeatedly come within the points of their
bayonets, and strike on the muzzels of the guns? -- You have heard the
witnesses.

Does the law allow one member of the community to behave in this manner
toward his fellow-citizen, and then bid the injured party be calm and
moderate? The expressions from one party were -- "Stand off -- stand off" ^ "I
am upon my station" -- "if they molest me upon my post, I will fire." -- "By
God I will fire!" -- "Keep off!" These were words likely to produce reflection
and procure peace. But had the words on the other hand a similar tendency? --
Consider the temper prevalent among all parties at this time. Consider the then
situation of the soldiery; and come to the heat and pressure of the action. The
materials are laid, the spark is raised, the fire inkindles, the flame rages,
the understanding is in wild disorder, all prudence and true wisdom are utterly
consumed. Does common sense, does the law expect impossibilities? Here, to
expect equanimity of temper, would be as irrational, as to expect discretion in
a mad man. But was any thing done on the part of the assailants, similar to the
conduct, warnings and declarations of the prisoners? Answer for yourselves,
Gentlemen. The words reiterated, all around, stabbed to the heart, the actions
of the assailants tended to a worse end: To awaken every passion of which the
human breast is susceptible. Fear, anger, pride, resentment, revenge,
alternately, take possession of the whole man. To expect, under these
circumstances, that such words would assuage the tempest, that such actions
would allay the flames -- You might, as rationally, expect the inundations of a
torrent would suppress a deluge; or rather, that the flames of Etna would
extinguish a conflagration!

Prepare, Gentlemen of the Jury, now to attend to that species of law, which
will adapt itself to this trial, with all its singular and aggravating
circumstances. A law full of benignity, full of compassion, replete with mercy.

And here, Gentlemen, I must, agreeable to the method we formerly adopted,
first tell you by what law the prisoners are not to be tried, or condemned. And
they most certainly are not to be tried by the Mosaic law: a law, we take it,
peculiarly designed for the government of a peculiar nation, who being in a
great measure under a theocratical form of government, it is institutions
cannot, with any propriety, be adduced for our regulation in these days. It is
with pain, therefore, I have observed any endeavor to mislead our judgment on
this occasion; by drawing our attention to the precepts delivered in the days
of Moses; and by disconnected passages of Scriptures, applied in a manner
foreign to their original design or import, there seems to have been an attempt
to touch some peculiar sentiments, which we know are thought to be prevalent;
and in this way, we take it, an injury is like to be done, by giving the mind a
biass, it ought never to have received; because it is not warranted by our laws.

We have heard it publicly said of late, oftener, than formerly, Whosoever
shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. This is plainly,
Gentlemen, a general rule, which, like all others of the kind must have its
exceptions. A rule, which if taken in it is strict litteral lattitude, would
imply, that a man killing another in self defense, would incur the pains of
death. A doctrine, which no man in his senses would ever embrace: a doctrine
that certainly never prevailed under the Mosaical institution. For we find, the
Jews had their six cities of refuge, to which the manslayer might flee, from
the avenger of blood. And something analogous to this, (if it did not originate
from it) is our benefit of clergy.

And so, that "the murderer shall flee to the pit" comes under the same
consideration. And when we hear it asked, as it very lately has been, "Who DARE
stay him?" I answer, if the laws of our country stay him, you ought to do
likewise; and every good subject dares to do what the law allows. But the very
position is begging the question: for the question, now in issue, is, whether
either of the prisoners is a murderer, in the sense of our laws; for you
recollect, that what is murder and what not, is a question of law, arising upon
facts stated and allowed.

But to go on; You shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which
is guilty of death. Here again, is a begging the question; and moreover the
words " guilty of death," if rightly rendered from the original, must be one of
those general rules, I just now mentioned; which always have their exceptions.
But those words seem to be wrong translated; for in the margin of our great
bible, we find them rendered " faulty to die." Against a position of this kind
we have no objection. If we have committed a fault, on which our laws inflict
the punishment of death, we must suffer. But what fault we have committed you
are to enquire: or rather you, Gentlemen, are to find the facts proved in Court
against us, and the Judges are to see and consider what the law pronounces
touching our offense, and what punishment is thereby inflicted as a penalty.

In order to come at the whole law resulting from the facts which have been
proved, we must enquire into the LEGALITY of the assemblies. For such is the
wisdom and policy of the law, that if any assembly be lawful, each in dividual
of that assembly is answerable only for his own^ act, and not for any other. On
the contrary, if an assembly be unlawful, the act of any one of the company, to
the particular purpose of assembling, is chargeable on all. This is law, which
no lawyer will dispute; it is a law founded in the security of the peace of
society, and however little considered, by people in general, it ought now
steadily to be kept in mind.

Was the assembly of the soldiers lawful?

For What did the soldiers assemble?

Was the Sentin^ insulted and attacked?

Did he call for assistance, and did-the party go to assist him?

Was it lawful for them so to do?

Was the soldiers when thus lawfully assembled, assaulted, etc. by a great
number of people assembled, etc.

Was this last assembly lawful?

Was any thing done by this unlawful assembly, that will, in law, justify,
excuse, or extenuate the offense of killing, so as to reduce it to manslaughter?

Was the killing justifiable, Or rather was it justifiable self-defence?
excusable, Or rather was it self-defence culpable, -- but through the beniguity
of the law excusable! Or felonious?


If felonious, was it with or without
Malice?

Under each of these heads of enquiry, in their order, Mr. Josiah Quincy
arranged his arguments; and as he separated and compared, and settled the
facts, he applied his law, with explanatory comments. In the course of which he
necessarely run over again facts, that had been before noticed, which occasions
our omission of this part of his defense. But for the sake of those, who would
choose to ^spect, at their leisure, the authorities. They are here subjoined in
the order, in which they were cited.

Hawkin's Vol. II. p. 29.9. ibid -- Mutiny Act p. 115, 116, 117 118 78 8. --
Blackstone's Com. Vol. I. p. 147 262, 335, 336 -- Blackstone Vol. IV. p. 194,
195 -- 3 d Iustitute p. 51. 57 -- Blackstone Vol. IV. p. 191, 192 -- Foster's
Crown Law 276, 277, 278 262, 257 -- Blackstone Vol. IV. p. 200 top.

Blackstone Vol IV. p. 180.280 -- Foster's Crown Law p. 298 -- 3 d Iustitute,
56 top -- Hawkins Vol. I. 75 -- ibid 71 bot^ ibid 72 top -- Foster's Crown Law
273, 274. -- Keil 128, 129 51.

Fosters Crown Law 278.277.276.295

Blackstone Vol. IV p. 191 -- Foster's Crown Law p. 277 -- Blackstone Vol. IV.
p. 192 -- Foster's Crown Law p 298. 296.292 -- 3 d Institute p. 55 bot. --
Hawkins Vol. I. p. 82 bot. 84 mid -- Hawkins pleas of the Crown Vol. I p. 484
-- Hawkins Vol. I. 85 mid -- Cro. Car. p. 537 Cooks case -- Hale Vol. II. p.
274 -- Blackstone Vol IV. p. 183 -- Hawkins Vol. I. p. 82 bot. -- Keil p. 135
bot.

Foster p. 261, 262 -- Blackstone Vol IV. p. 27 -- Hawkins Vol. I. p. 84 44 --
Foster p. 350 5.

Hawkins Vol. I Chap. 31, 21 -- cites Bulstrode p. 86, 87 -- Keil p. 51 -- Lord
Bacon's Elem. 25.

The law laid down, in Foster, 261, 2. before cited, being indisputable law,
not denied or controverted; and being very material in the trial, and much
relied on by the prisoners, is here set down at large.

"I will mention a case, (says the learned Judge,) which through the ignorance
or leuity of juries has been sometimes brought within the rule of accidental
death. It is where a blow aimed at one person lights upon another and kills
him. This, in a loose way of speaking, may be called accidental with regard to
the person who dies by a blow not intended against HIM. But the law
considers this case in a quite different light. If from circumstances it
appears that the injury intended to A. be it by poison, blow, or ANY OTHER
MEANS OF DEATH, would have amounted to murder, supposing him to have been
killed by it, it will amount to the same offense if B. happens to fall by the
same means. Our books say, that in this case the malice egreditur personam But
to speak more intelligibly, where the injury intended against A. proceeded from
a wicked, murderons, or mischievous motive, the party is answerable for all the
consequences of the action, if death ensues, from it, though it had not its
effect upon the person whom he intended to destroy. The malitia I have already
explained, the heart regardless of social duty DELIBERATELY bent upon mischief,
consequently the guilt of the party is just the same in the one case as the
other. On the other hand, if the blow intended against A. and lighting on B.
arose from a sudden trasport of passion which in case A. had died by it, would
have been reduced to manslaughter, the fact will admit of the SAME ALLEVIATION
if B. should happen to fall by it." To the same effect are other authorities.

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemem of the Jury.
I have now gone through those authorities in law, which I thought pertinent to
this trial. I have been thus lengthy, not for the information of the Court, but
to satisfy you, Gentlemen, and all who may chance to hear me, of that law,
which is well known to those of us, who are conversant in cou^ts, but not so
generally known, or attended to, by many, as it ought to be. A law which
extends to each of us, as well as to any of the prisoners; for it knows no
distinction of persons.

And the doctrines which have been thus laid down are for the safeguard of us
all. Doctrines which are founded in the wisdom and policy of ages; which the
greatest men, whoever lived, have adopted and contended for. Nay, the matter
has been carried, by very wise men, much further than we have contested for.
And that you may not think the purport of the authorities read, are the rigid
notions of a dry system, and the contracted decisions of municipal law, I beg
leave to read to you a passage from a very great, theortic, writer: a man whose
praises have resounded through all the known world, and probably will, through
all ages, whose sentiments are as free air, and who has done as much for
learning, liberty, and mankind, as any of the Sons of Adam; I mean the
sagacious Mr. Lock: He will tell you, Gentlemen, in his Essay on Government,
p. 2. c. 3. "That all manner of force without right puts man in a state of war
with the aggressor; and of consequence, that, being in such a state of war, he
may LAWFULLY KILL him, who put him under this unnatural restraint." According
to this doctrine, we should have nothing to do, but enquire, whether here was "
force without right:" if so, we were in such a state, as rendered it LAWFUL TO
KILL the aggressor, who put us under so unnatural a restraint. Few, I believe,
will say, after hearing all this evidence, that we were under no unnatural
restraint. But we don't want to extend matters so far. We cite this author to
show the world, that the greatest friends to their country, to universal
liberty, and the immutable rights of all men, have held tenets, and advanced
maxims favorable to the prisoners at the bar. And although we should not adopt
the sentiments of Mr. Lock in their most extensive latitude, yet there seems
to be something very analogous to his opinion, which is countenanced in our
laws.

There is a spirit which pervades the whole system of English jurisprudence,
which inspires a freedom of thought, speech and behavior. Under a form of
government like ours, it would be in vain to expect, that pacific, timid,
obsequious, and servile temper, so predominant in more despotic governments.
From our happy constitution there results it is very natural effects -- an
impatience of injuries, and a strong resentment of insults: (and a very wise
man has said, "He who tamely bears insults inviteth injuries.") Hence, I take
it, that attention to the "feelings of humanity" -- to "humanity and
imperfection" -- "the infirmities of flesh and blood;" that attention to "the
indelible rights of mankind;" -- that lenity to "the passions of man;" -- that
"benignity and condescension of the law" so often repeated in our books.

And, indeed, if this were not the case, the genius of our civil constitution
and the spirit of our municipal law would be repugnant: -- that prime defect in
any political system -- that grand solecism in state policy.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

This cause has taken up much of your time, and is likely to take up so much
more, that I must hasten to a close: indeed I should not have troubled you, by
being thus lengthy, but from a sense of duty to the prisoners; they, who, in
some sense, may be said to have put their lives in my hands; they whose
situation was so peculiar, that we have necessarily taken up more time, than
ordinary cases require: they, under all these circumstances, placed a
confidence, it was my duty not to disappoint; and which I have aimed at
discharging with fidelity. I trust you, Gentlemen, will do the like: that you
will examine and judge with a becoming temper of mind; remembering that they
who are under oath to declare the whole truth, think and act very differently
from by standers, who, being under noties of this kind, take a latitude, which
is by no means admissible in a court of law.

I cannot close this cause better, than by desiring you to consider well the
genius and spirit of the law, which will be laid down, and to govern yourselves
by this great standard of truth. To some purposes, you may be said, Gentlemen,
to be Ministers of justice: and "Ministers (says a learned Judge) appointed for
the ends of public justice, should have written on their hearts the solemn
engagements of his Majesty, (at his coronation) to cause law and justice IN
MERCY to be executed in all his judgments.

"The quality of mercy is not strained;
"It droppeth like the gentle rain from heaven --
" -- It is twice blessed;
"It blesses him that gives, and him that takes."
I leave you, Gentlemen, hoping you will be directed in your enquiry and
judgment; to a right discharge of your duty. We shall all of us, Gentlemen,
have an hour of cool reflection -- when the feelings and agitations of the day
shall have subsided; when we shall view things through a different, and a much
juster medium. It is, then, we all wish an absolving conscience. May you,
Gentlemen, now act such a part, as will hereafter insure it -- such a part as
may occasion the prisoners to rejoice. -- May the blessing of those, who were
in jeopardy of life, come upon you -- may the blessing of him who is " not
faulty to die," descend and rest upon you and your posterity.

JOHN ADAMS, Esquire
May it please your Honors and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
I am for the prisoners at the bar, and shall apologize for it only in the
words of the Marquis Beccaria: "If I can but be the instrument of preserving
one life, his blessing and tears of transport, shall be a sufficient
consolation to me, for the contempt of all mankind." As the prisoners stand
before you for their lives, it may be proper, to recollect with what temper the
law requires we should proceed to this trial. The form of proceeding at their
arraignment, has discovered that the spirit of the law upon such occassions, is
conformable to humanity, to common sense and feeling; that it is all benignity
and candor. And the trial commences with the prayer of the Court, expressed by
the Clerk, to the Supreme JUDGE of Judges, empires and worlds: "God send you a
good deliverance."

We find, in the rules laid down by the greatest English Judges, who have been
the brightest of mankind; -- We are to look upon it as more beneficial, that
many guilty persons should escape unpunished, than one innocent person should
suffer. The reason is, because it is of more importance to community, that
innocence should be protected, than it is, that guilt should be punished; for
guilt and crimes are so frequent in the world, that all of them cannot be
punished; and many times they happen in such a manner, that it is not of much
consequence to the public, whether they are punished or not. But when innocence
it self, is brought to the bar and condemned, especially to die, the subject
will exclaim, it is immaterial to me, whether I behave well or ill; for virtue
itself, is no security. And if such a sentiment as this, should take place in
the mind of the subject, there would be an end to all security whatsoever. I
will read the words of the law itself.

The rules I shall produce to you from Lord Chief Justice Hale, whose character
as a lawyer, a man of learning and philosophy, and as a christian, will he
disputed by nobody living; one of the greatest and best characters, the English
nation ever produced: his words are these. 2. H. H. P. C. Tutius semper est
errare, in acquietando, quam in puniendo, exparte misericerdioe, quam ex part
justifioe, it is always safer to err in acquitting, than punishing, on the part
of mercy, than the part of justice: The next is from the same authority, 305
Tutius erratur ex part mitiori, it is always safer to err on the milder side,
the side of mercy, H. H. P. C. 509, the best rule in doubtful cases, is, rather
to incline to acquital than conviction: and in page 300 Quod dubitas ne
feceris, Where you are doubtful never act; that is, if you doubt of the
prisoners guilt, never declare him guilty; this is always the rule, especially
in cases of life. An other rule from the same Author, 289, where he says, In
some cases, presumptive evidence go far to prove a person guilty, though there
is no express proof of the fact, to be committed by him; but then it must be
very warily pressed, for it is better, five guilty persons should escape
unpunished, than one innocent person should die.

The next authority shall be from another Judge, of equal character,
considering the age wherein he lived; that is Chancellor Fortescue, in praise
of the laws of England, page 59, this is a very ancient writer on the English
law: his words are, "Indeed one would rather, much rather, that twenty guilty
persons escape the punishment of death, than one innocent person be condemned,
and suffer capitally." Lord Chief Justice Hale, says, It is better five guilty
persons escape, than one innocent person suffer. Lord Chancellor Fortiscue, you
see, carries the matter farther, and says, Indeed one had rather, much rather,
that twenty guilty persons should escape, than one innocent person suffer
capitally. Indeed this rule is not peculiar to the English law, there never was
a system of laws in the world, in which this rule did not prevail; it prevailed
in the ancient Roman law, and which is more remarkable, it prevails in the
modern Roman law, even the Judges in the Courts of Inquisition, who with racks,
burnings and scourges, examine criminals, even there, they preserve it as a
maxim, that it is better the guilty should escape punishment, than the innocent
suffer. Satius esse nocentem absolvi quam insentem damnari, this is the temper
we ought to set out with; and these the rules we are to be governed by. And I
shall take it for granted, as a first principle, that the eight prisoners at
the bar, had better be all acquitted, though we should admit them all to be
guilty, than, that any one of them should by your verdict be found guilty,
being innocent.

I shall now consider the several divisions of law, under which the evidence
will arrange itself.

The action now before you, is homicide; that is the killing of one man by
another, the law calls it homicide, but it is not criminal in all cases, for
one man to slay another. Had the prisoners been on the Plains of Abraham, and
slain an hundred Frenchmen a piece, the English law would have considered it,
as a commendable action, virtuous and praisworthy: so that every instance of
killing a man, is not a crime in the eye of the law; there are many other
instances which I can not enumerate, an officer that executes a person under
sentence of death, etc. So that Gentlemen, every instance of one man's killing
another, is not a crime, much less a crime to be punished with death. But to
descend to some more particulars.

The law divides homicide into three branches; the first, is justifiable, the
second excusable, and the third felonious; felonious homicide, is subdivided
into two branches; the first is murder, which is killing with malice
aforethought, the second is manslaughter, which is killing a man on a sudden
provocation: here Gentlemen, are four sorts of homicide, and you are to
consider, whether all the evidence amounts to the first, second, third, or
fourth, of these heads. The fact, was the slaying five unhappy persons that
night; you are to consider, whether it was justifiable, excusable, or
felonious; and if felonious, whether it was murder or manslaughter. One of
these four it must be, you need not divide your attention to any more
particulars. I shall however, before I come to the evidence, show you several
authorities, which will assist you and me in contemplating the evidence before
us.

I shall begin with justifialbe homicide; if an officer a sheriff execute a man
on the gallows, draws and quarters him, as in case of high treason, and cuts
off his head, this is justifiable homicide, it is his duty. So also, Gentlemen,
the law has planted fences and barriers around every individual; it is a castle
round every man's person, as well as his house. -- As the love of God and our
neighbor, comprehends the whole duty of man, so self-love and social,
comprehend all the duties we owe to mankind, and the first branch is self-love,
which is not only our indisputable right, but our clearest duty, by the laws of
nature, this is interwoven in the heart of every individual; God almighty,
whose laws we cannot alter, has implanted it there, and we can annihilate
ourselves, as easily as root out this affection for ourselves. It is the first,
and strongest principle in our nature, Justice Blackstone calls it, "The
primary cannon in the law of nature." That precept of our holy religion which
commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves does not command us to love our
neighbor better than ourselves, or so well, no Christian Divine has given
this interpretation. The precept enjoins, that our benevolence to our fellow
men, should be as real and sincere, as our affections to ourselves, not that it
should be as great in degree. A man is authorized therefore by common sense,
and the laws of Egland, as well as those of nature, to love himself better than
his fellow subject: If two persons are cast away at sea, and get on a plank, (a
case put by Sir Francis Bacon,) and the plank is insufficient to hold them
both, the one has a right to push the other of^ to save himself. The rules of
the common law therefore, which authorize a man to preserve his own life at the
expense of another's, are not contradicted by any divine or moral law. We talk
of liberty and property, but, if we cut up the law of self-defence, we cut up
the foundation of both, and if we give up this, the rest is of very little
value, and therefore, this principle must be strictly attended to, for
whatsoever the law pronounces in the case of these eight soldiers will be the
law, to other persons and after ages, all the persons that have slain mankind
in this country, from the beginning to this day, had better have been
acquitted, than that a wrong rule and precedent should be established.

I shall now, read to you a few authorities on this subject of self-defence.
Foster 273 in the case of justifiable self-defence, "The injured party may
repel force with force in defense of his person, habitation, or property,
against one who manifestly intends and endeavors with violence, or
surprise, to commit a known felony upon either." -- In these cases, he is not
obliged to retreat, but may pursue his adversary, till he finds himself out
of danger, and if in a conflict between them he happens to kill, such killing
is justifiable." Keiling, 128, 129. I must entreat you, to consider the words
of this authority, the injured person may repel force by force against any who
endeavors to commit any kind of felony on him or his, here the rule is, I have
a right to stand on my own defense, if you intend to commit felony; if any of
the persons made an attack on these soldiers, with an intention to rob them, if
it was but to take their hats feloniously, they had a right to kill them on the
spot, and had no business to retreat; if a robber meets me in the street, and
commands me to surrender my purse, I have a right to kill him without asking
questions; if a persons commits a bare assault on me, this will not justify
killing, but if he assaults me in such a manner, as to discover an intention,
to kill me, I have a right to destroy him, that I may put it out of his power
to kill me. In the case you will have to consider, I do not know there was any
attempt to steal from these persons; however, there were some persons
concerned, who would probably enough have stolen, if there had been any thing
to steal; and many were there who had no such disposition, but this is not the
point we aim at, the question is, are you satisfied, the people made the attack
in order to kill the soldiers? If you are satisfied that the people, who ever
they were, made that assault, with a design to kill or maim the soldiers, this
was such an assault, as will justify the soldiers killing in their own defense.
Further it seems to me, we may make another question, whether you are satisfied
that their real intention was to kill or maim or not? if any reasonable man, in
the situation of one of these soldiers, would have had reason to believe in the
time of it, that the people came with an intention to kill him, whether you
have this satisfaction now, or not in your own minds, they were justifiable, at
least excusable in firing; you and I, may be suspicious that the people who
made this assault on the soldiers, did it to put them to the flight, on purpose
that they might go exulting about the town afterward in triumph; but this will
not do, you must place yourselves in the situation of Wemms or Killroy --
consider yourselves, as knowing that the prejudices of the world about you,
were against you; that the people about you, thought you came to dragoon them
into obedience to statutes, instructions, mandates and edicts, which they
thoroughly detested; that many of these people were thoughtless and
inconsiderate, old and young, sailors and landmen, negroes and molattos; that
they, the soldiers had no friends about them, the rest were in opposition to
them; with all the bells ringing, to call the town together to assist the
people in King Street; for they knew by that time, that ^re was no fi^e; the
people shouting, huzzaing, and making the mob whistle as they call it, which
when a boy makes it in the street, is no formidable thing, but when made by a
multitude, is a most hideous shriek, almost as terrible as an Indian yell; the
people crying Kill them! Kill them! Knock them over! heaving snow-balls, oyster
shells, clubs, white birch sticks three inches and an half diameter, consider
yourselves, in this situation, and then judge, whether a reasonable man in the
soldiers situation, would not have concluded they were going to kill him. -- I
believe, if I was to reverse the scene, I should bring it home to our own
bosoms; suppose Colonel Marshall, when he came out of his own door, and saw
these grenadiers coming down with swords, etc. had thought it proper to have
appointed a military watch; suppose he had assembled Gray and Attucks that were
killed, or any other persons in town, and applanted them in that station as a
military watch, and there had come from Murray's barracks, thirty or forty
soldiers, with no other arms than snow-balls, cakes of ice, oyster-shells,
cinders and clubs, and attacked this military watch in this manner, what do you
suppose would have been the feelings and reasonings of any of our householders;
I confess I believe they would not have borne the one half of what the
witnesses have sworn the soldiers bore, till they had shot down as many as were
necessary to intimidate and disperse the rest; because, the law does not oblige
us to bear insults to the danger of our lives, to stand still with such a
number of people round us, throwing such things at us, and threatening our
lives, until we are disabled to defend our s^ves.

"Where a known felony, is attempted upon the person, be it to rob, or murder,
here the party assaulted may repel force with force, and even his own servant
then attendant on him, or any other person present, may interpose for
preventing mischief, and if death ensues, the party so interposing will be
justified. -- In this case nature and social duty cooperate." Foster 274.

Hawkins P. C. Chap. 28, 25. toward the end, "Yet it seems that a private
person, a fortiori, an officer of justice, who happens unavoidably to kill
another in endeavoring to defend himself from, or suppress dangerous rioters,
may justify the fact, in as much as he only does his duty in aid of the public
justice." Section 24. "And I can see no reason why a person, who without
provocation is assaulted by another in any place whatsoever, in such a manner
(...) plainly shows an intent to murder him, as by discharging a pistol, or
pushing at him with a drawn sword, etc. may not justify killing such an
assailant, as much as if he had attempted to rob him: For is not he who
attempts to murder me, more injurious than he who barely attempts to rob me?
And can it be more justifiable to fight for my goods than for my life; and it
is not only highly agreeable to reason that a man in such circumstances, may
lawfully kill another, but it seems also to be confirmed by the general tenor
of our law books, which speaking of homicide se defendo, suppose it done in
some quarrel or affray.."

"And so perhaps the killing of dangerous rioters, may he justified by any
private persons, who cannot otherwise suppress them, or defend themselves from
them; in as much as every private person seems to be authorized by the law, to
aim himself for the purposes aforesaid." Hawkins p. 71. 14. -- Here every
private person is authorized to arm himself, and on the strength of this
authority, I do not deny the inhabitants had a right to arm themselves at that
time, for their defense, not for offense, that distinction is material and must
be attended to.

Hawkins, page 75. 14. "And not only he who on an assault retreats to the wall
or some such straight, beyond which he can go no further, before he kills the
other, is judged by the law to act upon unavoidable necessity; but also he who
being assaulted in such a manner, and in such a place, that he cannot go back
without manifestly endangering his life, kills the other without retreating at
all." -- 16. "And an officer who kills one that insults him in the execution of
his office, and where a private person, that kills one who feloniously assaults
him in the high way, may justify the fact without ever giving back at all."

There is no occasion for the Magistrate to read the Riot. act. -- In the case
before you, I suppose you will be satisfied when you come to examine the
witnesses, and compare it with the rules of the common law, abstracted from all
mutiny-acts and articles of war, that these soldiers were in such a situation,
that they could not help themselves; people were coming from Royal
exchange-lane, and other parts of the town, with clubs, and cord wood sticks;
the soldiers were planted by the wall of the Custom House; they could not
retreat, they were surrounded on all sides, for there were people behind them,
as well as before them; there were a number of people in Royal Exchange lane;
the soldiers were so near to the Custom house, that they could not retreat,
unless they had gone into the brick wall of it. I shall show you presently,
that all the party concerned in this unlawful design, were guilty of what any
one of them did; if any body threw a snow-ball, it was the act of the whole
party; if any struck with a club, or threw a club, and the club had killed any
body, the whole party would have been guilty of murder in law.

Ld. C. J. HOLT, in Mawgrige's Case, Keyling 128, say, "Now it has been held,
that if A of his malice prepensed assaults B, to kill him, and B draws his
sword and attacks A and pursues him, then A for his safety gives back, and
retreats to a wall, and B still pursuing him with his drawn sword. A in his
defense kills B. This is murder in A. For A having malice against B, and in
pursuance thereof endeavoring to kill him, is answerable for all the
consequences, of which he was the original cause. It is not reasonable for any
man that is dangerously assaulted, and when he perceives his life in danger
from his adversary, but to have liberty for the security of his own life, to
pursue him that maliciously assaulted him; for he that has manifested that he
has malice against another, is not fit to be trusted with a dangerous weapon
in his hand. And so resolved by all the Judges when they met at Seargeant's
inn, in preparation for my Lord Morley's trial."

In the case here, we will take Montgomery, if you please, when he was attacked
by the stout man with the stick, who aimed it at his head, with a number of
people round him, crying out, Kill them! Kill them! had he not a right to kill
the man. It all the party were guilty of the assault made by the stout man, and
all of them had discovered malice in their hearts, had not Montgomery a right,
according to Lord Chief Justice Holt, to put it one of their power to wreak
their malice upon him. I will not at present, look for any more authorities in
the point of self-defence; you will be able to judge from these, how far the
law goes, in justifying or excusing any person in defense of himself, or taking
away the life of another who threatens him, in life or limb: the next point is
this, That in case of an unlawful assembly, all and every one of the assembly
is guilty of all and every unlawful act, committed by any one of that assembly,
in prosecution of the unlawful design they set out upon.

Rules of law should be universally known, what ever effect they may have on
politics; they are rules of common law, the law of the land, and it is
certainly true, that where ever there is an unlawful assembly, let it consist
of many persons or a few, every man in it is guilty of every unlawful act of
committed by any one of the whole party, be they more or be they less, in
pursuance of their unlawful design. This is the policy of the law: to
discourage and prevent riots, insurrections, turbulence and tumults.

In the continual vicissitudes of human things, amidst the shocks of fortune
and the whirls of passion, that take place at certain critical seasons, even in
the mildest government, the people are liable to run into riots and tumults. --
There are Church-quakes and state-quakes, in the moral and political world, as
well as earthquakes, storms and tempests in the physical -- Thus much however
must be said in favor of the people and of human nature, that it is a general,
if not universal truth, that the aptitude of the people to mutinies, seditions,
tumults and insurrections, is in direct proportion to the despotism of the
government. -- In governments completely despotic, i.e. where the will of one
man, is the only law, this disposition is most prevalent. -- In Aristocracies,
next -- in mixed Monarchies, less than either of the former -- in complete
Republick's the least of all -- and under the same form of government as in a
limited monarchy, for example, the virtue and wisdom of the administration, may
generally be measured by the peace and order, that are seen among the people.
-- However this may be, such is the imperfection of all things in this world,
that no form of government, and perhaps no wisdom or virtue in the
administration, can at all times avoid riots and disorders among the people."

Now it is from this difficulty, that the policy of the law has framed such
strong discouragements, to secure the people against tumults; because when they
once begin, there is danger of their running to such excesses, as will overturn
the whole system of government. -- There is the rule from the reverend sage of
the law, so often quoted before.

I. H. H. P. C. 437. "All present, aiding and assisting, are equally principal
with him that gave the stroke, whereof the party died. For though one gave the
stroke, yet in interpretation of law, it is the stroke of every person, that
was present aiding and assisting."

I. H. H. P. C. 440. "If diverse come with one assent to do mischief, as to
kill, rob, or beat, and one does it, they are all principals in the felony. If
many be present, and one only gives the stroke whereof the party dies, they are
all principal, if they came for that purpose."

Now if the party at Deck-square, came with an intention only to beat the
soldiers, and began the affray with them, and any of them had been accidentally
killed, it would have been murder, because it was an unlawful design they came
upon; if but one does it, they are all considered in the eye of the law to be
guilty, if any one gives the mortal stroke, they are all principal here,
therefore there is a reversal of the scene; if you are satisfied, that these
soldiers were there on a lawful design and it should be proved any of them shot
without provocation and killed any body, he only is answerable for it. First
Hale's pleas of the crown.

I. H. H. P. C. 444. "Although if many come upon an unlawful design, and one of
the company kill one of the adverse party, in pursuance of that design, all are
principals; yet if many be together upon a lawful account, and one of the
company, kill another of an adverse party, without any particular abetment of
the rest to this fact of homicide they are not all guilty that are of the
company, but only those that gave the stroke or actually abetted him to do it."

I. H. H. P. C. 445. "In the case of a riotous assembly to rob or steal deer,
or do any unlawful act of violence, there the offense of one, is the offense of
all the company."

In an other place, I. H. H. P. C. 439. "The Lord Dacre and diverse others went
to steal deer in the park of one Pelham -- Raydon one of the company, killed
the keeper in the park: the Lord Dacre and the rest of the company being in the
other part of the park. Yet it was adjudged murder in them all, and they died
for it. -- And he quotes Crompton, 25. Dalton 93 p. 241." So that in so strong
a case as this, where this nobleman set out to hunt deer in the ground of
another, he was in one part of the park, his company in another part, yet they
were all guilty of murder."

The, next is Hale's Pleas of the Crown, 1. H. H. P. C. 440. "The case of
Drayton Bassit, diverse persons doing an unlawful act, all are guilty of what
is done by one."

Foster 353, 354. "A general resolution against all opposers, whether such
resolution appears upon evidence to have been actually and implicitly entered
into by the confederates, or may reasonably be collected from their number,
arms or behoviour, at, or before the scene of action," such resolutions, so
proved, have always been considered as strong ingredients in cases of this
kind. And in cases of homicide, committed in consequence of them, every person
present; in the sense of the law, when the homicide has been committed, has
been involved in the guilt of him that gave the mortal blow."

Foster. "The cases of Lord Dacre mentioned by Hale, and of Pudsey, reported by
Crompton, and cited by Hale, turned upon this point. The offenses they
respectively stood charged with as principals, were committed far out of their
sight and hearing; and yet both were held to be present. It was sufficient,
that at the instant the facts were committed, they were of the same party and
upon the same pursuit, and under the same engagements and expectations of
mutual defense and support, with those that did the facts."

Thus far I have proceeded, and I believe it will not be hereafter disputed by
any body, that this law ought to be known to every one who has any disposition
to be concerned in an unlawful assembly, whatever mischief happens in the
prosecution of the design they set out upon, all are answerable for it. It is
necessary we should consider the definitions of some other crimes, as well as
murder; sometimes one crime gives occasion to another, an assault is sometimes
the occasion of man slaughter, sometimes of excusable homicide. It is necessary
to consider what is a riot. 1. Hawk. c. 65. 2. I shall give you the definition
of it. "Wheresoever more than three persons uses force or violence, for the
accomplishment of any design whatever, all concerned are rioters."

Were there not more than three persons in Dock-square? -- Did they not agree
to go to King Street, and attack the Main guard? -- Where then, is the reason
for hesitation, at calling it a riot? -- If we cannot speak the law as it is,
where is our liberty? And this is law, that wherever more than three persons,
are gathered together, to accomplish any thing with force, it is a riot 1.
Hawk. C. 65. 2. "Wherever more than three, use force and violence, all who are
concerned therein are rioters: But in some cases wherein the law authorizes
force, it is lawful and commendable to use it. As for a sheriff, 2. And 67.
Poph. 121. or constable, 3. H. 7.10.6. or perhaps even for a private person,
Poph. 121. Moore, 656. to assemble a competent number of people, in order with
force, to oppose rebels, or enemies, or rioters, and afterward with such
fOrce, actually to suppress them."

I do not mean to apply the word rebel on this occasion: I have no reason to
suppose that ever there was one in Boston, at least among the natives of the
country; but rioters are in the same situation, as far as my argument is
concerned, and proper officers may suppress rioters, and (...) may even private
persons.

If we strip ourselves free from all military laws, mutiny acts, articles of
war and soldiers oaths and consider these prisoners as neighbors, if any of
their neighbors were attached in King Street, they had a right to collect
together to suppress this riot and combination. If any number of persons meet
together at a fair, or market, and happen to fall together by the ears, they
are not guilty of a riot, but of a sudden affray: here is another paragraph
which I mu^^ read to you, 1. Hawkins, c. 65. 3, "If a number of persons, being
met together at a fair or market, or on any other lawful and innocent occasion,
happen on a sudden quarrel, to fall together by the ears, they are not guilty
of a riot, but of a sudden affray only, of which none are guilty, but those who
actually engage in it," etc. End of the ^. It would be endless, as well as
superfluous, to examine, whether every particular person engaged in a riot,
were in truth one of the first assembly, or actually had a previous knowledge
of the design thereof.

I have endeavored to produce the best authorities, and to give you the rules
of law in their words, for I desire not to advance any thing of my own. I choose
to lay down the rules of law, from authorities which cannot be disputed. --
Another point is this, whether, and how far, a private person may aid another
in distress? Suppose a press gang should come on shore in this town, and
assault any sailor or householder in King street, in order to carry them of
board one of his Majesty's ships and impress him without any warrant, as a
seaman in his Majesty's service, how sat do you suppose the inhabitants would
think themselves warranted by law, to interpose against that lawless press
gang^ I agree that such a press gang would be as unlawful an assembly, as that
was in King street. If they were to press a^ inhabitant, and carry him off for
a sailor, would not the inhabitants think themselves warranted by law to
interpose in behalf of their fellow citizens? Now Gentlemen, if the soldiers
had no right to interpose in the relief of the Sentry, the inhabitants would
have no right to interpose with regard to the citizen, for whatever is law for
a soldier, is law for a sailor, and for a citizen, they all stand upon an equ^^
sooting, in this respect. I believe we shall not have it disputed, that it
would be lawful to go into King Street, and help an honest man there, against
the press master. We have many instances in the books which authorize it, which
I shall produce to you presently.

Now suppose you should have a jealousy in your minds, that the people who made
this attack on the Sentry, had nothing in their intention more than to take him
off his post, and that was threatened by some; suppose they intended to go a
little farther, and ^ar and feather him, or to ride him, (as the phrase is in
Hudibras) he would have had a good right to have stood upon his defense, the
defense of his liberty, and if he could not preserve that without hazard to his
own life, he would be warranted in depriving those of life, who were
endeavoring to deprive him of his; that is a point I would not give up for my
right hand, nay, for my life.

Well, I say, if the people did this, or if this was only their intention,
surely the officer and soldiers had a right to go to his relief, and therefore
they set out upon a lawful errand, they were therefore a lawful assembly, if we
only consider them as private subjects and fellow citizens, without regard to
Mutiny Acts, Articles of War, or ^oldiers Oaths; a private person, or any
number of private persons, have a right to go to the assistance of their fellow
subject in distress and danger of his life, when assaulted and in danger from a
few or a multitude. Keyl. 136. "If a man perceives another by force to be
injuriously treated, pressed and restrained of his liberty, though the person
abused does not complain, or call for aid or assistance; and others out of
compassion shall come to his rescure, and kill any of those that shall so
restrain him, that is manslaughter. Keyl -- A and others without any warrant,
impress B to serve the King at sea, B quietly submitted and went off with the
press master: Hugett and the others pursued them, and required a sight of their
warrant; but they showing a piece of paper that was not a sufficient warrant,
thereupon Hugett with the others drew their swords, and the press-masters
theirs, and so their was a combat, and those who endeavored to rescue the
pressed man killed one of the pretended press-masters. This was but
manslaughter, for when the liberty of one subject is invaded, it affects all
the rest: It is a provocation to all people, as being of ill example and
per^elous consequences."

2. Lord Raymond, 1301. The Queen versus Tooley et alios. Lord Chief Justice
Holt says, 3d. "The prisoner ( i. e. To^l^y) in this case had sufficient
provocation; for if one be imprisioned upon an unlawful authority, it is a
sufficient provocation to all people out of compassion; -- and where the
liberty of the subject is invaded, it is a provocation to all the subjects of
England, etc. and sure a man ought to be concerned for magna charta and the
laws; and if any one against the law imprisons a man, he is an offender against
magna charta."

I am not insensible of Sir Michael Foster's observation on these cases, but
apprehend they do not invalidate the authority of them as far as I now apply
them to the purpose of my argument. -- If a stranger, a mere fellow subject may
interpose to defend the liberty, he may to defend the li^ of another
individual. But according to the evidence, some imprudent people before the
Sentry, proposed to take hi^ off his post, others threatened his life, and
intelligence (...) this was carried to the Main-guard, before any of the
prisoners turned out: They were then ordered out to relie^ the Sentry, and any
of our fellow citizens might lawfull^ have gone upon the same errand; they were
therefore lawful assembly.

I have but one point more of law to consider, and the is this: In the case
before you, I do not pretend to pr^ that every one of the unhappy persons
slain, were concerned in the riot; the authorities read to you just now, s^ it
would be endless to prove, whether every person that was present and in a riot,
was concerned in planning the fir^ enterprise or not: nay, I believe it but
justice, to say, some were perfectly innocent of the occasion, I have reason in
suppose, that one of them was, Mr. Maverick; he was a v^ worthy young man, as
be has been represented to me, and had no concern in the riotous proceedings of
that nig^ and I believe the same may be said, in favor of one (...) at least,
Mr. Caldwell who was slain; and therefore many people may think, that as he,
and perhaps another was innocent, therefore innocent blood having been shed,
the must be expiated by the death of somebody or other. ^ take notice of this,
because one gentleman nominated ^ the sheriff, for a Juryman upon this trial,
because he ^ said, he believed Capt. Preston was innocent, but innoce^ blood
had been shed, and therefore somebody ought to ^ hanged for it, which he
thought was indirectly giving (...) opinion in this cause. I am afraid many
other persons have ^inted such an opinion; I do not take it to be a rule, that
where innocent blood is shed, the person must die. In the instance of the
Frenchmen on the Plains of Abraham, they were innocent, fighting for their King
and country, their blood is as innocent as any, there may be multitudes killed,
when innocent blood is shed on all sides, so that it is not an invariable rule.
I will put a case, in which, I dare say, all will agree with me: Here are two
persons, the father and the son, go out a hunting, they take different ^ds, the
father hears a rushing among the bushes, takes it to be game, fires and kills
his son through a mistake; here is innocent blood shed, but yet nobody will say
the father ought to die for it. So that the general rule of law, (...) that
whenever one person has a right to do an act, and that act by any accident,
takes away the life of another, it is accusable, it bears the same regard to
the innocent as to the guilty. If two men are together, and attack me, and I
(...) a right to kill them, I strike at them, and by mistake, ^ke a third and
kill him, as I had a right to kill the first, (...) killing the other, will be
excusable, as it happened by ^cident. If I in the heat of passion, aim a blow
at the ^erson who has assaulted me, aiming at him, I kill another ^rson, it is
but manslaughter. Foster, 261 3. "If an ac^d unlawful in itself be done
deliberately and with in^ion of mischief or great bodily harm to particulars,
or ^f mischief indiscriminately, fall it where it may, and ^th ensues against
or beside the original intention of the ^y, it will be murder. But if such
mischievous intention does not appear, which is matter of fact and to be
collected from circumstances, and the act was done heedlessly had
inconsiderately, it will be manslaughter: not accidental death, because the act
upon which death ensued, was ^lawful."

Under this head, etc. [ See the remainder inserted in pages 14^, 146.]

Supposing in this case, the Molatto man was the person made the assault,
suppose he was concerned in the unlawful assembly, and this party of soldiers
endeavoring to de^d themselves against him, happened to kill another person
who was innocent, though the soldiers had no reason ^t we know of, to think any
person there, at least of that number who were crouding about them innocent,
they might naturally enough presume all to be guilty of the riot and assault,
and to come with the same design; I say, if on firing on these who were guilty,
they accidentally killed an innocent person, it was not their faults, they were
obliged to defend themselves against those who were pressing upon them, they
are not answerable for it with their lives, for upon supposition it was
justifiable or excusable to kill Attucks or any other person, it will be
equally justifiable or excusable if in firing at him, they killed another who
was innocent, or if the provocation was such as to mitigate the guilt to
manslaughter, it will equally mitigate the guilt, if they killed an innocent
man undesignedly, in aiming at him who gave the provocation, according to Judge
Foster, and as this point is of such consequence. I must produce some more
authorities for it. 1. Hawkins, 84. "Also, if a third person accidentally
happen to be killed, by one engaged in a combat with another upon a sudden
quarrel, it seems that he who kills him, is guilty of manslaughter only, etc.
H. H. P C. 442. To the same point and 1. H. H. P. C. 484. and 4. Black. 27.

I shall now consider one question more, and that is concerning provocation.
The distinction between M^r^er and Manslaughter, is more easily confounded than
many other distinctions of Law relative to Homicide. -- And many persons among
us seem to think that the punishment of Death ought to be inflicted upon all
voluntary killing one private man by another, whether done suddenly or
deliberately, cooly or in anger. -- These received notions may have originated
partly from a false construction of the general precept to Noah, whose sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his be blood be shed. -- But may not some of these
mistaken notions have been derived from law books -- We find the distinction
between Murder and Manslaughter, sometimes attributed to the peculiar benignity
of the English law, and it is sometimes represented that the particular fact
which the law of England calls Manslaughter, and indulges with Clergy, is
punished with death in all other laws.

Vide Observations on the Statutes page 54. By the law of Scotland, there is no
such thing as Manslaughter, no by the civil law; and therefore a criminal ind^
for Murder under the Statute of Henry the Eighth, where the Judges proceed by
the rules of the civil law, must either be found guilty of the Murder or
acquitted. -- and in another place, Observations on the Statutes 422. Note (z.)
I have before observed that by the civil law, as well as the law of Scotland,
there is no such offense, as what is, with us termed Manslaughter: Sir Michael
Foster 288. If taking general verdicts of acquittal, in plain cases of death,
Per Infortunium, etc. deserves the name of a deviation, it is far short of
what is constantly practiced at an Admiraly ^essions, under 28. H. 8. with
regard to offenses not ousted of Clergy by paticular statutes, which had they
been committed at land would have been entitled to Clergy^* In these cases the
Jury is constantly directed to acquit the prisoner; because the marine law does
not allow of Clergy in any case, and therefore in an indictment for murder on
the high seas, if the fact comes out upon evidence to be no more than
Manslaughter, supposing it to have been committed at land, the prisoner is
constantly acquitted.

H. Lord Raymond 1496. His Lordship says, "From these cases it appears, that
though the law of England, is so far peculiarly favorable (I use the word
peculiarly because I know of no other law, that makes such a distinction
between Murder and Manslaughter) as to permit the excess of anger and passion
(which a man ought to keep under and govern) in some instances to extenuate the
greatest of private injuries, as the taking away a man's life is; yet in these
cases, it must be such a passion, as for the time deprives him of his reasoning
faculties.

I shall not enter into any enquiry, how far the Admiralty sessions in England,
or a Special Court of Admiralty in America ought to proceed by the rules of
civil law, though it is a question of immense importance to Americans. But must
beg leave to observe that though the distinction between Murder and
Manslaughter is not found in words in the civil law, yet the distinction
between homicide, with deliberation and without deliberation, and on a sudden
provocation is well known in that law, and the former is punished with death,
the later, with some inferior corporal punishment at the discretion of the
Judges.

Indeed, the civil law is more favorable, and indulgent to sudden anger and
resentment than the common law, and allows many things to be a provocation
sufficient to exempt the person killing from the Paena ordinaria, which is
death, which the common law considers as a slight provocation or none at all.

Cod. Lib. 9. Tit. 16, Note 40. -- Gail, page 503. -- Maranta, page 49. Par. 4.
Did. 1.77.

It should seem from these authorities, that the lenity and indulgence of the
laws of England, is not unnatural, extraordinary, or peculiar, and instead of
being unknown in the civil law, that it is carried much further in many
respects than in the common law. -- And indeed it seems that the like
indulgence, was permitted in the Jewish law -- though it has been so often
represented as peculiar to the English law, that many persons seem to think it
unwarrantable, and tending to leave the guilt of blood upon the land.


We have hitherto been considering self-defence, and how far persons may go in
defending themselves against aggressors, even by taking away their lives, and
now proceed to consider, such provocations as the law allows to mitigate or
extenuate the guilt of killing, where it is not justifiable or excusable.

An assault and battery, committed upon a man, in such a manner as not to
endanger his life, is such a provocation as the law allows to reduce killing,
down to the crime of manslaughter. Now the law has been made on more
consideration than we are capable of making at present; the law considers a man
as capable of bearing any thing, and every thing, but blows I may reproach a
man as much as I please, I may call him a thief, robber, traitor, scoundrel,
coward, lobster, bloody back, etc. and if he kills me it will be murder, if
nothing else but words preceed; but if from giving him such kind of language, I
proceed to take him by the nose, or fillip him on the forehead, that is, an
assault! that is a blow; the law will not oblige a man to stand still and bear
it; there is the distinction; hands off, touch me not; as soon as you touch me,
if I run you through the heart it is but Manslaughter; the utility of this
distinction, the more you think of it, the more you will be satisfied with it;
it is an assault when ever a blow is struck, let it be ever so slight, and
sometimes even without a blow. The law considers man as frail and passionate,
when his passions are touched, he will be thrown off his guard, and therefore
the law makes allowances for this frailty, considers him as in a sit of
passion, not having the possession of his intellectual faculties, and therefore
does not oblige him to measure out his blows with a yard stick, or weigh them
in a scale; let him kill with a sword, gun or hedge stake, it is not murder,
but only manslaughter. Keyling's Reports 135. Regina versus Mawgrige. "Rules
supported by authority and general consent, showing what are always allowed to
be sufficient provocations. First, if one man, upon any words shall make an
assault upon another, either by pulling him by the nose, or filliping upon the
forehead, and he that is so assaulted, shall draw his sword, and immediately
run the other through, that is but manslaughter; for the peace is broken by the
person killed, and with an indignity to him that received the assault. Besides,
he that was so affronted might reasonably apprehend, that he that treated him
in that manner, might have some further design upon him." So that here is the
boundary, when a man is assaulted, and kills in consequence of that assault, it
is but manslaughter; I will just read as I go along the defintion of an
assault. 1. Hawkin's Chap. 62. 1. "An assault is an attempt or offer, with
force or violence, to do a coporal hurt to another; as by stricking at him,
with or without a weapon, or presenting a gun at him, at such a distance to
which the gun will carry, or pointing a pitch-fork at him, or by any other such
like act done in an angry, threatening manner, etc. But no words can amount to
an assault." Here is the defintion of an assault, which is a sufficient
provocation to soften killing down to manslaughter. 1. Hawkin's, Chap. 31. 36.
"Neither can he be thought guilty of a greater crime, than manslaughter, who
finding a man in bed with his wife, or being actually struck by him, or pulled
by the nose, or filliped upon the forehead, immediately kills him, or in the
defense of his person from an unlawful arrest; or in the defense of his house,
from those who claiming a title to it, attempt forcibly to enter it, and to
that purpose shoot at it, etc." Every snow-ball, oyster shell, cake of ice, or
bit of cinder that was thrown that night, at the Sentinel, was an assault upon
him; every one that was thrown at the party of soldiers, was an assault upon
them, whether it hit any of them or not. I am guilty of an assault, if I
present a gun at any person, whether I shoot at him or not, it is an assault,
and if I insult him in that manner, and he shoots me, it is but manslaughter.
Foster, 295 6. "To what I have offered with regard to sudden rencounters, let
me add, that the blood, already too much heated, kindles afresh at every pass
or blow. And in the tumult of the passions, in which mere instinct self
preservation, has no inconsiderable share, the voice of reason is not heard.
And therefore, the law in condesension to the infirmities of flesh and blood
does extenuate the offense." Insolent, scurrilous, or slanderous language, when
it preceeds an assault, aggravates it. Foster 316. "We all knew that words of
reproach, how grating and offensive soever, are in the eye of the law, no
provocation, in the case of voluntary homicide, and yet every man who has
considered the human frame, or but attended to the workings of his own heart,
knows, that affronts of that kind, pierce deeper, and stimulate in the veins
more effectually, than a slight injury done to a third person, though under
color of justice, possibly can." I produce this to show the assault, in this
case, was aggravated by the scurrilous language which preceeded it. Such words
of reproach, stimulate in the veins, and ex^sperate the mind, and no doubt if
an assault and battery succeeds them, killing under such a provocation, is
softened to manslaughter, but, killing without such provocation, makes it
murder.

FIVE o'Clock, P. M. the Court adjourned till Tuesday morning, nine o'Clock.

Tuesday, NINE o'Clock, the Court met according to adjournment, and Mr. ADAMS
proceeded

May it please your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
I yesterday afternoon produced from the best authorities, those rules of law
which must govern all cases of homicide, particularly that which is now before
you; it now remains to consider the evidence, and see whether any thing has
occured, that may be compared to the rules read to you; and I will not trouble
myself nor you with labored endeavors to be methodical, I shall endeavor to
make some few observations, on the testimonies of the witnesses, such as will
place the facts in a true point of light, with as much brevity as possible; but
I suppose it would take me four hours to read to you, (if I did nothing else
but read) the minutes of evidence that I have taken in this trial. In the first
place the Gentleman who opened this cause, has stated to you, with candor and
precision, the evidence of the identity of the persons.

The witnesses are confident that they know the prisoners at the bar, and that
they were present that night, and of the party; however, it is apparent, that
witnesses are liable to make mistakes, by a single example before you. Mr.
Bass, who is a very honest man, and of good character, swears positively that
the tall man, Warren, stood on the right that night, and was the first that
fired; and I am sure you are satisfied by this time, by many circumstances,
that he is totally mistaken in this matter; this you will consider at your
leisure. The witnesses in general did not know the faces of these persons
before; very few of them knew the names of them before, they only took notice
of their faces that night. How much certainty there is in this evidence, I
leave you to determine.

There does not seem to me to be any thing very material in the testimony of
Mr. Aston, except to the identity of M'Cauley, and he is the only witness to
that. If you can be satisfied in your own minds, without a doubt, that he knew
M'Cauley so well as to be sure, you will believe he was there.

The next witness is Bridgham, he says he saw the tall man Warren, but saw
another man belonging to the same regiment soon after, so like him, as to make
him doubt whether it was Warren or not; he thinks he saw the Corporal, but is
not certain, he says he was at the corner of the Custom house, this you will
take notice of, other witnesses swear, he was the remotest man of all from him
who fired first, and there are other evidences who swear the left man did not
fire at all; if Wemms did not discharge his gun at all, he could not kill any
of the persons, therefore he must be acquitted on the fact of killing; for an
intention to kill, is not murder nor manslaughter, if not carried into
execution: The witness saw numbers of things thrown, and he saw plainly sticks
strike the guns, about a dozen persons with sticks, gave three cheers, and
surrounded the party, and struck the guns with their sticks several blows: This
is a witness for the crown, and his testimony is of great weight for the
prisoners; he gives his testimony very sensibly and impartially. He swears
positively, that he not only saw ice or snow thrown, but saw the gus struck
several times; if you believe this witness, of whose credibility you are wholly
the Judges, as you are of every other; if you do not believe him, there are
many others who swear to circumstances in favor of the prisoners; it should
seem impossible you should disbelieve so great a number, and of crown witnesses
too, who swear to such variety of circumstances that fall in with one another
so naturally to form our defense; this witness swears positively, there were a
dozen of persons with clubs, surrounded the party; twelve sailors with clubs,
were by much an overmatch to eight soldiers, chained there by the order and
command of their officer, to stand in defense of the Sentry, not only so, but
under an oath to stand there, i. e. to obey the lawful command of their
officer, as much, Gentlemen of the Jury, as you are under oath to determine
this cause be law and evidence; clubs they had not, and they could not defend
themselves with their bayonets against so many people; it was in the power of
the ^ailors to kill one half or the whole of the party if they had been so
disposed; what had the soldiers to expect, when twelve persons armed with
clubs, (sailors too, between whom and soldiers, there is such an antipathy,
that they fight as naturally when they meet, as the elephant and Rhinoc^ros)
were daring enough, even at the time when they were loading their guns, to come
up with their clubs, and smite on their guns; what had eight soldiers to expect
from such a set of people? Would it have been a prudent resolution in ^h^m, or
in any body in their situation, to have stood still, to see if the sailors
would knock their brains out, or not? Had they not all the reason in the world
to think, that as they had done so much, they would proceed farther? their
clubs were as capable of killing as a ball, an hedge stake is known in the law
books as a weapon of death, as much as a sword, bayonet, or musk^t. He says,
the soldiers were loading their guns, when the twelve surrounded them, the
people went up to them within the length of their guns, and before the firing;
besides all this he swears, they were called cowardly raseals, and dared to
fire; he says these people were all dressed like sailors; and I believe, that
by and bye you will find evidence enough to satisfy you, these were some of the
persons that came out of Docksquare, after making the attack on Murray's
barracks, and who had been arming themselves with sticks from the butchers
stalls and cord wood piles, and marched up round Cornhill under the command of
Attucks. All the bells in town were ringing, the rattling of the blows upon the
guns he heard, and swears it was violent this; corroborates the testimony of
James Bailey, which will be considered presently. Some witnesses swear a club
struck a soldier's gun, Bailey swears a man struck a soldier and knocked him
down, before he fired, "the last man that fired, levelled at a lad, and moved
his gun as the lad ran:" You will consider, that an intention to kill is not
murder; if a man lays poison in the way of another, and with an express
intention that he should take it up and die of it, it is not murder: Suppose
that soldier had malice in his heart, and was d^termined to murder that boy if
he could, yet the evidence clears him of killing the boy, I say, admit he had
malice in his heart, yet it is plain he did not kill him or any body else, and
if you believe one part of the evidence, you must believe the other, and if he
had malice, that malice was ineffectual; I do not recollect any evidence that
assertains who it was that stood the last man but one upon the left, admitting
he discovered a temper ever so wicked, cruel and malicious, you are to consider
his ill temper is not imputable to another, no other had any intention of this
deliberate kind, the whole transaction was sudden, there was but a very short
space of time between the first gun and the last, when the first gun was fired
the people fell in upon the soldiers and laid on with their weapons with more
violence, and this served to increase the provocation, and raised such a
violent spirit of revenge in the soldiers, as the law takes notice of, and
makes some allowance for, and in that fit of fury and madness, I suppose he
aimed at the boy.

The next witness is Dodge, he says, there were fifty people near the soldiers
pushing at them; now the witness before say, there were twelve sailors with
clubs, but now here are fifty more aiding and abetting of them, ready to
relieve them in case of need; now what could the people expect? It was their
business to have taken themselves out of the way; some prudent people by the
Townhouse, told them not to meddle with the guard, but you hear nothing of
this from these fifty people; no, instead of that, they were huzz^ing and
whistling, crying damn you, fire! why don't you fire? So that they were
actually assisting these twelve sailors that made the attack; he says the
soldiers were pushing at the people to keep them off, ice and snowballs were
thrown, and I heard ice rattle on their guns, there were some clubs thrown from
a considerabl distance across the street. This witness swears he saw snow-balls
thrown close before the party, and he took them to be thrown on purpose, he saw
oyster-shells likewise thrown. -- Mr. Langford the watchman, is more particular
in his testimony, and deserves a very particular consideration, because it is
intended by the council for the crown, that his testimony shall distinguish
Killroy from the rest of the prisoners, and exempt him from those pleas of
justification, excuse or ex^en^tation, which we rely upon for the whole party,
because he had previous malice, and they would from hence conclude, he aimed at
a particular person; you will consider all the evidence with regard to that, by
itself.

Hemmingway, the sheriff's coachman, swears he knew Killroy, and that he heard
him say, he would never miss an opportunity of si^ing upon the inhabitants:
this is to prove that Killroy had preconceived malice in his heart, not indeed
against the unhappy persons who were killed, but against the inhabitants in
general, that he had the spirit not only of a Turk or an Arab, but of the
devil; but admitting that this testimony is literally true, and that he had
all the malice they would wish to prove, yet, if he was assaulted that night,
and his life in danger, he had a right to defend himself as well as another
man; if he had malice before, it does not take away from him the right of
defending himself against any unjust aggressor. But it is not at all
improbable, that there was some misunderstanding about these loose expressions;
perhaps the man had no thoughts of what his words might import; many a man in
his cups, or in anger, which is a short fit of madness, has uttered the
rashest expressions, who had no such savage disposition in general: so that
there is but little weight in expressions uttered at a kitching fire, before a
maid and a coachman, where he might think himself at liberty to talk as much
like a bully, a fool, and a madman as he pleased, and that no evil would come
of it. Strictly speaking, he might mean no more than this, that he would not
miss an opportunity of firing on the inhabitants, if he was attacked by them in
such a manner as to justify it: soldiers have sometimes avoided opportunities
of firing, when they would have been justified, if they had fired. I would
recommend to them, to be tender by all means, nay, let them be cautious at
their peril; but still what he said, amounts in strictness, to no more than
this, "If the inhabitants make an attack on me, I will not bear from them what
I have done already;" or I ill bear no more, than what I am obliged by law to
bear. No doubt it was under the fret of his spirits, the indignation,
mortification, grief and shame, that he had suffered a defeat at the
Rope-walks; it was just after an account of an aff^^y was published here,
betwixt the soldiers and inhabitants at New York. There was a little before the
5th of March, much noise in this town, and a pompuous account in the news
papers, of a victory obtained by the inhabitants there over the soldiers; which
doubtless excited the resentment of the soldiers here, as well as exultations
among some sorts of the inhabitants: and the ringing of the bells here, was
probably copied from New York, a wretched example in this, and in two other
instances at least: the defeat of the soldiers at the Rope-walks, was about
that time too, and if he did, after that, use such expressions, it ought not to
weigh too much in this case. It can scarcely amount to proof that he harbored
any settled malice against the people in general. Other witnesses are
introduced to show that Killroy had besides his general ill will against every
body, particular malice against Mr. Gray, whom he killed, as Langford swears.

Some of the witnesses, have sworn that Gray was active in the battle at the
Rope walks, and that Killroy was once there, from whence the Council for the
Crown would infer, that Killroy; in King street, on the 5th of March in the
night, kenw Gray whom he had seen at the Rope-walks before, and took that
opportunity to gratify his preconceived malice; but if this is all true, it
will not take away from him his justification, excuse, or extenuation, if he
had any. -- The rule of the law is, if there has been malice between two, and
at a distant time afterward they met, and one of them assaults the other's
life, or only assaults him, and he kills in consequence of it, the law presumes
the killing was in self defense, or upon the provocation, not on account of the
antecedent malice. If therefore the assault upon Killroy was so violent as to
endanger his life, he had as good a right to defend himself, as much as if he
never had before conceived any malice against the people in geral, or Mr. Gray
in particular. If the assault upon him, was such as to amount only to a
provocation, not to a justification, his crime will be manslaughter only.
However, it does not appear, that he knew Mr. Gray; none of the witnesses
pretend to say he knew him, or that he ever saw him. It is true they were both
at the Rope-walks at one time, but there were so many combatants on each side,
that it is not even probable that Killroy should know them all, and no witness
says there was any rencounter there between them two. Indeed, to return to Mr.
Langford's testimony, he says, he did not perceive Killroy to aim at Gray, more
than at him, but he says expressly, he did not aim at Gray. -- Langford says, "
Gray had no stick, was standing with his arms folded up," -- This witness, is
however most probably mistaken in this matter and consounds one time with
another, a mistake which has been made by many witnesses, in this case, and
considering the confusion and terror of the scene, is not to be wondered at --

Witnesses have sworn to the condition of Killroy's bayonet, that it was bloody
the morning after the 5th of March. -- The blood they saw, if any, might be
occasioned by a wound given by some of the bayonets in the affray, possibly in
Mr. Posdick's arm, or it might happen, in the manner mentioned by my brother
before. -- One bayonet at least was struck off and it might fall, where the
blood of some person slain afterward flowed. -- It would be doing violence to
every rule of law and evidence, as well as to common sense and the feelings of
humanity, to infer from the blood on the bayonet, that it had been stabbed into
the brains of Mr. Gray after he was dead, and that by Killroy himself who had
killed him.

Young Mr. Davis swears, that he saw Gray that evening, a little before the
firing, that he had a stick under his arm, and said he would go to the riot, "I
am glad of it, (that is that there was a rumpus) I will go and have a slap at
them, if I lose my life." -- And when he was upon the spot, some witnesses
swear, he did not act that peaceable inoffensive part, which Langford thinks he
did. -- They swear, they thought him in liquor -- that he run about clapping
several people on the shoulders saying, "Don't run away" -- "they dare not fire"
Langford goes on "I saw twenty or five and twenty boys about the Sentinal --
and I spoke to him, and bid him not be afraid." -- How came the Watchman
Langford to tell him not to be afraid. Does not this circumstance prove, that
he thought there was danger, or at least that the Sentinel in fact, was
terrified and did think himself in danger. Langford goes on "I saw about twenty
or five and twenty boys that is young shavers." -- We have been entertained
with a great variety of phrases, to avoid calling this sort of people a mob. --
Some call them shavers, some call them genius's. -- The plain English is
gentlemen, most probably a motley rabble of saucy boys, negroes and molattoes,
Irish teagues and out laudish jack tarrs. -- And why we should scruple to call
such a set of people a mob, I cannot conceive, unless the name is too
respectable for them: -- The sun is not about to stand still or go out, nor the
rivers to dry up because there was a mob in Boston on the 5th of March that
attacked a party of soldiers. -- Such things are not new in the world, nor in
the British domi^ions though they are comparatively, rareties and novelties in
this town. -- Carr a native of Ireland had often been concerned in such
attacks, and indeed, from the nature of things, soldiers quartered in a
populous town, will always occasion two mobs, where they prevent one. -- They
are wretched conservators of the peace!

Langford "heard the rattling against the guns, but saw nothing thrown." --
This rattling must have been very remarkable, as so many witnesses heard it,
who were not in a situation to see what caused it -- These things which hit the
guns made a noise, those which hit the soldiers persons, did not -- But when so
many things were thrown and so many hit their guns, to suppose that none struck
their persons is incredible. -- Langford goes on " Gray struck me on the
shoulder and asked me what is to pay? I answered, I don't know but I believe
someth^ng will come of it, by and bye." -- Whence could this apprehension of
mischief arise, it L'angford did not think the assault, the squabble, the
affray was such as would provoke the soldiers to fire? -- " a bayonet went
through my great coat and jacket," yet the soldier did not step out of his
place -- This looks as if Langford was nearer to the party than became a
watchman. Forty or fifty people round the soldiers, and more coming from Quaker
lane, as well as the other lanes -- The soldiers heard all the bells ringing
and saw people coming from every point of the compass to the assistance of
those who were insulting, assaulting, beating and abusing of them -- what had
they to expect but destruction, if they had not thus early taken measures to
defend themselves?

Brewer saw Killroy, etc. saw Dr. Young etc. "he said the people had better go
home." It was an excellent advice, happy for some of them had they followed it
but it seems all advice was lost on these persons, they would harken to none
that was given them in Dock square, Royal exchange lane or King street, they
were bent on making this assault, and on their own destruction.

The next witness that knows any thing was, James Bailey, he saw Carrol,
Montgomery and White, he saw some round the Sentry, heaving pieces of ice,
large and hard enough to hurt any man, as big as your fist: one question is
whether the Sentinel was attacked or not. -- If you want evidence of an attack
upon him there is enough of it, here is a witness an inhabitant of the town,
surely no friend to the soldiers, for he was engaged against them at the
Ropewalks; he says he saw twenty or thirty round the Sentry, pelting with cakes
of ice, as big as one's fist; certainly cakes of ice of this size may kill a
man, if they happen to hit some part of the head. -- So that, here was an
attack on the Sentinel, the consequence of which he had reason to dread, and it
was prudent in him to call for the Main Guard: he retreated as far as he could,
he attempted to get into the Custom house, but could not; then he called to the
Guard, and he had a good right to call for their assistance; "he did not know,
he told the witness, what was the matter," "but he was afraid there would be
mischief by and bye;" and well he might, with so many shavers and genius's
round him -- capable of throwing such dangerous things. Bailey swears,
Montgomery fired the first gun, and that he stood at the right, "the next man
to me, I stood behind him, etc" This witness certainly is not prejudiced in
favor of the soldiers, he swears, he saw a man come up to Montgomery with a
club, and knock him down before he fired, and that he not only fell himself,
but his gun flew out of his hand, and as soon as he rose he took it up and
fired. If he was knocked down on his station, had he not reason to think his
life in danger, or did it not raise his passions and put him off his guard; so
that it cannot be more than manslaughter.

When the multitude was shouting and ^uzza^ng, and threatening life, the bells
all ringing, the mob whistle screaming and rending like an Indian yell, the
people from all quarters throwing every species of rubbish they could pick up
in the street, and some who were quite on the other side of the street throwing
clubs at the whole party, Montgomery in particular, smote with a club and
knocked down, and as soon as he could rise and take up his firelock, another
club from a far struck his b^east or shoulder, what could he do? Do you expect
he should behave like a Stoic Philosopher lost in Apathy? Patient as Epictatus
while his master was breaking his legs with a cudg^? -- It is impossible you
should find him guilty of murder. You must suppose him divested of all human
passions, if you don't think him at the least provoked, thrown off his guard,
and into the surer brevis, by such treatment as this.

Bailey "Saw the Molatto seven or eight minutes before the firing, at the head
of twenty or thirty sailors in Cornhill, and he had a large cordwood stick." So
that this Attucks, by this testimony of Bailey compared with that of Andrew,
and some others, appears to have undertaken to be the hero of the night; and to
lead this army with banners, to form them in the first place in Dock square,
and march them up to King Street, with their club^; they passed through the
main street up to the Main guard, in order to make the attack. If this was not
an unlawful assembly, there never was one in the world. Attucks with his
myrmidous comes round Jockson's corner, and down to the party by the
Sentry-box; when the soldiers pushed the people off, this man with his party
cried, do not be afraid of them, they dare not fire, kill them! kill them!
knock them over! And he tried to knock their brains out. It is plain the
soldiers did not have their station, but cried to the people, stand off: now to
have this reinforcement coming down under the command of a stout Molatto
f^llow, whose very looks, was enough to terrify any person, what had not the
soldiers then to fear? He had hardiness enough to fall in upon them, and with
one hand took hold of a bayonet, and with the other knocked the man down: This
was the behavior of Attucks; -- to whose mad behavior, in all probability,
the dreadful carnage of that night, is chiefly to be ascribed. And it is in
this manner, this town has been often treated; a Carr from Ireland, and an
Attucks from Framingham, happening to be here, shall sully out upon their
thoughtless enterprises, at the head of such a rabble of Negroes, etc. as they
can collect together, and then there are not wanting, persons to ascribe all
their doings to the good people of the town.

Mr. Adams proceeded to a minute consideration of every witness produced on the
crown side; and endeavored to show, from the evidence on that side, which
could not be contested by the council for the crown, that the assault upon the
party, was sufficiently dangerous to justify the prisoners; at least, that it
was sufficiently provoking, to reduce to manslaughter the crime, even of the
two who were supposed to be proved to have killed. But it would swell this
publication too much, to insert his observations at large, and there is the
less necessity for it, as they will probably occur to every man who re^ds the
evidence with attention He then proceeded to consider the testimonies of the
witnesses for the prisoners, which must also be omitted: And concuded,

I will enlarge no more on the evidence, but submit it to you. -- Facts are
stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the
dictates of our passions, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence:
nor is the law less stable than the fact; if an assault was made to endanger
their lives, the law is clear, they had a right to kill in their own defense;
it it was not so severe as to endanger their lives, yet if they were assaulted
at all, struck and abused by blows of any sort, by snow-balls, oyster-shells,
cinders clubs, or sticks of any kind; this was a provocation, for which the law
reduces the offense of killing, down to manslaughter, in consideration of those
passions in our nature, which cannot be eradicated. To your candor and justice
I submit the prisoners and their cause.

The law, in all vicissitudes of government, fluctuations of the passions, or
flights of enthusiasm, will preserve a steady undeviating course; it will not
bend to the uncertain wishes, imaginations, and wanton tempers of men. To use
the words of a great and worthy man, a patriot, and an hero, an enlightened
friend of mankind, and a martyr to liberty: I mean ALGERNOON SIDNEY, who from
his earliest infancy sought a tranquil retirement under the shadow of the tree
of liberty, with his tongue, his pen, and his sword, The law, (says he,) no
passion can disturb. It Is void of desire and fear, lust and anger. It Is means
sine affectu; written reason; retaining some measure of the divine perfection.
It does not enjoin that which pleases a weak, frail man, but without any regard
to persons, commands that which is good, and punishes evil in all, whether
rich, or poor, high or low, -- It Is deaf, inexorable, inflexible. On the one
hand it is inexorable to the cries and lamentations of the prisoners; on the
other it is deaf, deaf as an adder to the clamou^s of the populace.

[ The cause was then closed by Robert Treat Pain, Esquire on the part of the
crown: In his argument, he endeavored to settle the principal facts, by
comparing the evidence as well on the part of the crown as of the prisoners;
and also to show, that the many undeniable rules of law, which had been
produced, did not apply to the cause at bar. And further, that even upon a
supposition, the party had a right to go to the relief of the Sentry, in the
manner testified by the witnesses; yet from their conduct in going down to the
Sentry, and behavior while there, the law would consider them as an unlawful
assembly. But as the person who wrote the trial in short hand, was so fatigued,
that he could not take down what Mr. Pain said, we are not able to insert his
argument in this publication.]

TUESDAY, half past FIVE o'Clock, P. M. (Mr. Pain not having gone through his
argument) the Court adjourned to Wednesday morning, Eight o'Clock.

WEDNESDAY morning* Eight o'Clock, the court met according to Adjournment, when
Mr. Pain finished closing, and the Court proceeded to sum up the cause to the
Jury.

JUDGE TROWBRIDGE.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
William Wemms, James Hartegan, William M'Cauley Hugh White, Matthew Killroy,
William Warren, John Carrol and Hugh Montgomery, prisoners at the bar, are
charged by the Grand Jurors for the body of this county, with having
feloniously and of their malice aforethought, shot and thereby killed and
murdered Samuel Maverick Samuel Gray, James Caldwell, Patrick Carr, and Crispus
Attucks, against the peace, crown and dignity of our Sovereign Lord the King;
although it is laid in each indictment that some one of the prisoners in
particular gave the mortal wound, yet as all the rest of them are charged with
being present aiding and abetting him to do it, they are all charged as
principals in the murder; and therefore, if upon consideration of the evidence
given in this case, it should appear to you that all the prisoners gave the
mortal wound, or that any one of them did it, and that the rest were present
aiding and abetting him to do it, the indictment will be well maintained
against all the prisoners, so far as respects the killing, because in such
case, the stroke of one is, in consideration of law, the stroke of all. 1 Hale,
437, 463. 2 Hale, 344, 345. Foster, 351. Sa^k, 334, 5.
And as the crime whereof the prisoners are accused is of such a nature as that
it might have been committed by any one of them, though the indictments purport
a joint charge, yet the law looks on the charge as several against each of the
prisoners. 2 Haw. 25. 89
To this charge they have severally pleaded Not Guilty, and there by thrown the
burden of proof upon the crown. -- Considering how much time has already been
taken up in this case, and the multiplicity of evidence that has been given in
it, I shall not spend any time in recapitulating what each witness has
testified, especially as your Foreman has taken it in writing from the mouths
of the witnesses, but shall endeavor to point out the manner in which the
various testimonies are to be considered, and how the evidence given is to be
applied, still leaving it with you to determine how far that which has been
testified by each witness is to be believed. But before I do this, it may not
be improper, considering what has in the course of this year been advanced,
published, and industriously propagated among the people, to observe to you
that none of the indictments against the prisoners are founded on the act of
this province, or the law given to the Jews, but that, all of them are
indictments a^ common law. -- The prisoners are charged with having offended
against the common law, and that only; by that law therefore they are to be
judged, and by that law condemned, or else they must be acquitted. -- This
seems to make it highly proper for me to say something to you upon the common
law, upon homicide and the several kinds and degrees of it, and the rules for
trial of homicide as settled and established by the common law. -- The laws of
England are of two kinds, the unwritten or common law, and the written or
statute law. -- The general customs or immemorial usage of the English nation,
is properly the common law. And the evidence thereof are the Records of the
several Courts of Justice, the Books of Reports and Judicial Decisions, and the
Treatises of the Sages of the Law, handed down to us from the times of the
highest an^iquity 1 Black, 63, 64.
The common law is the law by which the proceedings and determinations in the
King's ordinary Courts of Justice, are guided and directed -- This law is the
birth right of every Englishman -- The first settlers of this country brought
it from England with them -- It was in force here when the act of this province
against murder was made. Pro. Act. 9 W. 3.
Murder here was then felony by common law, and excluded Clergy by, 23. H. 8.
c. 1. and 1. Edw. 6. c. 12. -- So that, that province act, created no new
felony -- It was in aff^mance of the common law -- If murder by that act had
been made a new felony, a murderer would now be entitled to the benefit of
clergy by force of 25. E. 3 c 4. because it is not taken away by that province
act or any other made since. 2 Haw. 33. 24. 2 Hale, 230.334 335
Homicide is of three kinds, justifi^ble, excusable, and selonious -- The first
has no share of guilt at all -- the second very little, but the third is the
highest crime against the law of nature. 4 Black. 177, 8
There are also degrees of guilt in felonious homicide, which divide the
offense into manslaughter and murder. 4 Black. 190.
I shall give some instances under each head, proper to be considered in this
case, and known at this day. And first of justifiable homicide. -- Killing him
who attempts to rob or murder me, to break open my dwelling house in the night,
or to burn it, or by force to commit any other felony on me, my wife, child,
servant, friend, or even a stranger, if it cannot otherwise be prevented, is
justifiable. 24 H. 8. c. 5. 1 Hale 488. 4 Black. 180. Foster 273.4.
By common law it was, and still is, the duty of peace officers, such as
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Under-sheriffs, and Constables, to suppress
riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies. -- The Stat. 13. H. 4. c. 8. subjected
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and Under-sheriffs to the penalty of L. 100,
if they neglected their duty therein. And as the common law obligues the peace
officers to suppress riots, etc. so it empowers them to raise a sufficient
force to enable them to do it. -- A Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, or
Undersheriff may raise the power of the county, and the Constable of a town,
the people of that town, to aid and assist him in suppressing a riot and
apprehending the rioters, and if they stand in their defense, resist the
officer, and continue their riotous proceeding in pulling down a house,
assaulting and beating, or abusing any person or persons, such rioters may
lawfully be killed, if they cannot otherwise be prevented 1 Haw. 28. 14.65. 11.
1 Hale 53.293, 4.495, 596.4 Black. 147.
It is the duty of all persons (except women, decrepid persons, and infants
under fi^teen,) to aid and assist the peace officers to suppress riots, and:c.
when called upon to do it. -- They may take with them such weapons as are
necessary to enable them effectually to do it, and may justify the beating,
wounding, and even killing, such rioters as resist, or refuse to surrender; if
the riot cannot otherwise be suppressed, or the rioters apprehended 1 Haw. 63.
10.65. 20 21.4 Black. 147 179.180.
So in case of a sudden affray, if a private person interposing to part the
combatants, and giving notice of his friendly design, is assaulted by them, or
either of them, and in the struggle happens to kill, he may justify it, because
it is the duty of every man to interpose in such cases to preserve the public
peace. Foster 272. 1 Haw 63. 11.13
A fortiori private persons may interpose to suppress a riot. Kely. 76 1 Haw.
65. 11.


Homicide excuseable in self-defence is where one engaged in a sudden affray,
quits the combat before a mortal wound given, retreats as far as he safely can,
and then urged by mere necessity, kills his adversary in the defense of his own
life. 1 Hale 479. Foster 277
This differs from justifiable self defense, because he was to blame for
engaging in the affray, and therefore must retreat as far as he can safely;
whereas in the other case aforementioned neither the peace officers, nor his
assistants, nor the private person, is obliged to retreat, but may stand and
repel force by force. Foster 273.


Manslaughter is the unlawful killing another without malice express or
implied: -- As voluntarily upon a sudden heat, or involuntarily in doing an
unlawful act 4 Black. 191.
Manslaughter on a sudden provocation, differs from excusable homicide in self
deffence, in this; that in one case there is an apparent necessity for self
preservation to kill the aggressor, in the other there is no necessity at all,
it being a sudden act of revenge. 4 Black. 192.
As where one is taken in the act of adultry, and instantly killed by the
husband in the first transport of passion. Kely. 137. Ray. 212. Foster 298.
So if one, on angry wo^ ass^ults another by wringing his nose, and he
thereupon immediately draws his sword and kills the assailant, it is but
Manslaughter, because the peace is broken, with an indignity to him that
received the assault, and he being so affronted, might reasonably apprehend the
other had some further design on him. Kely. 135.
Where one happens to kill another in a contention for the wall, it is bat
manslaughter 1 Haw 31. 36. 1 Hale 455, 6.
So where H and A came into Buckner's lodging, A takes down a sword in the
scabbard that hung there, stood at the chamber door with the sword undrawn, to
prevent Buckner from going out before they could bring a Bailiff to arrest him
for a debt he owed H; and upon some discourse between Buckner and H, Buckner
takes a dagger out of his pocket, stabs and kills H with it. This was adjudged
only manslaughter at common law, and not to come within the statute of I. Ja 1.
against stabbing, because Buckner was unlawfully imprisoned. Style's 467.
So where an officer abruptly and violently pushed into a gentleman's chamber,
early in the morning to arrest him, without telling him his business, or using
words of arrest, and the gentleman not knowing him to be an officer, in his
first surprise, took down a sword and stabbed him. This also was ruled to be
but manslaughter at common law, because the gentleman might reasonably conclude
from the officer's behavior, that he came to rob or murder him Foster 298, 9.
1 Hale 370. Kely. 136.
So where Marshal and some other B^iliffs, came to Cook's dwelling house about
eight o'clock in the morning, called upon him to open his doors and let them
enter, because they had a warrant, on such and such writs, at the suit of such
persons, to arrest him, and required him to obey them, but he told them they
should not enter, and bid them depart, and thereupon they broke a window, and
then came to the door of the house, and in attempting to foree it open, broken
one of the hinges, whereupon Cook shot Marshal and killed him; it was adjudged
not to be murder, because though Marshal was an officer, yet he was not in the
due execution of his office, but was doing an unlawful act in attempting to
break open the house to execute such a civil process; and every one has a right
to defend his house in such cases; but to be manslaughter, because Cook saw
Marshall, knew him, shot and killed him voluntarily, when he might have
resisted him without killing him. Cro. Car 537 8. Cook's Case.
Though no words of reproach, nor actions, or gestures expressive of reproach
or contempt, without an assault, will by common ^aw free the party killing from
the guilt of murder, Foster 290.
yet words, of menace of bodily harm, may amount to such a provocation, as to
make the offense to be but manslaughter. 1 Hale 456.


If these determinations appear new and extraordinary to you, it is not to be
wondered at, considering the doctrines that of late have been advanced and
propagated among you. In the course of this year you doubtless have heard much
of the law given to the Jews, respecting homicide, as well as of the precept
given to Noah, that "Whosoever shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed." Whence it has been inferred, that whoever voluntarily kills another,
whatever the inducement, or provocation may be, is a murderer, and as such
ought to be put to death. But surely not only the avenger of blood, and he who
killed a thief breaking up an house in the night, were exceptions to that
general precept, but also he who killed another in his own defense. Even the
Jewish Doctors allowed this* 1 Hale, 4.
and that justly; because the right of self-defence is founded in the law of
nature, The Jews Indeed, suppos^d their law equally subjected to death, him who
killed another whether of malice aforethought, or on a sudden fa^ling out: but
it seems the early christian divines did not, for the Clergy in the reign of
Canute, the beginning of the eleventh century, so conserved the Mosaical law as
to deem him a muderer, who in time past had conceived hatred against his
neighbor and lain in wait for him and killed him, and him guilty of
manslaughter only who killed another on suden provocation; and it is ordained
by one of the laws of this Canute, that if any person shall with premeditation
kill another he shall be openly delivered up to the kindred of the slain, but
if the killing be not with premeditation the Bishop shall take cognizance of
it. Ca. Eq. 270, 1.
and as homicides have since happened, and been tried in the King's Courts, the
Judges have from time to time, determined them to be either justifiable,
excusable, or felonious: and if felonious, to be murder or manslaughter,
according to the particular circumstances that attended the killing.

These determinations of the King's Courts, for so many ages past, show, not
only what the common law in cases of this kind is, but that these rules of the
common law, are the result of the wisdom and experience of many ages. --
However it is not material in the present case, whether the common law is
agreeable to, or variant from, the law given to the Jews, because it is
certain, the prisoners are not in this Court to be tried by that law, but by
the common law, that is according to the settled and established rules, and
ancient customs of the nation, approved for successions of ages.

Murder, by the common law, is the unlawful killing a reasonable creature,
under the King's peace, of malice aforethought, by a person of sound mind and
discretion. 3 Inst. 47. 4 Black 19^
Malice is the grand criterion that distinguishes murder from all other
homicide. Malice aforethought, is not confined to an old grudge, or fixed,
settled anger against a particular person, but it extends to a disposition to
do evil 4 Black. 199.
It is the dictate of a wicked, depraved, and malignant spirit. Fost. 256.
As when one with a sedate, deliberate mind, and formed design kills another 4
Black. 199.
Not where the killing is owing to a sudden transport o^ passion, occasioned by
any considerable provocation. For the law pays such regard to human frailty, as
not to put an hasty act, and a deliberate one, upon the same footing with
regard to guilt. 4 Black 191
In the case of duelling, when two, upon a sudden quarrel, instantly draw their
swords and fight, and one kill the other, it is manslaughter; but if on such a
quarrel in the morning, they agree to fight in the afternoon, or so long after
as that there is sufficient time for the blood to cool, the passions to
subside, and reason to interpose, and they meet and fight accordingly, if one
kills the other, it is murder. 1 Hawk. 31 1 29. Kely. 27. 130. Fost. 296. Ld.
Raym. 1494, 5.
So if a man resolves to kill the next man he meets, and does it, it is murder,
although he knew him not, for this shows the malignity of his heart, and his
universal malice. 4. Black. 200.
So where one maliciously strikes or shoots at another, but misses him and
kills a third person, whom he did not intend to hurt, it is nevertheless
murder, because he is answerable for all the consequences of his malicious act;
1 Hale. 442. Fost. 261, 2.
but if the blow intended against A, and lighting on B, arose from a sudden
transport of passion, which in case A had died by it, would have reduced the
offense to manslaughter, the fact will admit of the same alleviation if B
should happen to fall by it. Fost. 262.
If two or more come together to do an unlawful act against the King's peace,
of which the probable consequence might be bloodshed, as to beat a man, or
commit a riot, and in the prosecution of that design, one of them kills a man,
it is murder in them all. 1 Haw. 31. 46. 4 Black. 200.
So where one kills another wilfully without a considerable provocation, it is
murder, because no one unless of an abandoned heart, would be guilty of such an
act upon a slight or no apparent cause. 4 Black 200.
So if one kills an officer of justice, either civil or criminal, in the
execution of his duty, or any of his assistants endeavoring to conserve the
peace, or any private person endeavoring to suppress an affray, or apprehend a
felon, knowing his authority, or the intention with which he interposes, it is
murder. 1 Hale. 457. Fost. 270, 308. 1 Hawk. 31. 44. 4 Black. 200, 1.
As to the rules settled and established by common law, for the trial of
homicide, it is observable, That no person can by common law, be held to answer
for any kind of homicide, at the suit of the King only, unless he be first
accused thereof by a Jury of the county where the fact was done. 4 Black.
343.300, 1.
-- That he who is so accused, may on the plea of Not Guilty, not only put the
council for the King upon the proof of the fact, but when it is proved, may
give any special matter in evidence to justify or excuse it, or to alleviate
the offense. 4 Black. 332, 3. 1 Ius^. 283. a
-- That the facts are to be settled by another Jury of the same county, 2
Hawk. 40. 1. 4 Black. 301.
who are supposed to be best knowing of the witnesses and their credibility,
and their verdict must be founded on the evidence given them in Court. 1 Hale.
635. Fortescue 1. Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 28.
-- That if any of the jurors are knowing of the facts, they ought to inform
the Court of it, be sworn as witnesses, and give their testimonies in Court, to
the end it may be legal evidence to their fellows, and the Court may know on
what evidence the Jury's verdict is founded. 3 Black. 374 5.
-- That the Court are to determine the law arising on the facts, because they
are supposed to know it. 2 Haw. 22 21. Ld. Raym. 1494 Fost. 255, 6.280.
-- That the Jury, under the direction of the Court in point of law, matters of
fact being still left to them, may give a general verdict conformable to such
direction; but in cases of doubt, and real difficulty, the Jury ought to state
the facts and circumstances in a special verdict, that the Court upon farther
consideration thereof, may determine what the law is thereon. Fost. 255, 6.
-- That although malice is to be collected from all circumstances, yet the
Court, and not the Jury, are the proper Judges thereof, as also, if the quarrel
was sudden, whether there was time for the passions to cool, or whether the act
was deliberate or not. Fost. 257. Ld. Raym. 1493.4.5.
The Judge ought to recommend to the Jury to find the facts specially, or
direct them hypothetically, as -- if you believe such and such witnesses, who
have sworn so and so, the killing was malicious, and then you ought to find the
prisoners guilty of murder; but if you do not believe these witnesses, then you
ought to find them guilty of manslaughter only. And according to the nature of
the case, -- if you on the evidence given, believe the facts to be so, then the
act was deliberate, or if you believe them to be so, then it was not
deliberate, and according as you believe, so you ought to fin^ one or the
other. Fost. 256. Ld. Raym. 1494. Vaugh. 144.


To what has been said under this head I must add, that in the trial of this
case, both the Court and Jury are as much obliged to observe these rules, as a
Court and Jury in England would be in the trial of a like case there; the law
in these respects is the same here, as there. A Juror's oath in this case is
also the same here as there. 2 Hale 293.
Therefore by law, you are to settle the facts in this case, upon the evidence
given you in Court: you must be sensible, that in doing it, you ought not to
have any manner of regard to what you may have read or heard of the case out of
Court. And as it is the proper business of the Court, to determine the law
arising upon the facts, you must also be sensible, that you are to take the law
from the Court, and not collect it from what has been said by people out of
Court, or, published in the newspapers, or delivered from the pulpits.

Having premised these things, I shall observe to you, the several questions
that arise in this case; and point out to you the manner in which I think they
may be best considered and determined.

The principal questions are these, viz. I. Whether the five persons said to be
murdered, were in fact killed? And if so. II. Whether they, or either of them
were killed by the prisoners, or either of them? And if they were, then III.
Whether such killing was justifiable, excusable, or felouious? And if the
latter, IV. Whether it was manslaughter or murder?


As to the first, you have not only the corouer's inquest, but the testimony of
so many witnesses, that the five persons were shot and thereby mortally wounded
in the night of the 5th of March last, and that some of them died instantly,
and the rest in a few days after, that you doubtless will be satisfied they
were all killed. And the same evidence must I think also convince you, that
they were all killed by the party of soldiers that were at the Custom-house
that night, or by some of them.

Whether the prisoners were there, will therefore be your next enquiry; for if
either of them was not, he must be acquitted. You have the testimony of
Bridgham and Simpson as to Wemms; of Danbrooke and Simpson as to Hartegan, of
Austin as to M'Cauley; of Simpson, Langford. Bailey and Clark as to White; of
Archibaid, Langford and Brewer as to Killroy; of Dodge and Simpson as to
Warren; and of Bailey, Bass, Palms, Danbrooks and Wilkinson as to Montgomery's
being at the Custom house that night, and of the party of soldiers that was
there; and this is not contested with any opposite proof. -- The law does not
in this case make the testimony of two witnesses necessary for the Jury to
settle a fact upon: If one swears it, and upon his testimony you believe it,
that is sufficient evidence for you to find the fact. But if you are satisfied
upon the evidence, that all the prisoners were there, yet, as each prisoner is
severally charged with having killed these five persons, and by his plea has
denied the charge, you must be fully satisfied upon the evidence given you,
with regard to each prisoner, that he in particular, did in fact, or in
consideration of law, kill one or more of these persons that were slain, or he
must be acquitted.

The way therefore to determine this, will be for you to name some one of the
prisoners, and then consider, whether it appears upon the evidence in the case,
that he did in fact kill Maverick? And then, whether upon the evidence it
appears, he in fact killed Gray? And so enquire in the same manner, whether he
did in fact kill either of the other three persons? And having noted how it
appears upon the evidence with regard to him; you must then proceed in like
manner with each of the other prisoners; and if upon a full consideration of
the evidence in the case, you should be in doubt, as to any one of the
prisouers having in fact killed either of the persons that were slain, you must
consider whether he did it in consideration of law? Now all that are present,
aiding and abetting one person in killing another, do, in judgment of law, kill
him. The stroke of one is, in consideration of law, the stroke of all. When a
number of persons assemble together to do an unlawful act, and in prosecution
of that design, one of them kills a man, all the rest of the company are in law
considered as abetting him to do it. 1. Hale. 440, 1. Fost. 351,


You must therefore enquire how, and for what purpose, the prisoners came
together at the Custom house, and what they did there before these person were
killed?

The Council for the prisoners say, that, if they were at the Custom-house that
night, they went there by order of the Captain of the Main-guard, to support
and protect the Sentry, who was insulted, assaulted and abused by a
considerable number of people, assembled for that purpose; but as this is
denied by the Council for the Crown, it will be proper to consider whether, a
Sentry was duly placed at the Custom-house? And if so, whether he was attacked?
And if so, whether the prisoners went by order of the Captain, to support and
protect him?

That a Sentry was in fact then placed at the Custom-house, by order of Colonel
Dairymple, the Commanding Officer, as also that one had been placed there for a
long time before, is testified by Capts. OF Hara, and Mason, and indeed the
right to place Sentries, (it being in time of peace) is the only thing that has
been questioned. Upon this, therefore I would observe, that as the main design
of society, is the protection of individuals by the united strength of the
whole community; so for the sake of unanimity, strength and dispatch, the
supreme executive power is by the British constitution vested in a single
person, the King or Queen. This single person has the sole power of raising
fleets or armies; and the Statute of 13 Car 2. c. 6. declares, That within all
his Majesty's realms and dominions, the sole supreme government, command and
disposition of the militia, and of all forces by sea and land, and all sorts
and places of strength is, and by the law of England ever was, the undoubted
right of his Majesty and his royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England.
And as Charles the Second had this right as King of England, it of course comes
to his successors, and our present Soverereign Lord the King, now has it.

Indeed the Bill of Rights declares among other things, That the raising or
keeping a standing army, within the kingdom, in a time of peace, unless with
the consent of Parliament, is against law. And it is said, that upon the same
principles whereon that declaration was founded, it is alike unlawful to be
dove in any other part of the King's dominious. But be that as it may, the
Mutiny Acts annually made, show the consent of Parliament, that the King in
time of peace should keep up a standing army not only in the Kingdom, but in
America also. They not only ascertain the number of troops that shall be kept
up, but provide for the regulation of such of the King's troops as are in
America. And therefore as by these acts the King is empowered to keep up these
troops, and he, by common law, has the command and disposition of all forces by
sea and land within his dominions, and is the principal conservator of the
peace, he doubtless, well might send such part of those troops to this part of
his dominions, in order to restore the public peace, or to aid and assist the
civil Magistrate in preserving of it, as he judged necessary for the purpose;
and if you should think there was no occasion for sending any troops here, for
either of those purposes, that will not alter the case, because the King being
the proper judge in that matter, the validity of his order will not depend upon
the truth of the representations whereon it is founded. The acts not only fix
the number of troops to be kept up, but also establish a law martial for their
government. Among other things, the Acts subject every officer or soldier that
sleeps on his post, or leaves it before he is relieved, or disobeys the lawful
command of his superior officer, to such punishment as a Court Martial shall
inflict, -- though it extend to death itself. These troops are, and ever since
they came here, have been under this martial law, and subject to as strict
regulation, as in time of war. Placing Sentries is a necessary part of the
regulation of our army, accordingly a Sentry has in fact been kept at the
Custom-house, ever since the troops have been here; and it is sworn, by the
Captains OF Hara and Mason, that it was done by order of the Commanding
Officer. If so, you have no reason to doubt but that it was legally done.

Your next enquiry then will be, whether the Sentry so placed at the Custom
house was attacked? Many witnesses have sworn that he was. But the Council for
the Crown say, the contrary appears by the testimony of Col. Marshal and others.

It is with you to determine this matter upon the whole of the evidence given
you. In doing it you ought to reconcile the several testimonies, if by any
reasonable construction of the words it may be done. -- Where some witnesses
swear they saw such a thing done, and others swear they were present and did
not see it: if the thing said to be done be such as it may reasonably be
supposed some might see and others not, by reason of their want of observation,
or particular attention to other matters there, as both may be true, you ought
to suppose them to be so, rather than presume that any of the witnesses swear
falsely. But if witnesses contradict each other, so that their testimonies
cannot be reconciled, you must then consider the number of the witnesses on
each side, their ability, integrity, indifference as to the point in question,
and the probability or improbability arising from the nature of the thing in
question, and upon the whole settle the fact as you verily believe it to be. If
you find the Sentry was attacked, the next thing to be considered is, whether
the prisoners went to protect him, and it so, whether it was lawful for them so
to do. There is a great difference between a common affray, and attacking the
King's forces. I think the law in that regard ought to be more generally known
here than it seems to be. If upon a sudden quarrel from some affront given or
taken, the neighborhood rise and drive the King's forces out of their
quarters, it is a great misdemeanor, and if death ensues it may be felony in
the assailants, but it is not treason, because there was no intention against
the King's person or government: But attacking the King's forces in opposition
to his authority, upon a march or in quarters, is levying war against the King.
Foster 219.
And resisting the King's forces, if sou^ to keep the peace, may amount to an
overact of high treason. 4 Black. 147.
Though it may be attended with great inconveniences for private persons,
without a peace officer, to make use of arms for suppressing an ordinary riot,
yet if the riot be such an one as savours of rebellion, it doubtless may
lawfully be done. 1 Haw. 65. 11.
You have heard what the witnesses deposed respecting the resolution taken to
drive the soldiers out of town, " because they had no business here." You have
also heard what has been testified of the proposals to attack the Main-guard --
of the assembling of the people especially in Dock-square -- of the huzzaing
for the Main guard and Kingstreet -- and of the attacking the Sentry. Now if
this was done in pursuance of a resolution taken "to drive the soldiers out of
the town, because they had no business here." I will not now determine whether
it was treason or not; but it certainly was a riot that savoured of rebellion;
for the suppressing whereof, private persons might not only arm themselves, but
make use of their arms, if they could not otherwise suppress it. 1 Haw. 65. 11.
Much more might the Captain of the Main guard take part of the guard, armed as
usual, and go with them to protect the Sentry By what Crookshanks, Benjamin
Davis, Whitington, and others have sworn, it seems the Sentry not only called
to the Main guard for assistance, but two men went and told them they must send
assistance directly or the Sentry would be murdered Whereupon the Captain gave
orders that a party should go to the assistance of the Sentry, and they were
drawn out accordingly, led down to the Custom house by a Corporal, and followed
by the Captain. Now as this party did not assemble, or go there, of their own
accord, but were sent by their Captain to protect the Sentry, it must be
supposed that was their design in going until the contrary appears. And
although upon the evidence you should not be satisfied that the Sentry was
attacked in pursuance of a resolution taken to drive the soldiers out of town,
because they had no business here, yet considering the notice given by the two
men to the Captain, of the danger the Sentry was in, and what the Captain
himself might then see and observe of the attack upon the Sentry, (if any
regard is to be had to what a great number of the witnesses have sworn) he well
might order out such a party, and go with them to protect the Sentry: And it
seems to be agreed that if the prisoners were at the Custom-house that night,
all of them, except the Sentry, were of that party. It has been said that this
party of soldiers, when on their march, pushed Fosdick with a bayonet while he
was standing peaceably in the street, and struck Brower as soon as they got to
the Custom-house, which showed their design was to disturb the peace, and not
to preserve it. But as Fosdick himself says, that, upon his refusing to move
out of his place, they parted and went by him, you will consider whether it is
not more reasonable to suppose, that what he calls a push was an accidental
touch owing to the numbers in the street, rather than any thing purposely done
to hurt him; and so with regard to the blow said to be given to Brewer. But
supposing the push purposely given by one of the party, and the blow by him or
another of them, it will by no means be sufficient to prove a design in the
whole party, to disturb the peace, nor will all of them be involved in the
guilt of one or more of them that broke the peace, unless they actually aided
or abetted him or them that did it; because they were assembled and sent forth
for a different purpose, and a lawful one. Foster 354(...)
But if they were a lawful assembly when they got to the Custom house, yet if
afterward they all agreed to do an unlawful act to the disturbance of the
peace, and in prosecution of that design Maverick and the rest were killed, all
that party will by law be chargeable with each mortal stroke given by either of
them, as though they all had in fact given it.

And it is said, that while they were at the Custom-house, before they fired,
some of them attempted with their bayonets to stab every one they could come
at, without any reason at all for so doing. Such conduct to be sure can neither
be justified nor excused. But as the time was so very short, and some of the
witnesses declare the people were crouding upon the soldiers, and that they
were moving their guns backwards and forwards crying stand off, stand off,
without moving from their station, you will consider whether this may not be
what other witnesses call an attempt to stab the people. But, be that as it
may, if the party was a lawful assembly before, this not being the act of the
whole, would not make it unlawful. The Council for the Crown insist that the
firing upon the people was an unlawful act, in disturbance of the peace, and as
the party fired so near together, it must be supposed they previously agreed to
do it; that agreement made them an unlawful assembly, if they were not so
before, and being so when they fired, all are chargeable with the killing by
any one or more of them. However just this reasoning may be, where there is no
apparent cause for their firing, yet it will not hold good where there is. If
each of the party had been at the same instant so assaulted, as that it would
have justified his killing the ass^ilant in defense of his own life, and
thereupon each of them had at that same instant fired upon and killed the
person that assaulted him, surely it would not have been evidence of a previous
agreement to fire, or prove them to be an unlawful assembly; nor would it have
been evidence of such agreement if the attack was not such as would justify the
firing and killing, though it was such an assault as would alleviate the
offense, and reduce it to manslaughter, since there would be as apparent a
cause of the firing in one case as in the other, and though not so good a
cause, yet such an one as the law, in condescension to human frailty greatly
regards. -- You will therefore carefully consider what the several witnesses
have sworn, with regard to the assault made upon the party of soldiers at the
Custom-house, and if you thereupon believe they were, before, and at the time
of their firing attacked by such numbers, and in such a violent manner, as many
of the witnesses have positively sworn, you will be able to assign a cause for
their firing so near together, as they did, without supposing a previous
agreement so to do. But it is said that if their firing as they did, don't
prove a previous agreement to do it, yet it is good evidence of an actual
abetment to fire, as one by firing encourages the others to do the like. As
neither of the soldiers fired more than once, it is evident that he who fired
last, could not thereby in fact, abet or encourage the firing of any of those
who fired before him, and so it cannot be evidence of such abetment. And if he
who fired first and killed, can justify it, because it was lawful for him so to
do, surely that same lawful act cannot be evidence of an unlawful abetment. And
though he who first fired and killed, may not be able to justify the doing it,
yet if it appears he had such a cause for the killing as will reduce it to
Manslaughter, it would be strange indeed if that same act should be evidence of
his abetting another who killed without provocation, so as to make him who
fired first guilty of murder. The same may be said as to all the intermediate
firings: and, as the evidence stands, I don't think it necessary to say how it
would be in case the first person fired with little or no provocation. If
therefore this party of soldiers, when at the Custom house, were a lawful
assembly and continued so until they fired, and their firing was not an actual
unlawful abetment of each other to fire, nor evidence of it, they cannot be
said to have in consideration of law killed those five persons or either of
them, but it must rest on the evidence of the actual killing: and, if so,
neither of the prisoners can be found guilty thereof, unless it appears not
only that he was of the party, but that he in particular in fact did kill one
or more of the persons slain. That the five persons were killed by the party of
soldiers or some of them, seems clear upon the evidence, and indeed is not
disputed.

Some witnesses have been produced to prove that Montgomery killed Attucks; and
Langford swears Kulroy killed Gray, but none of the witnesses undertake to say
that either of the other prisoners in particular killed either of the other
three persons, or that all of them did it. On the contrary it seems that one of
the six did not fire, and that another of them fired at a boy as he was running
down the street, but missed him (if he had killed him, as the evidence stands,
it would have been murder) but the witnesses are not agreed as to the person
who fired at the boy, or as to him who did not fire at all. It is highly
probable, from the places where the five persons killed fell and their wounds,
that they were killed by the discharge of five several guns only. If you are
upon the evidence, satisfied of that, and also that Montgomery killed Attucks,
and Killroy Gray, it will thence follow that the other three, were killed, not
by the other six prisoners, but by three of them only: and therefore they
cannot all be found guilty of it. And as the evidence does not show which three
killed the three, nor that either of the six in particular killed either of the
three, you cannot find either of the six guilty of killing them or either them
1 Hale 442.
If you are satisfied, upon the evidence given you, that Montgomery killed
Attucks, you will proceed to inquire whether it was justifiable, excusable, or
felonious homicide, and it the latter whether it was maliciously done or not.
As he is charged with murder, if the fact of killing be proved, all the
circumstances of necessity or infirmity are to be satisfactorily proved by him,
unless they arise out of the evidence produced against him, for the law
presumes the fact to have been founded in malice until the contrary appears.
Foster 255.


You will therefore, carefully consider and weigh the whole of the evidence
given you respecting the attack, made upon the party of soldiers in general,
and upon Montgomery in particular. In doing it, you will observe the rules I
have before mentioned, and not forget the part that some of the witnesses took
in this unhappy affair, and if upon the whole it appears to you, that
Montgomery was attacked, in such a violent manner, as that his life was in
immediate danger, or that he had sufficient reason to think it was, and he
thereupon fired and killed Attucks, for the preservation of his own life, it
was justifiable homicide; and he ought to be acquitted. -- If you do not
believe that was, the case, but upon the evidence are satisfied, that he was by
that assembly, assaulted with clubs and other weapons, and thereupon fired at
the rioters and killed Attucks: then you ought to find him guilty of
manslaughter only. But if upon the evidence you believe, that Montgomery,
without being previously assaulted, fired, and killed Attucks: then you will
find him guilty of muder But you must know, that if this party of soldiers in
general were pelted, with snow-balls, pieces of ice and sticks, in anger, this,
without more, amounts to an assault, not only upon those that were in fact
struck, but upon the whole party; and is such an assault as will reduce the
killing to manslaughter. And if you believe, what some of the witnesses have
sworn, that the people around the soldiers, and many of them armed with clubs,
crowded upon the soldiers, and with the cry of, "Rush on, Kill them, Kill them,
Knock them over," did in fact rush on, strike at them with their clubs, and
give Montgomery such a blow, as to knock him down, as some of the witnesses
say, or to make him sally, or stagger, as others say -- it will be sufficient
to show, that his life was in immediate danger, or that he had sufficient
reason to think so.

It seems, a doctrine, has of late been advanced, "that soldiers while on duty,
may upon no occasion whatever fire upon their fellow subjects, without the
order of a civil magistrate." This may possibly account, for some of those who
attacked the solders, saying to them, "You dare not fire, we know you dare not
fire." -- But it ought to be known, that the law does not countenance such an
absurd doctrine. A man by becoming a soldier, does not thereby lose the right
of self-defence which is founded in the law of nature. Where any one is,
without his own default, reduced to such circumstances, as that the laws of
society cannot avail him, the law considers him, "as still in that instance
under the protection of the law of nature." Foster 274, 5.
This rule extends to soldiers as well as others; nay, while soldiers are in
the immediate service of the King, and the regular discharge of their duty,
they rather come within the reason, of civil officers and their assistants, and
so are alike under the peculiar protection of the law.

If you are satisfied upon the evidence, that Killroy killed Gray, you will
then enquire, whether it was justifiable, excusable or felonious homicide, and
if the latter, whether it was with, or without malice. If the attack was upon
the party of soldiers in general, and in the manner I have just mentioned, as
some of the witnesses say it was, it is equally an assault upon all, whether
all were in fact struck, or not, and makes no material difference, as to their
respective right of firing: for a man is not obliged to wait until he is
killed, or struck, before he makes use of the necessary means of self defense.
If the blows with clubs were, by an enraged multitude, aimed at the party in
general, each one might reasonably think his own life in danger; for though he
escaped the first blow, he might reasonably expect more would follow, and could
have no assurance, that he should be so fortunate as to escape all of them.

And therefore, I do not see but that Killroy is upon the same sooting with
Montgomery; and your verdict must be the same as to both, unless what
Hemmingway swears Killroy said, or the affray at the Rope-walk, or both,
materially vary the case. Hemmingway swears, that he and Killroy were talking
about the town's people and the soldiers, and that Killroy said. "He never
would miss an opportunity, when he had one, to fire on the inhabitants, and
that he had wanted to have an opportunity, ever since he landed." But he says,
he cannot remember what words immediately preceded or followed, or at what
particular time the words were uttered, nor does he know whether Killroy was
jocular, or not. If the witness is not mistaken as to the words, the speech was
at least, very imprudent and foolish. However, if Killroy, either in Jest or in
earnest, uttered those words, yet if the assault upon him was such, as would
justify his firing and killing, or alleviate it so as to make it but
manslaughter, that will not inhance the killing to murder. And though it has
been sworn that Killroy and other soldiers, had a quarrel with Gray and others,
at the Ropewalk, a few days before the 5th March, yet it is not certain that
Killroy then knew Gray, or armed at him in particular: But if Gray encouraged
the assault by clapping the assailants on their backs, as Hink^ey swears he
did, and Killroy saw this and knew him to be one of those that were concerned
in the affray at the Rope walk, this very circumstance would have a natural
tendency, to raise Killroy's passions, and throw him off his guard, much more
than if the same things had been done by another person. -- In the tumult of
passion the voice of reason is not heard, and it is owing to the allowance the
law makes for human frailty, that all unlawful voluntary homicide is not deemed
murder. If there be "malice between A and B, and they meet casually, A assaults
B, and drives him to the wall, B in in his own defense kills A, this is se
defendendo, and shall not be heightened by the former malice, into murder or
homicide at large, for it was not a killing upon the account of the former
malice, but upon a necessity imposed upon him by the assault of A*" 1 Hale 479.
So upon the same principle, where the assault is such as would make the
killing but manslaughter, if there had been no previous quarrel, the killing
ought to be attributed to the assault, unless the evidence clearly shows the
contrary: an assault being known and allowed by law to be a provocation to
kill, that will free the party from the guilt of murder; whereas neither words
of reproach, nor actions expressive of contempt, "are a prov^cation to use such
violence," Kely. 131. Foster 290.
that is, the law does not allow them to be, without an assault, such a
provocation as will excuse the killing, or make it any thing less than murder.

Upon the same principle, where the assault is such, as makes the killing
manslaughter, the killing ought to be attributed to the assault, unless the
evidence clearly shows the contrary.

This meeting of Killroy and Gray was casual upon the part of Killroy at least;
he was lawfully ordered to the place where he was and had no right to quit his
station without the leave of Capt. Pres^on; nor were any of the party obliged
to retreat and give way to the rioters, but might lawfully stand, and repel
force by force.

It is needless for me to say what you ought to do with regard to the other six
prisoners, in case they had gone to the Custom-house, not to protect the
Sentry, but to disturb the peace, or after they got there and before the firing
had agreed so to do; or in case they had actually unlawfully abetted the
killing: because none of these things have been testified, nor can any of them
be deduced from any thing which has been given to you in evidence.

Having already said much more upon this occasion, than I should have thought
necessary in a like case, at any other time, I shall add no more.

JUSTICE OLIVER.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THIS is the most solemn trial I ever sat in judgment upon. It is of great
importance to the community in general, and of the last importance to the
prisoners at the bar. I have noticed your patience and attention during the
course of the trial, which have been highly commendable and seem to have been
adequate to the importance of the cause.

The occasion of this trial is the loss of five of our fellow subjects, who
were killed on the evening of the 5th of March last: whether the prisoners at
the bar are chargeable with their death or not, it is nevertheless our part to
adore the divine conduct in this unhappy catastrophe, and to justify the ways
of GOD to Man.

Here are eight prisoners at the bar who are charged with the murder of those
five persons, and whose lives or deaths depend upon your verdict. They are
soldiers, but you are to remember that they are fellow subjects also. Soldiers,
when they act properly in their department, are an useful set of men in
society. and indeed, in some cases, they are more useful than any other members
of society, as we happily experienced in the late war, by the reduction of
Canada, whereby our liberties and properties have been happily secured to us:
and soldiers, Gentlemen, are under the protection of the same laws equally with
any other of his Majesty's subjects.

There have been attempts to prejudice the minds of the good people of this
province against the prisoners at the bar, and I cannot help taking notice of
one in particular, (which included also an insult on this Court) published in
one of the Weekly Papers the day before this trial was to have come on. I think
I never saw greater mali^nity of heart expressed in any one piece; a malignity
blacker than ever was expressed by the savages of the wilderness, for they are
in the untutored state of nature and are their own avengers of wrongs done to
them; but we are under the laws of society, which laws are the avengers of
wrongs done to us: I am sorry I am obliged to say it, but there are persons
among us who have endeavored to bring this Supreme Court of Law into contempt,
and even to destroy the Law itself: there may come a time when these persons
themselves may want the protection of the law and of this Court, which they now
endeavor to destroy, and which, if they succeed in their attempts. It may be
too late for them to repair to for justice: but I trust, that the ancient
virtue and spirit of this people will return and the law be established on a
firm basis. If you, Gentlemen, have seen or read any of the libels which have
been published, and have imbibed prejudices of any sort, I do now charge you,
in that sacred Name which you have in the most solemn manner invoked for the
faithful discharge of your present trust, to divest your minds of every thing
that may tend to biass them in this cause: it is your duty to fix your eyes
solely on the scales of justice and as the law and evidence in either scale may
preponderate, so you are to determine by your verdict.

Gentlemen, the prisoners at the bar are indicted, with others, for the murder
of five different persons; viz. Carrol for the murder of James Caldwell; Kulroy
for the murder of Samuel Maverick; White for the murder of Patrick Carr;
Hartegan for the murder of Samuel Gray; Warren for the murder of Crispus
Attucks. Observe, that the five prisoners I have now named are severally
charged as principals in the different supposed murders, and the others as
^iding and abetting, which in the sense of the law makes the latter principals
in the second degree.

I should have given to you the definitions of the different species of
homicide, but as my brother has ^oke so largely upon this subject, and has
produced so many and so indisputable authorities relative thereto, I would not
exhaust your patience which has so remarkably held out during this long trial.
But I would add one authority to the numbers which have been produced, not that
it immediately relates to this case, but I the rather do it, because I see a
mixed audience, and many from the country whom it more directly concerns: it it
cited from the celebrated Ld. C. Just. HALE by the great and upright Judge
FOSTER, viz. If a person* drives his cart carlessly and it runs over a child in
the street; if he have seen the child and yet drives on upon him, it is MURDER
because wilfully done; here is the heart regardless of social duty: but if he
saw not the child, it is MANSLAUGHTER; (...) if the child had run cross the way
and the cart run over the chi^ before it was possible for the carter to make a
stop, it is by MISADVENTURE.

The law that was given to Noah after the deluge, viz. Whosoever sheddeth Man's
blood, by Man shall his blood be shed, has lately been urged in the most
public, manner very i^discriminately, without any of the softenings of
humanity. Moses in his code of laws, mentions the same, though in different
words, viz. He that kills a man. he shall be put to death: but be pleased to
remember Gentlemen, that Moses was the best Commentator on his own laws, and he
has published certain restrictions of this law, as, If one thrust another of
hatred that he die, the slayer shall surely be put to death; but if he thru^
him suddenly without enmity, or call a stone ^on him, not seeing him, so that
he die in those cases there were cities of refuge appointed for the manslayer
to flee to, that his life might be safe: so that to construe that law to Noah
strictly, is only to gratify a blood thirsty revenge, without any of those
allowanc^s for human frailties which the law of nature and the Eng^sh law also
make.

I would recommend to you, Gentlemen, in order to your forming a just verdict
in this cause, ^o sati^fy yourselves in the first pl^ce, whether or not the
prisoners at the bar were an unla^ful assembly when they were at the
Custom-house for on that much depends their guilt or innocence. That they were
^igh the Custom-house when the five persons mentioned in the indictments were
^lled, you c^n have no doubt, for it in conceded. Inquire then how they came
there. Now, two officers viz. Capt Mason and Capt. OHara have sworn that a
Sentinel was placed at the Custom house, by orders of the commanding officer to
protect the King's moneys, and that it is at his peri^^t he stirs from his
duty: it appears by diverse witnesses that this S^ntinel was attacked and called
for aid; upon which a party, consisting of the prisoners at the bar with an
officer at their head, went down to protect him: they were under obligation by
act of parliament to obey their commanding officer; and thus far, being at
their post constituted them a lawful assembly.

Consider next, whether those who were collected around the prisoners at the
bar, were a lawful or unlawful ass^mbly; and in order to satisfy yourselves,
weigh the evidence that has been offered impartially. But I cannot help taking
notice in this place, that some delicacy has been used at the bar, in calling
t^o^e people a mob. Mob is only a contr^ction of a Latin word which signifies a
tumultuous crowd gathered, but I shall use the legal phrase and call such a
crowd a ritous assembly, if the sound is more agreeable the mob.

As my b^other Trowbridge has been very full in his remarks upon the ^vidence,
and as you ^l^. Foreman have wrote down from h^ wit^ss^s months what they
testified which is somewhat uncommon, and for which you are to be applauded, I
shall therefore only m^ke a few remarks on those I think the most material
testimonies, not beginning in the order of examination, but in the order of
time.

Thomas Simmons say^, that be^wix^ eight and nine o'clock on that unhappy
evening, (which was before the firing, for the firing was not till between nine
and ten) he heard people at the Sugar house barracks, which are called Murray's
barracks, say, if the soldiers would not come out and fight them, they would
set fire to the four corners of the barracks, and burn every damned soul ^n
them; that there was a considerable number of them armed with outlasses,
swords, and sticks.

William Davis is the next witness I shall take notice of; he is a gentleman
who is a stranger to me, but whose character stands unimpeached in this Court,
and who has given a distinct testimony of what passed under his notice: he
says, that about eight o'clock he saw about two hundred in Forestreet, armed
with different weapons, threatening to knock down the first soldier or bloody
back they should meet; some proposed to go to the s^uthward and join their
friends there, and drive all the soldiers out of t^wn. At Dock-square, about
nine o'clock he says he saw numbers in the market ^earing up the stalls and
saying damn the dogs, where are they now? let us go and kill that damned
scoundrel of a Sentry, and then attack the Main-guard; others said, Smith's
barracks. At Olivers deck he says, he saw numbers with clubs: one man was
loading his piece, and said he would do for some of them scoundrels that night,
and said, damn the villains, scoundrells, Soldiers and Commissioners, and damn
the villain who first sent them here, they should not remain here above two
days longer.

Allow me, Gentlemen, to make a pause at this last part of the evidence, viz
Damn the villain who first sent them here; and make an observation which I am
so^ry for the occ^sion of the expression having been justified. I venture to
affirm that man a villain who uttered it, for it was his Majesty who sent them
here, and here they were fixed by his order and authority.

Dr. H^rons, who lives near to Murray's barrack's has told you, that a little
after eight o'clock he saw people coming from Dock square and heard the word.
Town born turn out, twenty or thirty times, and the people increasing. He
mentions the altereations between the officers and inhabitants, and a little
man talking with an officer, saying, You know the town and country have been
used ^ll we did not send for you, we will not have you here, we'll get rid of you,
or drive you away; and that then about two thirds of them went off and said,
let us go to the Main-guard, ^uzza for the Main-guard.

Dr. Jeffries says, that about eight o'clock he saw the passage to Murray's
barracks filled with inhabitants, who, with ill language dared the soldiers to
fight: he imagines there were seventy or eighty people, and but three soldiers,
and that when the officers were endeavoring to appease the people, snow-balls
were flung at them; and that when they told the people that the soldiers were
secured in their barracks and could not come out, somebody replied. You mean
they dare not come out you dare not let them. Some then said home, others said,
no we shall find some in King Street, others said, we'll go to the Main guard.
Dr. Jeffries has been so distinct and particular, that you cannot but remember
his testimony.

As to the pains which have been taken to exculpate this town from being
concerned in the fatal action of that night, they seen to me to have been
unnecessary. It is true, there has been, in times past, no place more
remarkable for order and good government than this town; but as it is a seaport
town and of great trade, it is not to be wondered at, that the inhabitants of
it should be infected with disorder as well as other populous places.

James Se^krig, with three others, say, that before the bells rang they saw,
not far from Murray's barracks, a large number armed with different weapons;
some of them say, nigh two hundred: that some of the people had been repulsed
from the barracks, and after that, a tall man with a red cloak and white wig
talked to the people, who listened to him, and then buzzaed for the Main-guard.
I cannot but make this observation on the tall man with a red cloak and white
wig, that, whoever he was, if the buzz^ng for the Main-guard and then attacking
the soldiers, was the consequence of his speech to the people, that tall man is
guilty in the fight of GOD, of the murder of the five persons mentioned in the
indictment, and although he may never be brought to a court of justice here, yet,
unless he speedily flies to the city of refuge, the supreme avenger of innocent
blood, will surely overtake him.

John Gridley has told you, that he heard numbers before the Townhouse say,
GOD damn the rascals, some said, this will never do, the readiest way to get
rid of those people, is to attack the Main-guard, strike at the root, this is
the nest; others replied, damn you, that is right. All this was before the
soldiers had formed.

It would be too tedious to recite the numbers of testimonies to prove a design
to attack the soldiers: I have selected a few, which seem to prove the intent,
for there are no less than thirty eight witnesses to this fact, six of whom the
council for the King have produced. Compare them Gentlemen, and then determine
whether or not there is any room to doubt of the numbers collected around the
soldiers at the Custom house, being a riotous assembly.

I will return now to the soldiers and view their behavior whilst they were
going upon duty at the Custom house, and whilst they were there. As they were
going from the Main-guard to their post, to support the Sentry, (who by the way
behaved with a good temper of mind, in endeavoring to avoid a dispute by
attempting to get into the Custom house, which he was by no means obliged to
do,) I say, ^s they were going down, Nathaniel Fosdick says, they bid him make
way but he refused: instead of forcing him to give way, he says, they gave way
to him, and passed to their post; when they got there, they loaded; and John
Gridley says, that, whilst they were loading, he passed between the fires and
they put up their guns to let him pass. I cannot find, upon examining the
testimonies, that any one soldier st^red from his post, and indeed it might
have been fatal to him to have broke his orders; but on the contrary, it has
been said, that had they stepped forward, they might have killed the people,
but that they only pushed their bayonets as they stood, to keep off the people
who were pressing on them; at the same time, bidding them keep off.

Now consider whether the prisoners had any just provocation to fire upon ihe
inhabitants, for that some of them did fire, you can be in no doubt There are
twenty five witnesses who have sworn to ice, snow-balls, sticks, etc. being
thrown at the prisoners, ten of whom, are winesses for the Crown. There are
nigh thirty witnesses who have sworn to words of provocation uttered against
the prisoners, as daring them to fire, and threatening to kill them; but you
must remember that words only, are no provocation in law to justify the killing
of a person; but if threatening expressions are attended with an attempt on the
life of a man, in such a case a killing may be justified; and if any such facts
appear in this trial, you must consider them thoroughly. And here, I would take
notice of the testimonies of some of the witnesses, viz. that although they
were close to the soldiers, they saw nothing of any kind thrown at them, nor
heard any huzza or a threatening: nay, one witness is so distinct, as to tell,
in a cloud of smoke, which guns killed the different persons. I know not how to
account for such testimonies, unless by the witnesses being affrighted, which
some of them say they were not: they themselves perhaps may s^s^y their own
minds.

D^ Jefferies relates an account which he had from Patrick Carr^ one of the
deceased, who on his death bed repeatedly told him and confirmed it but a few
hours before he died, that he went with a design against the soldiers, that the
soldier were pe^ted as they were going to their post, that he thought they were
abused and that they would really have fired before, for he heard many voices
cry out, kill them, and that he thought they fixed to defend themselves: that
he forgave, and did not blame the man, whoever he was, that shot him; that he
blamed himself for going to the riot, and might have known better, for he had
seen soldier: called to quel^ riots, but never saw any bear half so much
before. This Carr was not upon oath, it is true, but you will determine,
whether a man, just stepping into eternity, is not to be believed, especially
in favor of a set of men by by whom he had lost his life.

Ye have one difficulty to solve, Gentlemen, and that is, that there were five
persons killed, and here are eight soldiers charged with murdering them. Now
one witness says, that the Corporal did not fire, and Thowas Wilkinson says,
that the guns of the third or fourth man from the eighth flashed, so that there
are two guns of eight not discharged and yet it is said seven were fired This
evinces the uncertainty of some of the testimonies. My brother Trowbridge has
explained the difficulty of charging any one prisoner with killing any one
particular person, and has adduced an authority from Lord Chief Justice Hale,
to support him; so that this maxim of law cannot be more justly applied, than
in this case, viz That it is better that ten guilty persons escape, than one
innocent person suffer: indeed as to two of the prisoners, there is no great
doubt of their firing, namely, Montgomery and Killroy. As to Montgomery, it
seems to be agreed that he was on the right, and Richard Palms says, that a
piece of ice or a stick struck his gun before he fired: and Andrew, Mr.
Wendell's Negro man (of whom his master gives a particular and good character)
is very distinct in his account; and he says, that a stout man struck the
grenadier on the right, first on his gun and then on his head, and also kept
his bayonet in his left hand; and then a cry of kill the dogs, knock them over;
upon which he soon fired: here take the words and the blows together, and then
say, whether this firing was not justifiable.

As to Killroy, there have been stronger attempts to prove him guilty of murder
than any other. Two witnesses have sworn, that his bayonet was bloody next
morning; but nothing has been offered in evidence to prove how it came so; I
have only one way to account for it; if it was bloody, viz. that by pushing to
keep off Nathaniel Fosdick it might become so by wounding him in the (...) and
a^m. Nicholas Ferreter, who the week before b^at one of the soldiers at the
Rope walks, says further, that Killroy was then at the Rope walks; but at the
same time he says, that Killroy uttered no threatenings ha^ only ^a^ing the
Rope-makers to com^ out. But Samuel Hemmingway says, that some time before the
5th March as heard Killroy say, that he would not miss an opportunity of fi^^ng
on the inhabitants. How the conversation was had, whether it was maliciously
spoke or was jocose talk does not so fully appear, but it would be extreme hard
to connect such discourse with this transaction; especially, as his being at
the Custom House was not voluntary, but by order of his officer.

Thus Gentlemen, I have as concisely as I could, without doing injustice to the
cause, summed up the evidence to you: I was afraid of being tedious, otherwise
I should have more minutely considered it.

If upon the whole, by comparing the evidence* ye should find that the
prisoners were a lawful assembly at the Custom house, which ye can be in no
doubt of if you believe the witnesses, and also that they behaved properly in
their own department whilst there, and did not fire ^ill there was a necessity
to do it in their own defense, which I think there is a violent presumption of:
and if, on the other hand, ye should find that the people who were collected
around the soldiers, were an unlawful assembly, and had a design to endanger,
if not to take away their lives, as seems to be evident, from blows succeeeding
threatenings; ye must, in such case acquit the prisoners; or if upon the whole,
ye are in any reasonable doubt of their guilt, ye must then, agreeable to the
rule of law, declare them innocent.

As I said at first, this cause is of the last importance to the prisoners,
their lives or deaths depend upon your verdict; and may you be conducted by the
SUPREME WISDOM to return such an one, as that your hearts may not reproach you
so long as you live, and as shall acquit you at that tribunal, where the inmost
recesses of the human mind shall be fully disclosed.

[Each of the other Justices also summed up the evidence to the Jury very
particularly, and gave their opinions of the construction of law upon the
evidence; but as they differed in no material point, from the two Justices,
(who according to the custom of the Court) spoke first, they thought it
unnecessary to make public what was severally delivered by them.]

After the Court had summed up the Cause, the Jury withdrew for about two hours
and an half, and then returned to the Court. Clerk of the Court. Gentlemen of
the Jury, are you all agreed in your verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Clerk. William Wemms, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is William Wemms guilty of all or
either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that William Wemms is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. James Hartegan, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is James Hartegan* guilty of all or
either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oath, do say, that James Hartegan is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. William M'Cauley, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is William M'Cauley, guilty of all
of either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that William M'Cauley is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. Hugh White, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the Jury,
look upon the prisoner: How say you, is Hugh White guilty of all or either of
the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say that Hugh White is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. Matthew Killroy, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is Matthew Killroy guilty of all or
either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty of murder, but guilty of manslaughter.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that Matthew Killroy is not guilty of murder, but is guilty of
manslaughter, and so you say all.


Clerk. William Warren, hold up your hand, ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is William Warren guilty of all or
either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that William Warren is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. John Carrol, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the Jury
look upon the prisoner: How say you, is John Carrol guilty of the all or either
of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that John Carrol is not guilty, and so you say all.


Clerk. Hugh Montgomery, hold up your hand. ( which he did) Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you, is Hugh Montgomery guilty of all or
either of the felonies or murders whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty of murder, but guilty of manslaughter.


Clerk. Hearken to your verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You upon your
oaths do say, that Hugh Montgomery is not guilty of murder, but guilty of
manslaughter, and so you say all.


[ Wemms, Hartegan, M'Cauley, White, Warren and Carrol were immediately
discharged; Killroy and Montgomery; prayed the Benefit of Clergy, which was
allowed them, and thereupon they were each of them burnt in the hand, in open
Court, and discharged.] FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7 line 32 for Joiah, read Isaiah. p. 8. l. 26 for Josiah r. Isaiah. p.
13. l. 27 for on, r. in. p. 20. l. 33 for please look* r. please to look. p.
47. l 9 for short. r. short. p. 68 l. 18 for and, r an. p. 81. l. 25 dele Q p.
83, last line, dele Q. p. 84 l. 33. dele Q p. 85. l 11 dele Q p. 87. l. 2. dele
Q. p 96 l. 14. for you was, read, was you p 154 l. 4. for applanted, read, had
planted; and in the same page, last line, for defendo, read, defendendo. p.
159* l. 21. for uses, read use. p. 161 l. 29. for rescure, read rescue; and l.
37. for their, read there For Judge, read, Justice, at the beginning of Justice
Trowbridge's Speech.

INDEX to the WITNESSES.
Austin Jonathan Williams 10 Archibald Francis 19 Appleton Nathaniel 50 Andrew,
(a Negroe) 111 Appleton John 51 Bridgeham Ebenezer 11 Brewer James 20 Bailey
James 24 Bass Jedediah 32 Burdick Benjamin 45 Bowman Archibald 88 Bulkley John
105 Bo^son William 107 Bliss Theodore 129 Bass Henry 131 Clark Samuel 16
Croswell Joseph 53 Carter James 53 Crawford James 80 Cookson John 91 Carry
Jonathan 53 Cruckshanks Alexander 99 Carter Liut. William 100 Cox John 104
Cornwall Daniel 109 Dodge James 14 Danbrooke John 30 Davies Benjamin 85 Dixon
William 89 Davies Benjamin junr. 97 Davies Wm. Sergt. Major 101 Fosdick
Nathaniel 40 Ferriter Nicholas 44 Frost John 107 Field Catherine 123 Gooll
Archibald 81 Gillespie John 89 Goldfinch Capt. John 96 Gray Harrison junr. 118
Gridley John 121 Hemmingway Samuel 41 Hiller Joseph 42 Hill John Esquire 53 Hunter
William 82 Hughes Shubael 87 Hirons Dr. Richard 93 Hinkley Joseph 116 Hall
Thomas 128 Jefferies Dr. John 124 Kneeland Bartholomew 49 Knight Thomas 90
Keaton Patrick 101 Knox Henry 104 Langford Edward G. 16 Lee Benjamin 106
Marshall Thomas 51 Mitchelson David 83 Murray Matthew 118 Mansfield John 123
Mason Capt. Edward 128 O'Hara Capt. Barbason 129 Palms Richard 28 Prince
Newton, (Negroe) 110 Parker William 120 Pain Edward 232 Russel Nathaniel 102
Ruddock John Esquire 110 Simpson Josiah 37 Short John 84 Selking James 87 Strong
William 91 Symmonds Thomas 119 Stewart John 129 Thayer Nathaniel 49 Thomson
James 98 Tow^sh^nd Gregory Esquire 111 Wilkinson Thomas 34 Williams Robert 47
Wilson Archibald 81 Waddel James 108 Wendel Oliver 115 Whittingdon William 115
Willis Charles 118
APPENDIX.
MANY Gentlemen having expressed a desire, that some account of the evidence as
it appeared on the trial of Edward Manwarring, John Munro, Hammond Green, and
Thomas Greenwood should be made public, we have, for the satisfaction of such,
who wish to be made acquainted with the real state of facts respecting the
above four persons, inserted by way of appendix from the minutes of a gentleman
who attended the trial, the substance of what the witnesses produced, as well
on the part of the Crown, as of the prisoners, testified on that trial.

The prisoners were charged by the Grand Jury, with being present, aiding,
abetting and assisting, etc. William Warren in the murder of Crispus Attucks;
as is at large set forth in the indictment, at the beginning of the preceding
trial.

This trial came on the 12th day of December last, and ( Jonathan Sewall, Esquire
the King's Attorney, being absent) Samuel Quincy, Esquire conducted the cause on
the part of the Crown.

After the Jury were impaneled, Mr. Quincy opened the facts on which he
expected to support the charge against the prisoners; and then called the
following witnesses.

Samuel Drown, son of Mr. Thomas Drown of Boston, Tinplate Worker, sworn,
I know all the prisoners: I was in King Street on the evening of the 5th
March, when the party of soldiers at the Custom-house fired on the people
assembled in King street. -- I then saw two flashes from the Custom-house, but
who fired them cannot tell, one of the flashes came from the balcony of the
Custom house, and the other from a chamber window of the Custom house, the
second window from the corner of Royal exchange-lane, and the third from the
balcony; I saw a person in the balcony, with something in his hand, a gun or
pistol. I saw the flash, but I heard no report, when I saw this flash, it was
at the time the soldiers were firing; I did not think it a time to stay and
hear the report, but I saw him after the flash go from the balcony into the
house, he went in stooping. When I saw the flash, I was standing in the middle
of King Street between Quaker-lane and Roal-exchange-lane. I also saw a flash
from the middle window of the Custom house chamber, between the balcony and
Royal-exchange-lane, I cannot tell whether this flash came from a gun or a
pistol, the muzzel was thrust out of the window above a yard, the flesh was
inside. I don't know that either of the prisoners were in the balcony, or at
the Custom-house that night. The flash I saw at the window, was inside, and as
near the glass as the length of a man's hand. The distance between the two
flashes was a quarter of a minute. -- I did not see any flash from the muzzels
of either of their guns or pistols, but the flash at the window blazed up half
a yard, the window was open two or three inches, I saw no person at the widow.

Gillam Bass. Upholster, sworn.
I was in King street on the evening of the 5th March last, saw the soldiers
fire, -- two or three flashes seemed four or five feet higher than the rest. I
saw no firing from the Custom house, nor any person in the balcony or at the
windows. I did not look there. I stood near Mr. Stone's steps.

Timothy White, Stationer, sworn.
He was called in support of Drowne's character. He swore Samuel Drown lived
with him two years, and during that time attended his shop; that he never
observed any thing to impeach his veracity or understanding. -- Some people
thought him foolish.

Charles Bourgat, a French boy, born at Bourdeux, servant to Mr. Manwarring,
sworn.
I am an apprentice to Mr. Edward Manwarring. On the evening of the 5th March
last, I was at Mr. Hudson's in Back-street, at the North end, where my master
then lodged, Mr. Hudson and his wife were at home; when the bells rung I ran
into King street, and to the door of the Customhouse which was on a jarr partly
open, and a young man one Green, he with one eye, ( pointing to Hammond Green)
opened the door and pulled me in; two or three gentlemen came down stairs, and
one of them a tall man, pulled me up stairs, and said to me, you must fire, the
tall man gave me a gun, and said to me " if you don't fire I Will kill you." -- I
went up stairs and stood at a front window in the chamber, and the tall man
loaded two guns with two balls each, and I fired them both; as soon as I had
fired one gun, he, the tall man, said again to me, " if you don't fire I will
kill you." He had a cane with a sword in it in his hand, and compelled me to
fire both the guns. After I had fired these two guns, Mr. Manwarring fired one
gun also out of the same window. The tall man loaded the three guns, and I see
him put the balls into each of them and heard them go gown. The two guns I
fired, I pointed up the street and in the air. When my master Mr. Manwarring
pointed his gun out of the window I was in the room, but went out and was on
the stairs before his gun went off, I heard it, but did not see it. As soon as
I had fired, the tall man took me down stairs, and said he would give me money
if I would not tell: I replied, I did not want any money, but if I was called
before the Justices, I would tell the truth. There were a great many people in
the house, and a number of people round me in the chamber where I fired, I
cannot tell the precise number, but there were more than ten, Mr. Munro and
Hammond Green were in the house below stairs, Mr. Manwarring was in the chamber
when all the three guns were lo^ded and fired, there was the space of a minute
and an half between the second gun I fired, and the third which my Master
fired. There was a candle in the chamber, but I cannot tell whether there were
one or two windows in it. When I came up into the chamber, there were two guns
in it, I fired twice out of the same gun, but I cannot tell whether Mr.
Manwarring fired the same gun I did. At the time I and my master fired, the
street below was full of people, and the mob were throwing sticks, snow-balls,
etc. It was pretty dark, but I don't know but there might be a little moon. I
cannot tell whether the guns my master and I fired, were fired before or after
the firing by the soldiers. When I went from Mr. Hudson's to the Custom house,
I passed through the lane that leads from the Market to the Custom house, (
Royal-exchange-lane) and I did not see the Sentry box or any soldiers near the
Custom house; there were many people round there in the street. Immediately
after I went down stairs, I went out of the house and saw a great number of
people throwing snow-balls and sticks, but I saw no soldiers. I returned to Mr.
Hudson's house, Mr Hudson and his wife were then at home, and no other person
in the house. Upon being again asked where he was when he heard the report of
his master's gun? Says, he was quite down stairs. Upon being asked whether he
was not soon after his commitment taken out of goal and examined by Mr.
Molineux? Says, he was in the goaler's house with Mrs. Otis the prison keeper's
wife, Mr. Wallis, deputy sheriff, and Mr. Molineux, and that the latter told
him to tell the truth: and that this was previous to his examination before the
Justices.

Mr. Quincy declaring he had no further evidence to produce on the part of the
Crown. The prisoners desired the following witnesses might be sworn and
examined, which was done accordingly.

Mr. Edward Pain, George Bethane, and Edward Davis, Merchants, and Harrison
Gray junr. they testified, That they stood opposite the Custom-house on the
evening of the 5th of March last, when the firing was in King street that their
faces were toward the Custom-house. That the moon shone strong on the house,
that they did not see the balcony door of the Custom house open that evening,
or any person in the balcony, or any window in the front of the house open, or
guns fired from either the balcony or any of the windows in the front of the
house, and are fully satisfied no such thing could have happened while the
soldiers were there without their observing it. That they stood opposite the
Custom-house in full view of it from he time the soldiers first came down there
until all the guns were discharged. That they are satisfied the whole of the
firing was from the street, and that all above was quiet, and no light in any
of the front rooms of the Custom house. Mr. Davis added, that soon after the
firing he saw two women standing at the chamber window of the Custom-house,
which is next to Royal-exchange-lane, with their hands under their aprons, in
the posture of spectators.

Elizabeth Avery, sworn.
I lived with Mr. Bartholemew Green at the Custom-house on the 5th of March
last, and when the noise was in the street, before the house I went with
(Hammond Green the prisoner at the bar) Nancey Green and Mary Rogers up into
that chamber of the house, which is next to Royal exchange-lane and right over
the Sentry box as it then stood, and from the west window in that room saw the
party of soldiers come down from the Main-guard to the Sentry; I tarried in
this room till the firing was all over, and the soldiers had returned from
whence they came. There was no other person in this room, (except them I have
mentioned) during the whole time of my being there, but Thomas Greenwood who
came in and went out again in a minute. Nor was there any gun or pistol, or
candle in the room. Nor was the door of the balcony or any of the windows of
the chamber opened that evening to my knowledge, and I verily believe they were
not. The French Boy, who has just been sworn in this Court was not there that
evening, nor did I ever see him there in my life. Nor was Mr. Manwarring or Mr.
Munroe there on that evening.

Ann Green daughter of Mr. Bartholemew Green, was then sworn, and confirmed in
every particular the testimony of Elizabeth Avery, the preccedihg witness.

Elizabeth Hudson, the wife of Mr. John Hudson, with whom Mr. Manwarring
boarded on the evening of the 5th of March l^, was sworn.
She deposed that on the evening of the 5th of March, Mr. Edward Manwarring was
at her house, in Back street at the northerly part of the town, together with
Mr. John Munroe and one Mr. Warwell, that the French Boy, Charles Bourgat was
also there. That when the bells rung, she, Mr. Manwarring and the two Gentlemen
who were with him, went to a window fro^ting the street to inquire where the
fire was, supposing that occasioned the ringing of the bells. That hearing from
the conversation in the street there was no fire but some disturbance, they all
left the window, and Messrs. Manwarring, Munroe and Warwell, went into Mr.
Manwarring's chamber. That her the depone^t's husband was out of town that
evening, and she being afraid to be alone went into Mr. Manwarring's room, and
tarried there until all the bells were done ringing and the disturbance was all
over. That Mr. Manwarring called his servant boy Charles Bourgat up into the
room where the deponent and the others were, and kept him there the whole
evening, until after the bells had all ceased ringing, and until after ten
o'clock, That she is certain the French boy, Charles Bourgat, was not out of
her sight five minutes at a time, from the time the bells began to ring until
after ten o'clock. Nor does she know that he went out of the house during that
night. That M^sses, Manwarring, Munroe and Warwell, were at her house from the
dusk of evening until about half after ten o'clock, and did not go out of the
house during that whole time. That Mr. Munroe about half after ten o'clock said
he would go home to his lodgings, which Mr. Manwarring endeavored to dissuade
him from, telling him he might be molested, as he went through the street: He
Munroe however went away, but Mr. Manwarring and Mr. Warwell tarried in the
house all night.

The Court then inquired of the boy, whether he heard and understood what Mrs.
Hudson had testified, he said yes, and that her account was false, and that
what he himself had now declared in Court, was the truth and nothing but the
truth.

Mr. John Lovell, Mr. Edward Marriot, Mr. Ellwin of Quebec, and Mr. Philip
Dumaresque were then sworn as interpreters; and the boy was re-examined in
French and again affirmed in French to said interpreters, all the material
parts of his testimony as he had given it in English before.

James Penny, was then called and sworn.
He deposed that he was in goal in Boston for debt, that while there Charles
Bourgat the French boy, voluntarily, and without any threats or persuasion
declared to him, and one Elisha Ingraham then also a prisoner for debt in said
goal -- "That what he testified to the Grand Jury and before the Justices on
his examination with regard to his master Edward Manwarring, and John Munroe,
their firing out of the Custom-house on the evening of the 5th of March last,
was in every paticular false, and that he did swear in that manner by the
persuasion of William Molineux, who told him he would take him from his master
and provide for him, and that Mr. Molineux frightened him by telling him if he
refused to swear against his master and Mr. Munro the mob in Boston would kill
him: and farther that Mrs. Waldron, the wife of Mr. Waldron a tailor in Back
street, who sells ginger bread and drams, gave him the said Charles ginger
bread and cheese, and desired him to swear against his master." The said
Charles farther declared, "that neither he nor his master Edward Manwarring
were at the Customhouse at any time on the evening of the 5th of March last."

Charles Bourgat the French boy positively denied he ever made any such
declaration to Mr. James Penny or any other person; and desired that one Wm.
Page a cabinet maker, who was then also prisoner for debt in the said goal,
might be called, and examined relative to the conduct of said Penny, in
procuring this declaration. -- Page was accordingly sworn. He deposed that some
time after Manwarring and Munroe were indicted, he saw James Penny the former
witness at the window of the room where Charles Bourgat was confined, on the
backside of the goal, that Penny had a pen in his hand, a paper laying before
him, and was talking earnestly and roughly to the boy. That he this deponent
heard Mr. Penny speak quick to the boy, and asked him " Is this true," but that
he could not hear what the boy said, though he listened. -- On being asked,
whether he ever saw the boy carried out of the goal to Mr. Otis the
prison-keeper's house by Mr. Molineux to be examined, said that after Penny had
told of this confession of the boys, Mr. Molineux did come to the goal and the
boy was taken out and carried into Mr. Otis's house, and there declared he
never made the confession or declaration Penny pretended, and also that Mr.
Molineux never urged or required him to say any thing but the truth.

The Jury acquitted all the Prisoners, without going from their Stats.


