THE FOLLY and VANITY OF A LIFE spent in the Pursuit of WORLDLY PROFIT, EASE or
PLEASURE, COMPARED WITH A LIFE wholly employed in endeavoring to GLORIFY GOD,
and DO GOOD to MANKIND; ILLUSTRATED IN SOME ACCOUNT Of the pious Lady ELIZABETH
HASTINGS, AND OF ARMELLE NICOLAS, A poor ignorant Country Maid in France,
Commonly known by the Name of THE GOOD ARMELLE.

Life of ARMELLE NICOLAS, Book II. Chap. xvii.. 16. God has sent me into the
World for no other End than to love him; and by his great Mercy I have loved
him to that Degree, that I can love him no longer after the Way of Mortals.
It Is Time then for me to go to him, that I may love him after the Manner of the
Blessed.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP, at the Newest Printing-Office, in
Market-Street. M.DCC.LXX

IT is a very remarkable saying of our Lord and Savior to his disciples:
Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. It teaches
us, that the dullness and heaviness of men's minds, with regard to spiritual
matters, is so great, that it may justly be compared to the want of eyes and
ears, and that God has so filled every thing, and every place, with motives and
arguments for a godly life, that they who are but so blessed, so happy, as to
use their eyes and their ears, must needs be affected with them.

Now, though this was in a more special manner the case of those, whose senses
were witnesses of the life, miracles and doctrines of our blessed Lord, yet is
it as truly the case of all Christians at this time: for the reasons of
religion, and the calls to piety, are so written and engraved upon every thing,
and present themselves so strongly and so constantly to all our senses, in
every thing that we meet, that they can only be disregarded by eyes that see
not, and ears that hear not. What greater motive to a religious life, than the
vanity and poorness of all worldly enjoyments? And yet who can help seeing and
feeling this every day of his life! What greater call to look toward God, than
the pains, the sickness, the crosses and vexations of this life! And yet whose
eyes and ears are not daily witnesses of them! What miracles could more
strongly appeal to our senses, or what message from heaven speak louder to us,
than the daily dying and departure of our fellow creatures does. Let us but
intend to see and hear, and then the whole world becomes a book of wisdom and
instruction to us. All the mistakes and disappointments that happen to
ourselves, all the miseries and errors that we see in other people, become so
many plain lessons of advice to us, teaching us with as much assurance as an
angel from heaven, that we can no ways raise ourselves to any true happiness,
but by turning all our thoughts, our wishes and endeavors after the happiness
of another life. Octavius is a learned, ingenious man, well versed in most
parts of learning, and no stranger to any kingdom in Europe. The other day,
being just recovered from a lingering fever, he took upon him to speak thus to
his friends: My glass, says he, is almost run out; and your eyes see, how many
marks of age and death I bear about me: But I plainly feel myself sinking away
faster than any standers-by imagine. I fully believe, that one year more will
conclude my reckoning. The attention of his friends were much raised by such a
declaration, expecting to hear something truly excellent from so learned a man,
who had but a year longer to live; when Octavius proceeded in this manner: For
these reasons, says he, my friends, I have left off all taverns; the wine of
those places is not good enough for me in this decay of nature. I must now be
nice in what I drink; I cannot pretend to do, as I have done, and therefore am
resolved to furnish my own cellar with a little of the very best, though it
cost me ever so much. I must also tell you, my friends, that age forces a man
to be wise in many other respects, and makes us change many of our opinions and
practices. You know how much I have liked a large acquaintance; I now condemn
it as an error. Three or four cheerful diverting companions is all that I now
desire; because I find that in my present infirmities, if I am left alone, or
to grave company, I am not so easy to myself. A few days after Octavius had
made this declaration to his friends, he relapsed into his former illness, was
committed to a nurse, who closed his eyes before his fresh parcel of wine came
in. Young Eugenius, who was present at this discourse, went home a new man,
with full resolutions of devoting himself wholly unto God. I never, says
Eugenius, was so deeply affected with the wisdom and importance of religion, as
when I saw, how poorly and meanly the learned Octavius was to leave the world,
through the want of it. How often had I envied his great learning, his skill in
languages, his knowledge of antiquity, his address and fine manner of
expressing himself upon all subjects! But when I saw, how poorly it all ended,
what was to be the last year of such a life, and how foolishly the master of
all these accomplishments was then forced to talk, for want of being acquainted
with the joys and expectations of piety; I was thoroughly convinced, that there
was nothing to be envied or desired, but a life of true piety; nor any thing so
poor and comfortless, as a death without it. Now as the young Eugenius was thus
edified and instructed, so, if you are so happy as to have any thing of his
thoughtful temper, you will find, that all the world preaches to an attentive
mind; and that, if you have but ears to hear, almost every thing you meet,
teaches you some lesson of wisdom. But now, if to these admonitions and
instructions, which we receive from an experience of the state of human life,
if to these we add the lights of religion, those great truths which the Son of
God has taught us; it will be then as much past all doubt, that there is but
one happiness for man, as that there is but one God. Was all to die with our
bodies, there might be some pretense for those different sorts of happiness
that are now so much talked of: But since our all begins at the death of our
bodies; since all men are to be immortal, either in misery or happiness, in a
world entirely different from this; since they are all hastening hence at all
uncertainties, as fast as death can cut them down, some in sickness, some in
health, some sleeping, some waking, some at midnight, others at cock-crowing,
and all at hours that they know not of; is it not certain, that no man can
exceed another in joy and happiness, but so far as he exceeds in those virtues,
which fit him for a happy death.

Serena is a lady possessed of a considerable estate, whose time and fortune is
wholly employed in what is called a genteel, fashionable way of life. Now,
agreeable to the doctrine of the Gospel, if Serena had been obliged by the
necessities of life to wash clothes for a maintenance, to wait upon some
mistress, or to procure a poor living by teaching little children, it would
then have been her duty to serve and glorify God by such humility, obedience
and faithfulness, as might adorn that state of life in which it had pleased God
to place her. It would have been her duty to improve that one talent in the
best manner she was able; that when the time came that mankind were to be
rewarded for their labors, she might be received with a Well done, good and
faithful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. But as God has given her
five talents, as he has placed her above the necessities of life, in the happy
liberty of choosing the most exalted ways of virtue; as he has left her nothing
to do but to make the best use of variety of blessings, to make the most of a
short life, in studying her own perfection, the honor of God, and the good of
her neighbor, it is her business and duty to turn her five talents into five
more, and to consider how her time and health and fortune may be made so many
happy means of purifying her own soul, improving her fellow creatures in the
ways of virtue, and carrying her at last to the greatest heigths of eternal
glory. As she has no mistress to serve, her own soul ought to be the object of
her daily care; she is called to mourn for its impurities and imperfections,
and study all ways and means of restoring it to its primitive purity. This,
Serena, is your indispensible duty; for as sure as God is one God, so sure it
is, that he has but one command to all mankind, whether they be bound or free,
rich or poor; and that is, to act up to the excellency of that nature which he
has given them, to live by reason, to walk in the light of religion, to glorify
God in all his gifts, and dedicate every state and condition of life to his
service.

Let us look now at a state of life, which draws the admiration and envy of far
the greater part of the world, viz. the condition of those who have amassed
great riches; a situation which our blessed Savior declares to be extremely
dangerous, Luke 18:24. How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the
kingdom of heaven! And again, Luke 6:24. Woe to you rich; for ye have received
your consolation. And yet a situation which multitudes are pressing after, many
even without seeming to propose any other use from their riches, than the bare
pleasure of amassing and possessing them. Negotius is a temperate honest man.
He served his time under a master of great trade, but has by his own management
made it a more considerable business than ever it was before. The general good
of trade seems to Negotius to be the general good of life. As money is
continually pouring in upon him, so he often lets it go in various kinds of
expense and generosity, and sometimes in ways of charity. If you ask what it is
that has secured Negotius from all scandalous vices, it is the same thing that
has kept him from all strictness of devotion, it is his great business. He has
always had too many important things in his head, his thoughts have been too
much employed, to suffer him to fall either into any course of rakery, or to
feel the necessity of an inward solid piety. If Negotius was asked, what it is
he drives at in life, he would be at a loss for an answer. He has several
confused notions in his head, viz. that it is something great to have more
business than other people, to grow continually richer and richer, and to raise
an immense fortune before he dies. The generality of people, when they think of
happiness, think upon Negotius, in whose life every instance of happiness is
supposed to meet. Let us now look at this condition in another, but truer
light. Let it be supposed, that Negotius was a painful laborious man, every day
deep in variety of affairs; that he was sober and regular in his business; that
he grew old in this course of trading, and that the end and design of all this
labor was only this, that he may die possessed of more than an hundred
thousand pair of boots and spurs. Let it be supposed, that the sober part of
the world say of him, when he is dead, that he was a great and happy man, a
thorough master of business, and had acquired an hundred thousand pair of boots
and spurs, when he died. Now if this was really the case, I believe it would be
readily granted, that a life of such business was as poor and ridiculous as any
that can be invented. But it would puzzle any one to show, that a man that has
spent all his time and thoughts in business and hurry, that he might die, as it
is said, worth an hundred thousand pounds, has done more good for himself, than
he who has taken the same pains to have as many of any thing else, when he
leaves the world. For if the temper and state of our souls be our whole state;
if the only end of life be to die as free from sin, and exalted in virtue, as
we can; if naked as we came, so naked we are to return, and to stand a trial
before Christ and his holy angels, for everlasting happiness or misery, what
can it possibly signify what a man had or had not, in this world? What can it
signify, what you call those things, which a man has left behind him; whether
you call them his, or any one's else; whether you call them trees or fields, or
birds or feathers; whether you call them an hundred thousand pounds, or an
hundred thousand pair of boots. I say, call them; for the things signify no
more to him than the names. Now as it is easy to see the folly of a life thus
spent, there needs no better faculty of seeing, no finer understanding, to see
the folly of a life spent in making a man possessor of ten towns before he
dies; for if, when he has got all his towns or all his boots, his soul is to go
to his own place among separate spirits, and his body to be laid by in a
coffin, till the last trumpet calls him to judgment; where the inquiry will be,
how humbly, how devoutly, how purely, how meekly and charitably we have spoke,
thought and acted, whilst we were in the body; how can we say, that he who has
wore out his life in raising an hundred thousand pounds, has acted wiser for
himself, than he who has had the same care to procure an hundred thousand of
any thing else. But farther: Let it now be supposed, that Negotius, when he
first entered into business, happening to read the gospel with attention and
eyes opened, found that he had a much greater business upon his hands, than
that to which he had served an apprenticeship; that there were things which
belong to man, of much more importance than all that our eyes can see; so
glorious as to deserve all our thoughts, so dangerous as to need all our care,
and so certain as never to deceive the faithful labourer. If Negotius,
believing these things to be true, had entirely devoted himself to God at his
first setting out in the world, resolving to pursue his business no farther
than was consistent with great devotion, humility and self-denial; and for no
other ends, but to provide himself with a sober subsistence, and to do all the
good that he could to the souls and bodies of his fellow creatures. Now, had
this been the Christian spirit of Negotius, can any one who is truly in his
senses, say he had lost any degree of true joy and happiness, by thus
conforming to the spirit of Christianity: And yet I doubt not, but worldly
Christians of every denomination will oppose, and endeavor to discredit such a
representation of Christianity; but when you represent to your mind, how
Christians ought to live unto God, and in what degree of wisdom and holiness
they ought to use the things of this life, you must not look at the world,
which lies in wickedness, and whose wisdom is foolishness with God; but you
must look toward heaven. You must with the eyes of faith penetrate into the
invisible world, the world of spirits, and consider your order and condition
among them; you must endeavor, by the help of grace, to put in practice the
highest precepts of the gospel; you must think, how departed souls would live,
if they were again to act the short part of human life, and what degree of
wisdom and holiness you will wish for, when you are leaving this world. Now,
this is not proposing to ourselves any needless perfection; it is but barely
complying with the precepts of the gospel, which requires, that we be holy in
all manner of conversation. And as the holiness of Christianity consecrates all
estates and employments of life unto God, so are we more especially obliged to
observe this religious exactness in the use of our estates and fortunes,
because, if we waste them, we don't waste a trifle, that signifies little; but
we waste that, which might be made as eyes to the blind, as a husband to the
widow, and as a father to the orphan. If a man had eyes, hands and feet, that
he could give to those that wanted them; if he should either lock them up in a
chest, or please himself with some needless and ridiculous use of them, instead
of giving them to his brethren that were blind and lame; should we not justly
reckon him an inhuman wretch, if he should rather choose to amuse himself with
furnishing his house with those things, than to entitle himself to an eternal
reward, by giving them to those that wanted eyes and hands; might we not justly
reckon him mad? for after we have satisfied our own sober and reasonable wants,
all the rest of our money is like spare eyes and hands; something that can only
be well used, by giving it to those that want it. These tempers and this use of
our worldly goods, is so much the doctrine of all the New Testament, that you
cannot read a chapter without being taught of it, particularly that remarkable
passage at Matthew. 25:31, 46.

The life of the pious lady Elizabeth Hastings is an extraordinary instance of
the happy effect which Christianity has upon those who by joining with the
calls of grace, become willing to give up their whole hearts to follow its
dictates. This pious lady's first principle appears to have been the Glory of
God, and the purity of her own heart; next to this a continual solicitude and
labor to hold all her capacities, all her power and all her fortunes
continually upon stretch for the good of all men, weeping with those that wept;
rejoicing with those that rejoiced; given to hospitality; distributing to the
necessity of the saints, and to those that were less so, having joy at the
conversion of a sinner, or the least appearance of it; but the care of all her
cares was the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, the needy, and he that
has no helper, the lame, the halt and the blind. And in this place, says the
author of her life, what shall I say! or how can I expect to be believed! The
bent of her spirit ever lay toward these: She had a share in all their
sufferings; she would often converse with them, and enquire into their history,
with as much poverty of spirit, as they were in of outward condition; she would
study their particular cases, and put them in the way of better welfare. Some
of these were ever in her house, and frequently in great numbers; and it was no
neglect of here is, if any one went away unrelieved with meat, physic, raiment or
money; many of these that lived remote, had yearly allowances, and large sums
frequently issued out into distant parts of the kingdom. Her still larger
applications were fixed pensions upon reduced families, the maintenance of her
own charity-school, contributions to others, etc. etc. She was a great mistress
of all parts of economy, with respect to what she laid out upon herself. Her
body, she knew, was the temple of the Holy Ghost, which the believer must
possess in sanctification and honor, wherefore her support of it in meat,
drink and sleep was ever bounded by necessity; for they that walk in the
Spirit, as this pious lady did, die progressively to every vanity, and dare not
indulge the hurtful gratifications of the flesh, but labor to keep it under,
as knowing it to be the seat and repository of their most dangerous and deadly
enemy. Nevertheless she sought not her salvation by the force of her alms,
highly affluent as they were; for these, though necessary duties, yet, she well
knew, were not the charity of the gospel; not that charity which the Apostle
Paul so divinely describes at 1 Corinthians. 13:3. She was sensible, that Jesus
Christ must be revealed in the heart, before we can have any just claim to
discipleship, and that it is his ruling and bringing all things there in
subjection to his Spirit that was the great and only principle of Christian
charity. She knew, that the great scene of religion lay within, in the right
government of the heart; accordingly her eye was ever upon her heart, to see
that all its principles were cleansed from evil mixtures, had no taint from
self-love, were not sullied with vainglory; her care was to observe the
tendency of all its motions, how its struggles weakened in sinful desires,
endeavoring continually to nourish it by acts of faith and in the blood of her
Redeemer. She had well learnt to overcome evil with good, to suffer long and be
kind, to bear all things, and if ever by speech, carriage or otherwise she
suspected, that she had disturbed the spirit of any, she had no peace with
herself till she had taken care for the recovery of theirs.

Much more might be said of the endowments and virtues of this true disciple of
Jesus Christ, more especially of her patience under sufferings, and resignation
to Divine will; under the painful dispensation she passed through, during the
last eighteen months of her life, occasioned by a cancer in her breast, which,
notwithstanding she suffered it to be separated from her body, yet in the end
occasioned her death. This painful operation she not only bore with patience,
but even rejoiced, that she was counted worthy to suffer, knowing her Savior
had suffered in his flesh, and that, as sufferings was the way to his
perfection, it must also be the way to ours, this being the declared condition
of our being glorified with him; the truest marks of adoption, and the most
sovereign medicine sent from heaven for our cure. These truths this truly pious
Lady was so well acquainted with, that she declared, She would not wish to be
out of her present situation, nor exchange it for any other at any price. Thus
with great meekness and tranquillity, with cheerfulness scarce to be believed,
in perfect serenity and freedom, she continued her usual life till the time
appointed for the operation. When that time of deep trial came, she showed no
reluctance or struggle, but endured all even without complaint; only toward
the end she drew such a sigh, as the compassionate reader who reads this, may
do. Hence it appears, how those that follow the Lamb with sincerity, are
endowed with virtue and power resulting from the true spirit of his religion,
which others are unacquainted with. The night following the operation was not
indeed a night of much sleep, but of truly celestial rest; a night of
thanksgiving to her God for the visible demonstration of his power in her and
about her, for his stretch'd-out arm in her great deliverance, for the
bountiful provision her had made for her body and soul, holding all the powers
of her spirit exercised in acts of love, gratitude and adoration. She sooner
than was expected got upon her feet, and, with every improvement that could be
made, into the same way of life that she had been in before, wholly intent upon
the glory of God, and the good of her fellow creatures. But the distemper, only
repressed for a time, rose upon with great malignity, to the much greater
affliction of numbers in the world, than of her that bore it; for she had now
been, for some time, in the school of affliction, exercised with its sharp
discipline, and found its salutary effects. Under these sentiments her hope was
full of immortality, and the eternal weight of glory, now in full view, made
all her afflictions light. In this near and certain approach of death, her
cherishing warmth, like that of the sun, though it might be most felt by those
nearest, yet also reached those at greater distance; witness the great numbers
of letters she writ, and dictated to others when she became unable to write,
full of sweet counsel, having for their argument the blessedness of piety;
pressing home the necessity of it, and setting forth its true nature; witness
also the number of persons of all conditions who resorted at her house, to
behold the living power of religion in her, and to be benefited by her wisdom.
With some of these she continued in heavenly conference as long as she had
strength. Her life was near drawing to its last stage; but her lamp and her
life must be extinguished together, and she must occupy till her Lord comes.
Accordingly she convened her household, to strengthen and enforce every thing
that she had done or shown them before, by her dying counsels; and would have
extended this care to the whole village, but was restrained by the physician.
The path of the just is as a shining light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. The truly religious, whose evidences for heaven are clear,
rational, and well grounded, have a tide of joy springing up in their minds
beyond expression; something more moving and satisfactory than any one can
imagine, but they that perceive it. -- When they are just entering upon the
promised land, the splendour of the eternal day dawns upon them, and shines as
through the breaches of their shattered bodies, and raises in the inward man
such earnest of happiness, such foretastes of joy, as enables them to pass
through the valley of death in peace and triumph. As death drew near, she was
in transport, quite melted down with the impression of glory, 'broke out with a
raised accent into these words: Bless me, Lord! what is that I see! -- Oh! the
greatness of the glory that is revealed in me, -- that is before me. And some
time after she had so said, she fell asleep.

A Christian's daily Conversation with GOD, Exemplified in a short Extract OF
THE Holy Life of ARMELLE NICOLAS.
THE person, whose daily conversation is here described, was not long since a
poor simple country maid, and servant to a great family in France. The whole
course of her life was very instructive, and a most shining pattern of a true
spiritual conversation. It Is remarkable, that this person who served God with
such unwearied prayer and watchfulness, was so ignorant, that she could neither
read nor write, and was in the station of a servant, constantly employed in
business and hard labor. Hence we see, that the true service of God is
spiritual, universal, plain and easy, so that no person can be excused from it
by any pretense whatsoever.

It Is not so much the changing of places, or names, or modes and forms, or of
any thing without us, as the changing of our will and heart, that will render
our service acceptable to God. Hence the scripture declaring, what sort of
change is to be wrought in a soul, requires a translation from darkness to
light, ( Acts 26:18.) from death to life, ( Ephesians. 2:5.) and from being lost to
be found again.

The Lord give his grace to all that heartily desire it, always to walk before
him after such a pious manner as this devout soul did! whereof she herself gave
the following account to the author of her life.

As soon as I wake in the morning, I throw myself into the arms of my heavenly
love, as a child into the arms of his father. I rise with a design to serve and
please him, and if I have time to pray, I fall upon my knees in his holy
presence, and speak to him as if I really saw him with my bodily eyes. I give
myself up wholly to him, and desire him to fulfill all his holy will in me, and
that he would not suffer me that day to do the least thing which might be
offensive to him. In short, I love and praise him as much and as long as my
affairs permit; though very often I have hardly so much time as to say the
Lord's prayer. But I do not trouble myself about that; for I have God always in
my heart, as well when I am about my business, which I do in obedience to his
will, as when I retire on purpose to pray to him. This he himself has taught
me, that whatever I do out of love to him, is a real prayer.

I dress myself in his presence, and he shows me that his love supplies me with
raiment. And when I go about my business, even then does he not forsake me, nor
I him, but he converses with me; yea, I am then as much united to him, as when
I am at my prayers, set apart on purpose for my spiritual recollection. O! how
sweet and easy is all labor and toil in such good company! Sometimes I
perceive such strength and support in my mind, that nothing is to hard for me.
Nothing but the body is at work, the heart and myself burn with love to God.

When the body begins to be weary, or to repine, or to desire unseasonable
rest, being oppressed with uneasiness; my divine love enlightens me forthwith,
and shows me how I ought to suppress those rebellious motions of corrupt
nature, and not to nourish them at all, either by word or deed. This love keeps
the door of my lips, and watches over my heart, that it may not in the least
contribute to such irregular passions.

But if, at any time, for want of care, I am surprised with these or the like
faults, I cannot be at rest till I have obtained pardon, and God be reconciled
to me. I lie prostrate before his footstool, confessing all my faults to him,
and there I continue till he has forgiven me, renewed his friendship with me,
and confirmed it more than before. If people persecute me, and by foul and
uncharitable censures raise scandals upon me, or any other way afflict me; or
if evil spirits attack me with their crafty and cunning temptations, I then
presently run to my heavenly Love, who readily stretches forth his sacred arms
to receive me, showing me his heart and wounds open for my security, in which I
hide myself as in a strong castle and fortress. And then I am so mightily
strengthened, that if the whole army of hell itself, together with all the
creatures, should rise up against me, I fear them not, because I am under the
protection of the most high God, his love being the hiding place and safeguard
of my soul.

If God at any time hides his face, making as if he would go away from me, I
tell him, O! it is no matter, my Love, conceal thyself as much as thou please,
nevertheless I Will serve thee; for I know thou art my God. And then I stand upon
my guard more than ever, to be faithful to him, for fear of displeasing my
Love. And at the same time perceiving the greatness of my misery and poverty, I
insist the more upon the merits of our Savior, and resolve to rest contented,
though it should please him to leave me all the days of my life in such a
condition. But he never lets me continue long under these circumstances, and if
I may venture so to speak, he cannot forbear loving me, any more than I can
live without him.

If I am persuaded on holidays to be merry in company, I excuse myself. For
nothing can be compared to the pleasures of my Love, which are so much the
sweeter and greater for my withdrawing from all company whatsoever. If people
wonder, how I can stay always at home alone, I think within myself: O! if you
knew the glorious company I have, you would not say that I was alone; for I am
never less alone, than when I have nobody with me.

The night coming on, and every one going to rest, I find rest only in the arms
of divine love: I sleep leaning on his holy breast, like a child in his
mother's bosom. I say, I go to sleep, but being still busied about the love and
praises of my God, till I fall quite asleep. Many times this love rouses up all
my senses, so that I cannot sleep the greatest part of the night, but I spend
it in the embraces of the grace of God, which never forsakes such a poor
miserable creature as I am, but preserves me, and takes special care of me.

If in the night the evil spirits hover about, to torment or to surprise me,
(which often happens) this divine love guards me, and fights for me. Yea, it
gives me grace too, to resist them courageously, as if I were awake. For they
seldom continue long to assault me, unless it be in my sleep.

And this is the life I have led for these twenty years past, without
perceiving the least change of that love which was poured out into my heart,
after my sincere conversion unto him. Nay, I have observed its daily increase,
though every day it seemed impossible to endure any addition to what I already
enjoy. But truly, it is an infinite love, which satisfies and nourishes me, so
that every day I have a new hunger, though methinks I can receive no more, than
what I possess already every moment.

THE author of her life says, concerning the manner of her expressions, that
they were always very modest, without any noise or vehemence: her common
discourses were always holy and edifying; whereas others too commonly mis-spend
their time in useless conversation and unprofitable talk.

For a long while she could bear no other discourse but of God and his holy
love. I cannot imagine, said she, how a soul, created for heaven, can be
concerned about the dross of this world. From that time, if she happened to be
in company, where the subject of the discourse was but indifferent, either she
did not mind it at all, entertaining herself in the mean while with God; or, as
soon as she thought it proper, she diverted and changed the discourse; thinking
it but lost time, which was spent in this trifles of this world.

To every body that had a mind to be acquainted with God Almighty, she gave
this advice: To be silent, and to learn to keep their thoughts together in the
center of the heart: for this (said she) is the beginning of our union with
God, and by these means the soul forgets earthly things, and raises herself up
to the contemplation of heavenly objects. We ought to lose our familiarity with
the creatures, if we desire to enjoy the conversation of the Creator, a moment
of which does afford more delight and satisfaction, than all the finest
discourses in the world.

The real experience she had of the inward and spiritual life of grace, and of
the manifold operations it was attended with, does abundantly appear from the
larger account of her life and conversion.

One time when her mistress was afraid that Armelle was like to run quite mad
by an excess of devotion, she forbad her all spiritual exercises, and would not
let her go even to church, except on the Lord's day only: Armelle, being
sensible of the false step her mistress took, smiled within herself, saying,
Truly, I am not mad, after I have found my Beloved, whom I now love with all my
heart. I remember a time, when I was seeking only God without me, and then I
was mad indeed. This mistress of hers being of a sour and morose humor, showed
a deal of ill nature to Armelle, of which, however, she never complained, but
rather thanked God, that he was pleased to make this a means of her fuller
purification. Some seeing what she suffered in hat house, advised her entirely
to quit that place; she replied, according to her usual earnestness: Why would
you have me flee from the cross which the Lord himself has entailed upon me?
No, by no means: I shall never do it, except they turn me away by force. In
which unexpected answer her friends entirely acquiesced, never prompting her
again to quit a place where she had daily opportunity to practice patience and
self-denial; virtues so much contrary to the whole bent of corrupt nature, and
yet so necessary for rightly framing a Christian life and conversation. At
another time she said: If the soul be but well grounded in the favor of God,
and lively affected with the operations of his grace, all the insults of the
devil, and of the creatures, are borne with joy and comfort. But this is misery
indeed, when the Lord himself withdraws from the soul, and lets her shift for
herself.

In what company soever she was, she talked of nothing more, than of being
faithful to God. Nothing dropped more from her mouth, than, Let us be faithful,
let us be faithful to the Lord. This word she thought fit for any time, and
suitable to every company. Being asked by her friends, whether she had nothing
else to say, she answered: Don't wonder at my saying this over and over again.
If I should live a thousand years, I should still tell you the same thing. For
it is faithfulness, wherein the perfection of a Christian life consists.

Of the constraining power of the divine love she has the following expression:
Whenever I happened to adhere a little too much to my natural inclinations,
(apt to steal in upon the mind under the specious pretense of necessity) I was
immediately reproved by the love of God. This divine love is like a careful
tutor, who takes all the pains imaginable for advancing his pupil in the way of
learning he is engaged in; and for this reason keeps his eye constantly fixed
on him, both to correct his failings, though never so small, and to prevent his
being led away by any thing that might divert him from his chief employment.
Thus, says she, dealt the Lord with me. He kept me closely confined to an holy
awe and wariness; and when I happened by one oversight or other to withdraw, as
it were, from his eye, he in that very moment pursued after me, and recalled me
to my duty. But all this was done with so much love and tenderness, that it
must be a heart of brass, if not mollified by such endearing marks of love and
kindness.

She often wondered at some peoples dilatory doings in the service of God, and
said, it was a cunning fetch and stratagem of the devil, to make people put off
from one day to another such designs as might serve to advance the glory of
God, and the good of our fellow creatures. For, said she, it often happens,
that that grace which at one hour offers itself to a man, in order to support
him under some difficult enterprises, is not so easily met with at another
time. And besides this, how uncertain is our life! nay, if we were sure to live
longer, yet ought we not to linger upon that account at all, nor to defer from
one day to another what might be done this day. A man that is full of delays in
the service of God, must needs have but little love at the bottom. Wherever
love is raised to any eonsiderable degree, there the soul cannot rest, whilst
there remains any thing to be done required by the beloved. And this dilatory
temper, she said, was a great in pediment in the way to perfection. Many souls
were convinced of the will of God, but being too backward constantly to
struggle against the corrupt propensities of their dull and lazy temper, they
made but a slow progress in the work of religion. They say, tomorrow,
tomorrow it shall be done in good earnest; but that tomorrow never comes. The
consequence whereof is, that the longer they flatter themselves in their
disorderly and wonted customs, the less able they are to resist them at last at
all: the Lord leaves them now to their own will, since they did not improve
faithfully what once they had received.

Her humility was also grounded on a true and solid foundation. She confesses,
that the infinite love of God kept her undefiled as to the vanity of pride. I
was astonished, says she, when I was told to watch against pride, for I thought
whilst I was well in my wits, I could not possibly be proud. I was so fully
convinced that every thing really good was from God, that if all angels and men
had offered to per^^^^^ me to the contrary, I should never have believed them.
And this sense fortified me against every kind of pride.

Because her love to God was so great and fervent, the love she bore to her
fellow creatures was also wonderfully influenced and inflamed thereby. When she
considered the woeful state of the wicked, and the dreadful judgment that is
like to befall them at last, she then felt a more tender and commiserating love,
and her very bowels began to yearn for compassion. When she looked upon the
happy state she was arrived to, and the severe doom attending such profligate
wretches, she used to say, she seemed unto herself like one that had been in a
great storm at sea, and by stress of weather like to be cast away every minute;
but getting off at last safe and sound, remembered now ashore the dangers his
brethren and near relations were still exposed to, being tossed up and down in
the huge ocean, and left to the mercy of the roaring billows. Alas! said she,
thus it is with me, when I lay to heart the danger sinners run themselves into.
For the more endearing marks of divine grace the Lord has been pleased to
bestow upon me, the more fervent is my desire, that also others might partake
of the same with me.

AND now, ye learned men, and refined wits of the age, come hither and admire
the ignorance and simplicity of this poor country-maid! Consider how far she
exceeds your high flown superficial wisdom, and the dark flashes of human wit
and learning? And was it possible for her to attain to this heavenly wisdom and
divine knowledge, to such a nobleness and elevation of mind, without the scraps
and assistance of artificial learning and philosophy? then truly there must be
another school wherein those that flow unto the Lord, (Ps. 34:5) are lighted.
Indeed to know the love of Christ, passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3:19. Concerning
which our Savior was pleased thus to express his grateful sentiments with
hearty joy and heavenly triumph: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight,
Matthew. 11:25, 26. For it is written, (says St. Paul) I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent? Where
is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? But God
has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise; and God
has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are
mighty. And base things of the world, and things, which are despised, has God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. That
no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1:19, 20, 27, 28, 29. Isa. 29:14.
Chap. 33:18.

THOUGHTS ON Impartiality and Gospel Love, Recommended to the Notice OF THE
Truly Pious of every Christian Profession.
THE inspiration of God and the clear information of the holy scripture assures
us, that God reserves his choicest secrets for the purest minds, and that true
holiness is the only safe entrance into divine knowledge. The apostle declares,
Acts 10:34, That he perceived of a truth, that God is no respecter of persons;
but in every nation, he that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted
with him. Yet, notwithstanding the clearness of this and many more such
doctrines contained in the scripture, selfishness and partiality, those inhuman
and base qualities, are suffered to prevail even amongst such as are esteemed
the most pious in the several divisions of the Christian church, so as to raise
a flight, and often a kind of enmity, against those of other communions.
Nevertheless, the truly pious-hearted of every party are indeed nearer to one
another than many of them apprehend; and it would on experience be found, that
if each particular division of Christianity could produce but one man a piece,
that had the piety of an apostle, and the impartial love of the first
Christians, they would not want half a sheet of paper to hold the articles of
union, nor be half an hour before they were of one religion, however they may
differ in some external practices. If we sought truth for its own sake; if we
loved our neighbor as ourselves; and, if we desired nothing by our religion,
but to be acceptable to God, this partial spirit would have no place with us.
That universal love, which gives the whole strength of the heart to God, and
makes us love every man as we love ourselves, is the noblest, the most divine
and Godlike state of the soul; and religion does people very little good, but
so far as it brings this perfect love with it. Perfection can no where be
found, but in a pure, disinterested love of God and our neighbor. There is
therefore a communion of saints in the love of God, which no one can learn from
that which is called orthodoxy in the different sects, but is only to be had by
a total dying to all worldly views, by a pure love of God, and by such an
unction from above, as delivers the mind from selfishness, and makes it love
truth and goodness with an equality of affection in every man, let his name and
profession to religion be what it may. And by thus uniting in heart and spirit
with all that is holy and good in all professions, we enter into the true
communion of saints, and become real members of the true universal Christian
church. It is thus, that the angels, as ministering spirits, assist, join, unite
and cooperate with every thing that is holy and good in every division of
mankind. He that has been all his life long used to look with great slight upon
those of other profession, must naturally expect, they will be treated by God,
as they have been by him; and if he had the keys of the kingdom of heaven, such
people would find it hard to get a place in it. But it stands us greatly in
hand to get rid of this temper before we die; for if nothing but universal love
can enter into the kingdom of God, what can be more necessary for us, than to
be full of this love before we die?

We sometimes hear people of great zeal declare on their deathbeds their strict
attachment to the particular profession to which they belong, and declaring
their disunity with all other churches; but how much better would it be, if
such a person was to say: In this divided state of Christendom, I have chosen
to live and die in outward communion with the society to which I am joined;
fully believing, that if I worship God in spirit and in truth in this divided
part of the church, I shall be as acceptable to him, as if I had been a
faithful member of the one whole church, before it was broken into separate
parts. But as I am now going out of this disordered division, into a more
universal state of things, as I am going to the God of all churches, to a
kingdom of universal love, which must have its inhabitants from all people,
nations and languages of the earth; so in this spirit of universal love, I
desire to perform my last act of communion, joining in heart and spirit with
all that is Christian, holy and good in all other churches; praying from the
bottom of my soul, that every church may have its saints; that God's kingdom
may come, his will be done in every division of Christians and men, and that
every thing that has breath, may praise the Lord!


