A REPLY TO THE CHURCH of ENGLAND PLANTER's FIRST LETTER RESPECTING THE CLERGY.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed by ANNE CATHARINE GREEN. MDCCLXX.

TO THE CHURCH of ENGLAND PLANTER.
SIR,
I HAVE observed it to be the Track of many a little Scribbler, who steps into
a News-Paper, to usher in his Production with a pompous Account of what he is.
In your Hand-Bill of the 28th of last September, communicated to us with the
Pennsylvania Chronicle, you have avoided this Fault, and informed us what you
are not; you would be original in this as well as your other Plans -- You say,
You have not the Honor of a Seat in the Lower House of Assembly. You might
have spared yourself this Trouble, no one could have suspected it; there cannot
be a Set of Freeholders upon Earth so ignorant as to choose a Man for their
Representative, who is capable of disclosing such weak Sentiments to the
Public, and insulting the representative Body of a Province, by giving Advice
unworthy the lowest Circle of a Tippling-House.

Your chief Complaint lies, That the Clergy ride you like Asses; I will venture
to say, that the Parson who rides you has a very dull Beast under him. You may
think perhaps that I am angry with you; far otherwise. I was never better
pleased. I am pleased with you for writing against the Clergy, because you have
done it so weakly, that you have advanced their Interests rather than impaired
them, have proved their Advocate rather than their Opponent, and by a feeble
and impotent Attack have confirmed the Establishment you endeavored to
overthrow.

To give Advice even to a Friend is a delicate Matter; it implies a Kind of
Superiority which Men unwillingly acknowledge. It is a good Maxim never to give
Advice until it is asked; had you stayed until you had been asked, you would
have been silent for ever. -- But when an Individual presumes to instruct the
Representatives of a Country, the greatest Caution is necessary not to give
Offense: But this seems below your Concern; you not only inform the Assembly
what their Duty is, but you plainly tell them they have neglected their Duty,
and insult the Body from whom you expect Redress. You talk of Grievances and
Burdens, but One in particular which THEY have had in their Power to have
relieved you of ever since the first Rise of it, and that is, in Regard of the
Clergy, who now ride you like Asses, and think it out of your Power to relieve
yourselves. How far the Assembly could effect your Relief of themselves, the
Nature of the Constitution must determine; but had the Burden been so pressing,
I dare say they would have used their best Endeavors to have prevented your
being rode to Death.

You proceed to tell us, That at the Time of the first settling of the
Province, there was an absolute Necessity to encourage the Clergy to settle
amongst us in a WILDERNESS COUNTRY; but why so much larger Encouragement was
given to them than our neighboring Provinces gave you cannot conceive. -- The
Necessity to encourage the Clergy to continue amongst us is as absolute and
evident as it was first to settle them in this Wilderness Country. -- As the
Establishment of a national Religion, ought to be One of the first and
principal Acts of Civilization, so it ought to be the last Act that ceases, and
only to expire with the Constitution. Men are prone to slide back into a Savage
State when left without Instruction, and the Precepts of Religion are as
necessary to our Children now, as they were formerly to our Fathers.

[Before I proceed further with our Planter's Remarks, I shall beg Leave to lay
before the Public, a brief Account of the Origin of that Establishment the
Church at present enjoys, extracted from authentic Papers.

The Charter of the Province recites Two Reasons which induced the then Lord
Baltimore to ask, and the Crown to grant it: The First was for the Propagation
of the Christian Religion in a Country partly occupied by Savages, who had no
Knowledge of the divine Being; and the Second was for the extending of the
British Dominions.

As to the First declared Intent of the Crown in the Charter, the Propagation
of the Christian Faith, it happened that for above Sixty Years after the Grant,
no Attempt was made for establishing a Protestant Church or Clergy in this
Province, but, the Government of Maryland devolving at the Revolution into the
Hands of his late Majesty King William, then it was that under Governors
appointed by his Majesty, some Acts of Assembly were proposed, and indeed
passed here, for settling the religious Worship of the Church of England
amongst his Majesty's Protestant Subjects in this Colony.

But as the Province abounded with Papists, Quakers, and other Dissenters, who
had then a great Influence in our Assemblies, none of those Acts which they
prepared and passed among themselves were made effectual, but they were all
from Time to Time repealed in England, on Account of several Defects therein.

The Acts prepared and passed in Maryland for establishing Religion, just now
mentioned, were repealed and declared void by Order of his Majesty's Council of
the (...) January 1695, and the 30th November 1699.

The next Act for the Establishment of Religion which was prepared in Maryland,
was passed the 26th of April 1700, and that being transmitted to the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, their Lordships, with the Assistance
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, and also of the principal
Officers of the Crown named in their Commission, took that Act into
Consideration, and judged it liable to many material Objections, and
accordingly represented the same to his late Majesty King William in Council.

His Majesty had so much at Heart the Establishment of religious Worship here
according to the Church of England, and the Maintenance of Ministers, that
thereupon, by Order in Council of the 13th of February, 1701, he declared his
Dislike of that Act, and directed the Lords Commissioners for Trade and
Plantations to prepare a new Draught of an Act for that Purpose, with such
Alterations from the former Act as were proper to those Ends, and agreeable to
the Toleration allowed in England to Protestant Dissenters.

The Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations having prepared a Draught of
an Act accordingly, and laid it before his Majesty in Council, some of the
People called Quakers, in Behalf of their Brethren in Maryland, petitioned his
Majesty in Council against that Draught, on the 22d of May, 1701, as appears by
Order of Council of that Date. His Majesty was pleased to hear them and their
Counsel against it, as well as to hear the Reasons offered for it; and after
due Consideration of the whole, by Order of Council of the 5th of June, 1701,
directed that Draught to be sent to the Governor and Council in Maryland, to be
by them proposed to the Assembly here at their next Meeting, in order to be
passed into a Law. That Draught was sent, was proposed, and was passed into an
Act here accordingly, upon the 25th of March, 1702, and was transmitted from
hence, and again referred to the Examination of the Lords Commissioners of
Trade and Plantations, and by them reported for the royal Sanction and
Approbation, on the 18th of January, 1702. And, by Order of Council of the same
Day, reciting that the Governor, Council, and Assembly of Maryland had
Authority to ordain Laws, which were to continue and be in Force until the
royal Pleasure should be signified to the contrary, that Act, so solemnly
devised, prepared and considered in England, and passed in Maryland, was
approved, confirmed, finally ratified and established.

The First Innovation that I find to have been made in this Establishment was,
by an Act passed in 1715, C. 24. now in Force, whereby Five per Cent. is to be
deducted and paid by the Clergy to the Sheriff for his Collection, although the
forementioned Act had enacted, that the Sheriff should collect the Forty per
Poll in the same Manner he did the Public and County Levies, which County
Levies were paid for by the County, and given to the several Officers, without
deducting any Thing for Collection. -- To this the Clergy submitted, being from
their small Income then and low Circumstances unable at a great Expense to seek
Relief at Home.

The next Attempt was of a more important Nature, and tended more effectually
to reduce the Maintenance provided and established by the royal Authority for
the Clergy of this Province. An Act was passed in 1728, C. 2. entitled, An Act
for the amending the Staple of Tobacco," which enacted, That, for the Ease of
the People, and for the discharging all parochial and other Charges payable in
Tobacco, and assessed and levied on the People, all Persons may pay the whole
or any Part thereof at Ten Shillings Currency per Cent. at or before the 10th
of April Yearly, or 3-4th Parts thereof in Tobacco in Specie, in full Discharge
and Satisfaction of the whole, at the Choice of the Debtor; and that the
Sheriffs shall have until the last of June Yearly to return and make up the
Accounts of the public Allowances and other Tobacco Demands; and that all
Persons paying Money in Discharge of Tobacco or 3-4ths in Tobacco, shall be as
good as a Tender of the whole.

Against this Act the Reverend Mr. Henderson, with Six Clergymen, put in a
Petition into the Upper House of Assembly, in Behalf of themselves and absent
Brethren, which was unsuccessful. Upon the Act passing in Maryland on the 3d of
October, 1728, Mr. Henderson went over to England to petition the Crown against
it; and on the 17th of December, 1729, being the Day appointed for the Hearing
by the Committee of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
to whom his Majesty had referred it to consider and report what was fit for his
Majesty to do therein, on that Day the late Lord Baltimore sent for Mr.
Henderson, and assured him if he would withdraw his Petition from before the
Council, he would dissent to the Act; and promised upon his Honor that he
would give positive Instructions to his Governors never to presume to pass an
Act of that Nature for the future. -- However the several Inspection Laws in
1747, 1753, and 1763, stripped the Clergy in the same Manner of One Fourth of
their original Stipends; and the Bill now depending, which has passed the Lower
House of Assembly, and waits the Concurrence of the Council and Governor, gives
an Option to the People to pay off the Clergy 30 lb of Tobacco per Poll,
instead of 40 lb per Poll, if paid in Specie by the 10th Day of June Yearly, or
30 lb per Poll at the Rate of 12 s. 6 d. Currency per Hundred in Money, if not
paid in Tobacco by that Time, and subjects the Clergy to the very same
Inconveniences the Act of 1728 would have laid them under, had it not been
dissented to at that Time. If Tobacco be a Drug, the Planter will pay off in
Tobacco; if it be worth more than 12 s. 6 d. he will pay off in Money, because
he is allowed until the 10th of August for his Money Payment; and then he pays
but for 30 lb instead of 40 lb of Tobacco allowed by the old Act, so that the
Planter not only gains One Fourth in the Quantity, but may, if Tobacco bears
the Price it has done for Three Years past, be a Gainer of 100 or 150 per Cent.
in the Price, rating his Payment at 12 s. 6 d. per Hundred.

The Assessment of the 40 lb per Poll for the Clergy was designed in Lieu and
in Nature of Tithes, and was formerly paid as such in Kind; by which the Clergy
had the same Chance and Benefit as other Persons, either as to the Rise or Fall
of the Commodity, as they have in their Tithes in Kind in England. Now by this
Act all that Advantage is taken from them, let it rise or fall they must still
be Sufferers, they will lose in any Case, and have no Possibility of gaining.

Hence it appears how far these several Acts have tended virtually and in
Substance to repeal the Act so solemnly enacted and ratified by the royal
Authority, and how greatly the Maintenance thereby provided and established for
the Clergy has been reduced and diminished. And this Consideration may have
Weight to make the Assembly cautious how they act with respect to the Clergy,
who, upon this Principle, can never fail of Redress, when they are driven to
the Necessity of applying Home.

I shall now return to our Church of England Planter, who, though he writes to
the Vulgar, and writes like one of the Vulgar, may serve to show the Clergy
what they are to expect, if they once lose Sight of their fundamental Law.

If indeed, Sir, your Allegations be true, That those Gentlemen (the Clergy)
have vaunted over Government, Vestry, and Laity, bidding Defiance to the whole,
as, you urge, it is notoriously known they have done ever since the Year 1702,
until the First Inspecting Law on Tobacco passed which you date in 1751: If
this be true, that the Clergy, instead of recommending Obedience to Government,
have bid Defiance to the whole; instead of cultivating the Good Will and
Confidence of their Vestry and Parishioners, have notoriously insulted and
abused them, and have become Ramping Lions, as you elegantly express it in
another Place, instead of Meek Lambs, I wonder they had not been chained down
in their Dens long since, and that the Assembly, in whose Power (you say) it
was to have corrected these Enormities, should have let them pass unnoticed
from the Year 1702, until the First Inspecting Law on Tobacco; but as we hear
no more of them since, and your Complaints of these Violences terminate then,
it is hoped that Law worked a thorough Cure, and the Wisdom of the Legislature
could not be too much admired, that under One Act reformed the Clergy and the
Tobacco.

You wonder why the Clergy had a larger Encouragement here, than in our
neighboring Provinces; you may as well wonder why they had any Encourage at
all, since in many of our neighboring Provinces they have none; which are
thereby deprived of the inestimable Benefit of religious Union, and for Want of
a national Church, are by the Equality of all Sectaries, torn and convulsed by
continual Struggles between them for Superiority and Pre-eminence, whilst their
Ministers feel all the Miseries of a precarious Dependence often on involuntary
Contributions, and are exposed to Contempt, the never failing Attendant on
Poverty.

You rest your whole Plan of Reform, upon a Presumption that the Act of 1701-2,
for the Establishment of the Protestant Church, and the Maintenance of
Ministers in this Province, is not in Force: Now, if it appear that this Act is
in full Force, and has all the Marks of legal Authority a Law can have, the
pretty Structure you have been erecting, falls (like the baseless Fabric of a
Vision) to the Ground in an Instant.

It appears then that after passing the General Assembly, it was assented to by
a Governor acting under a Royal Commission, that was ratified by Queen Anne in
Council, Jan. 18, 1702, that it was excepted, with only one Act more, out of
the general Repeal in 1704, that it was made the Basis of many subsequent Acts,
and that it has been acknowledged by the Legislature here, and admitted by the
People for nearly 70 Years. You urge, that this Act of Assembly was INTENDED to
be made in our Sovereign King William's Time, but the King was dead at that
Time, although not known here, as he died on the 8th Day of March 1701-2, and the
Session began on the 16th of the same Month, so that he could not give his
Assent to it, by which Means it became void. That a dead King could not give
his Assent to an Act, is a Discovery for which you shall have Credit; but though
he could not, his Governor acting under his Commission could; and the dead King
could no more dissent than assent. In Judgment of Law, the King in his
political Capacity dies not* he is not dead in Law at least, until public
Proclamation of his Successor in those Dominions where in his Deputies reside.
-- All his Governors must necessarily continue in Commission until formaly
superseded by his Successor, and if the Assent of his Governor to a Law in his
Majesty's Name, before the Knowledge of his De^ease, be not valid in Law, the
British foreign Dominions must ever be exposed to Anarchy and Confusion: No
governmental Act would be legal, and the Judge who condemns a Criminal may be
arraigned for Murder. And this continuing Power upon the Demise of a King is so
essential to good Government; that it is extended by Act of Assembly to the
Officers of the Lord Proprietary. 1751 Chap. 27.
-- You say, he (the King) could not give his Assent to it, by which the Act
became void; I never heard that the Assent of the King or the Lord Proprietary
himself, not personally present, was necessary to the Validity of a Law here;
the Power of Dissent indeed lies at home, but the Assent of the Governor, as
the King's or Proprietor's Representative, and one Branch of the Legislature,
gives an Act full and competent Authority, until the Dissent arrives. By an
Act, 1638, C. 1, for establishing the House of Assembly, all Acts assented to
and approved by the said House, or major Part thereof, and afterward assented
to by the Lieutenant Governor, in the Name of the Lord Proprietary, are
adjudged and established for Laws See also 1650, C. 2.
. And by the Order of Council before recited, of the 18th of January 1702, it
was declared, that the Governor, Council, and Assembly of Maryland, had
Authority to ordain Laws, which were to continue and be in Force, until the
Royal Pleasure should be signified to the contrary. -- If there be any Doubts
concerning the Legality of the original Law of 1701-2, the Exception out of the
general Repeal in 1704 would serve to remove them; if the Authority of the Law
and of the Exception could be objected to, the several Acts dependant upon it,
by which it is interwove into, and become Part of, the Constitution, would in
Return prop, support and confirm it. -- I will take them in order, and quote
the References acknowledging the Validity of the Act of 1701-2.

By an Act passed in 1704, C. 34, 5, the Vestrymen are directed, where there is
no Minister resident in the Parish, to keep a fair Account of the 40 per Poll,
levied in their Parish, according to an Act, entitled, An Act for the
Establishment of religious Worship, etc. and also of the 10 per Poll to be
raised and levied in Virtue of that Act, and transmit it to the Governor and
Council. -- By an Act in 1715, C. 24, the Defects of the Act of 1701-2 are
remedied, and the 40 per Poll during a Vacancy, not before provided for, was
therein directed to be laid out by the Vestry, in repairing or building
Churches, or in purchasing or stocking a Glebe: By the last Section of this
Act, the Sheriff, who had no Allowance for his Trouble under the original Act,
was allowed to deduct 5 per Cent for collecting the 40 per Poll, and paying the
same either to the Incumbent or Vestry.

An Act in 1715, C. 30, repeals a Clause in an Act of Assembly, entitled, An
Act for establishing religious Worship in this Province, etc. requiring that
all Vestrymen should subscribe the Association, and directs that they shall
take the Oaths of Adjuration. An Act in 1716, C. 5, directs, that nothing
therein contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to alter any
Directions given by the Act for the Establishment of religious Worship within
this Province, as to the Manner of administering the Oaths required. In 1730,
C. 23, an Act passed, entitled, A SUPPLEMENTARY Act, to an Act, entitled, An
Act for the Establishment of religious Worship in this Province, according to
the Church of England, etc. wherein the Defects of that Act were remedied. By
an Act in 1733, it was enacted, that the Bills of Credit, then emitted, should
pass in Payment within this Province for Current Money, and all and any of the
Inhabitants were enabled to discharge all Lawyers Fees and Levies therewith
(the 40 per Poll and all Tobacco directed by an Act of Assembly of this
Province to be levied and applied to the building or repairing any Church or
Churches excepted.) An Act in 1747 The Three principal Inspecting Acts.
, C. 1, recites, that in Regard it is the general Expectation, that by Means of
this Act, Tobacco will be meliorated, the Quantity undoubtedly lessened, and
the Mode of Payment much facilitated, and thereby the Stipends of the Clergy
made more valuable than at present, and that it is deemed but highly
reasonable, that in Regard this Province will be at an Expense in carrying this
Act into Execution, in which the Clergy ought to bear a Part; be it enacted,
that during the Continuance of this Act, the County Courts shall levy on the
taxable Inhabitants of the respective Parishes, or Part of Parishes, within
their Counties, no more than Thirty Pounds of Tobacco per Poll, instead of 40
lb of Tobacco per Poll by a former Act directed, notwithstanding any thing in
the said former Act contained. The Acts of 1753 The Three principal Inspecting
Acts.
, and 1763 The Three principal Inspecting Acts.
C. 18, 23, make the same Reference in the same Words to the former Act, and
the latter Act continued in Force until the Day of October 1770.

To these Acts I may add one in 1715, and another in 1749, empowering the
Ministers, Vestry and Churchwardens, to summon and admonish Fornicators and
Adulterers; as well as several other Acts respecting Parochial Libraries,
respecting Glebes, respecting the various Offices of Churchwardens and
Vestrymen, who owe their very Existence to the Act of 1701-2 alone, all which
confirm and establish the Validity of that Law. -- If so uniform, so
uninterrupted an Acknowledgment of the Legislature, through such a Series of
Years, if their Faith so solemnly and so repeatedly pledged to the Clergy in
such a Variety of Acts, will not weigh against the Objection arising from King
William's Demise, there is a Salvo for that too -- nothing more nor less than a
plain, positive declaratory Act of Parliament, which will put the Validity of
the Law of 1701-2 beyond the Possibility of a Doubt, and render it of general
Acceptance.

By the Statute made in the 7th Year of King William the 3d, C. 27, entitled,
An Act for the better Security of his Majesty's Royal Person and Government, it
was enacted in 21, that no Commission, either Civil or Military, shall cease,
determine or be void, by Reason of the Death or Demise of his present Majesty,
or of any of his Heirs or Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, but that
every such Commission shall be, continue and remain in full Force and Virtue,
for the Space of Six Months after such Death or Demise, unless in the mean Time
superseded, etc.

Some Doubts arose concerning the Extent of the above Clause, whether by the
Word Commission therein, a Patent or Grant of any Office or Employment should
cease, determine or be void by the Death or Demise of King William, and whether
that Clause extended to his Majesty's foreign Dominions; to explain which, the
Statute of the 1st of Anne, C. 8, was made, which recited the above Clause of
the 7th William the 3d, and enacts, that no Patent or Grant of any Office or
Employment, either Civil or Military, shall be taken, construed, or judged to
cease, determine, or be void, by Reason of the Death or Demise of his said late
Majesty, but that every such Patent or Grant, shall be, continue, and remain in
full Force and Virtue, from and after the 7th Day of March, in the Year of our
Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, for the Space of Six Months then next
ensuing, unless in the mean Time superseded, etc. and the 6th Section enacts,
that all and singular the Provisions, Clauses, Matters, and Things whatsoever,
contained in this Act, and of that Part of the Act made in the 7th Year of the
late King, which is recited in this present Act, shall extend, and be construed
to extend to the Kingdom of Ireland, to the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, and
to all his MAJESTY'S DOMINIONS in AMERICA and ELSEWHERE: And the last Clause
enacts, that this present Act, and all other Acts to which the Royal Assent
shall be given after the 8th Day of March 1701, and before the End of this
present Session of Parliament, shall commence and begin, and be taken,
construed, and adjudged in Law to commence and begin upon the said 8th Day of
March 1701, unless in such Acts, some other Time for Commencement thereof be
specially limited and appointed This Act of Parliament seems, as well by its
Date as by its retrospective Power, to have the Act of Assembly of 1701-2
particularly in View.
.

This Act of Parliament first explains the Word Commission, to include any
Patent or Grant, Civil or Military; next extends all the Powers contained under
the former Act to all her Majesty's Dominions in America and elsewhere; and
lastly, has a retrospective View with respect to Time, and to prevent a
Moment's Lapse or Interregnum, commences on the 8th of March, the Day of the
King's Death, which must certainly cover the whole Time of the Session here,
from the 16th to the 25th of that Month. And here the Ignorance of our Planter
appears notorious, he picked up his little Knowledge from Bacon's Laws, and
presumed, because the King was dead, the Commission of the Governor ceased and
determined, and from hence formed this curious Conclusion, that upon dropping
of the Inspecting Law, the Clergy will be left destitute of any Act in their
Favor: An Opinion in which I think now he stands alone. I wish as much as he,
that the Clergy may be precluded the Occasion of their returning to their old
Claim of 40 per Poll, but by endeavoring to invalidate the Act itself, he not
only interests the Bishops' Influence with the Proprietor in their Favor, (of
which, he says, he is apprehensive) but perhaps the Crown itself, which cannot
tamely see an Act passed, and so solemnly confirmed by the Royal Authority, so
wantonly trampled under Foot, or permit the Church of England, so long and so
well established in this Province, to be stripped of its whole Support by a
pitiful Cavil; but I dare say that the Wisdom and Policy of the Legislature
here, will make such an Application needless, and that they will equally
despise his Plans and Apprehensions: The Clergy, if they are wise, will be very
cautious how they apply Home for Redress, and the Assembly will be too just, as
well as too politic, to drive them to that Extremity.

The Clergy are entitled under the Act of 1701-2, to the full Compliment of 40
lb of Tobacco per Poll; the Sheriff is therein obliged to collect it in the
same Manner, and by the same Authority as the Public and County Levies Which
are under Execution. Vide LL, No. 2. fol. 245 and 1724, C. 21. Sect. 2.
are collected, and to pay it to the Incumbent of each Parish. It was not until
the Year 1715 that an Act passed, allowing the Sheriff to deduct 5 per Cent.
for his Trouble. On making the First Inspection-Law in 1747, (not as you say in
1751, for you are as bad at Chronology as Legislation) it was thought proper as
the Value of the Staple would increase by the Regulation, that there should be
a Fifth deducted in all Tobacco Payments; the Clergy were included under this
Act; One Fifth deducted would reduce the 40 per Poll to 32 lb; 10 per Cent. was
also allowed for Convenience on Payments in Tobacco made to all but the Clergy
(...) extended to them, would have reduced their Claim to 29 lb (...) Commodity.

However, the Law passed to pay them 30 per Poll in Tobacco (...) which they
acquiesced, upon the Presumption which has since (...) founded, that the real
Increase upon the Value of Tobacco by (...) ^nspection, would balance the
nominal Loss: Thus the Law stood (...) when it was deemed proper, that Persons
not making Tobacco, might, (...) Certificates, pay the Clergy at the Rate of 12
s6 per Hundred. The 10 per Cent. allowed for Convenience in Tobacco Payments,
ought to have been made up in the Money Payments, but was overlooked then,
because the Clergy received 30 lb instead of 29 lb in Tobacco, in which the
greatest Proportion of their Salary being paid, they did not think the
additional 2 lb at Three Halfpence per lb an Object worthy their Attention; but
now the 10 per Cent. and Convenience ceasing with the Law, the Clergy are, even
upon the Principle of the Inspection-Law, entitled to 32 lb of Tobacco, as it
would be unjust to make them pay for a Convenience they no longer enjoy, or to
Four Shillings in Money, at the Rate of 12 s6 per Hundred.

The Tobacco and Money Payments, we may presume, were at that Time ( Anno 1753)
justly proportioned, and 12 s6 looked on nearly as an average Price for One
Hundred Pounds of public Tobacco: The Benefit of the Inspection-Law to the
Province is hence notorious, that 12 s6 is become scarcely Two Thirds, and of
late not One Half of the Worth of that Quantity of Tobacco: but if the Tobacco
be increased in Value, the Planter has no Reason to complain in Fact, because
he only pays his old Proportion of 30 per Poll; it would be uncharitable to
suppose, that he grudges the Minister those Returns he receives himself in so
much greater Proportion. His Complaint lies only on the Comparison. The Farmer,
whose Lands, now cleared and fitted for Cultivation, produce vast Crops of
Grain, for which he finds an immediate and liberal Market, compounds at the
Rate of 12 s6; and here the Comparison strikes. There can be no good Reason
given, why in public Taxations, one Man should pay double or treble the
Proportion of another, for the same Services; and if there appears a Necessity
for easing the Planter, there may be Room to lay a little Addition on the
Farmer, the Merchant, and the Gentleman, so that the Loss may not be so
severely felt by the public Officer, the Lawyer, or the Minister.

I calculate that One Half of the Parishes of Maryland do not consist of above
1200 Taxables; several of them fall short of that Number. You think 10 per Poll
would be sufficient to maintain a much greater Number of the Clergy than we
have now, in a very genteel Way. I suppose you would choose to assess the 10
per Poll at 12 s6 per Hundred; the Salary then on 1200 Taxables would amount to
L 75. Currency, that is L 45. Sterling per Annum, which, Commission and
Insolvences deducted, will hardly neat L 40. per Annum. You recommend, that the
Salary of each Clergyman should be fixed Yearly by the Vestry of each Parish,
as they will be the Neighbors of the Clergy of each Parish, they will be the
best Judges what it will take to support their Clergyman and Family in a
genteel Manner, and can either add or diminish as they shall see Cause. How can
you add? What, by voluntary Contribution? Precarious Dependence! How could you
find in your Heart to diminish? Suppose your Parson has a Wife and but Three
Children, it would come but to L 8. Sterling a Head, which is not equal to the
Hire of a Negro Boy of 12 Years of Age. We must allow you are an excellent
Judge what will maintain a Clergyman and his Family in a genteel Manner! You
refer us for Example to the PROVINCES of Virginia, (old and new Virginia I
presume) in the First the Salary of the Clergy, so far from being left to the
Discretion of a Vestry, is fixed by Law to 16 Hogsheads of Crop Tobacco, with
an Allowance of 4 per Cent. for Shrinkage, and a good House, Barn, etc.
together with a Glebe of at least 200 Acres of Land, are directed to be
provided for the Minister of each Parish at the public Expense.

The Clergy of Virginia, who were before allured into this Province, and filled
the Parishes here, when those in Virginia were left destitute, will now be no
longer desirous of changing their Situation, since, at the Rate of 12 s6 per
Hundred, One Half of the Parishes of Maryland will fall short of the Virginia
Stipend, considered together with the Convenience of their Glebes. As for new
Virginia, which is yet in Embryo, there cannot be so proper a Person to draw up
a Code of Laws for its internal Police, if Maryland can spare him, as the
Church of England Planter; and as there is not yet any Form of Ecclesiastical
Discipline in the Provinces of Virginia, whatever he may think to the contrary,
there may be a further Latitude for his Legislative Abilities, since his Plan
for Maryland would do Honor to a Solon or a Lycurgus. We must have it in his
own Words, for his Style is as complete as his Projects.

"I would further recommend that there should be a Clause in that Act to
empower the Vestry of each Parish to call before them, by Way of Summons, the
Clergyman of their Parish, for Neglect of Duty, or any Misconduct, when of
their own Knowledge, or on the Complaint of any Two or Three reputable
Parishioners, that they shall fix a Day and send their Summons to their
Clergyman, and that they shall also set up an Advertisement at the Church Door
at least Ten Days before the Time of meeting, signifying that their Clergyman
is to appear on such a Day before the Vestry -- and if any of his Parishioners
have any Complaint to make against him, they may attend on that Day, and then
if they of THEIR OWN KNOWLEDGE, or upon the Oath of Two or more creditable
Witnesses, have Reason to condemn him for Neglect of Duty or Misconduct, that
they shall reprimand him for the first and second Time, and for the third
discharge him." -- A very summary Way of Proceeding, indeed! Why, Sir, you
would erect a Court worse than the old Scottish Presbytery, worse than the High
Commission, worse than the Inquisition. Your Vestry is at once Judge, Jury and
Evidence; they may proceed to Sentence of their own Knowledge, without Process,
without Form, without Precedent, without Law, common, civil or ecclesiastical;
and, to crown the whole, without Appeal too. Hatred or Interest may produce an
Accusation, Suspicion be received as Proof, and Passion pronounce Judgment.

Do you exclaim against the Admiralty Courts, which proceed by the known Rules
of the Civil Law? Do you shudder at the Introduction of an Ecclesiastical
Court? and yet adopt a Plan a Thousand Times more tyrannical! View but the
Comparison!

Stillingfleet's Ecclesiastical Law.
In all Causes of Deprivation by the Ecclesiastical Law of a Person actually
possessed of a Benefice, the following Things must concur. First, a Monition or
Citation of the Party to appear; Second, a Charge given, to which he is to
answer, called a Libel; Third, a competent Time assigned for the Proofs and
Answers; Fourth, a Liberty of Counsel, and to except against the Proofs and
Witnesses; Fifth, a solemn Sentence after the hearing the Proofs and Answers.
-- And if these Things are not complied with, there is just Cause of Appeal,
and he may have a Remedy by a superior Court -- All which is agreeable to
common Justice and the Reason of Mankind -- because a Liberty of Defense is
allowed and a Right of Appeal. -- A Clergyman who has spent his Youth in severe
Studies, and expended a Fortune, which, if laid out in Trade, or the Study of
any other Profession, would have procured him an handsome Livelihood, is not to
be turned out like a discarded Footman from a capricious Master.

After their Clergyman is discharged and paid, in Proportion to his Yearly
Salary, for the Time he has served (that is, turned out with his Family, only
on Ten Days Notice, to shift for himself) they (meaning the Vestry I suppose)
are to get a Reader to supply his Place until they can suit themselves with a
Clergyman. -- Do you, Sir, accuse the Clergy of vaunting over Government, and
make so direct an Attack upon his Lordship's Right of Patronage? -- Would you
invalidate the Charter that confers that Right, as well as the Act of 1701-2?
Would you insinuate that the King had no Power to grant the one, as you assert
his Governor had no Power to assent to the other? Would you, on the one Hand,
advise the Lower House of Assembly forcibly to wrest out of his Lordship's
Hands a Power so solemnly conferred on him by the royal Authority, and, on the
other, to deprive a Clergyman of Part of the Property his Lordship has invested
him with, by dividing his Parish without his consent? -- And would you instruct
them to violate the Faith pledged by their Ancestors, and recommend it to the
Makers of Laws to be the first to infringe them? -- With a Disposition to
overturn all Government -- to set aside all Law, and to throw the Province into
general Confusion, how happy it is that your Abilities only tend to render your
Designs contemptible!

A good deal of Pains has been taken to induce the People to look upon the
Freeholds of the Clergy in a different Light from others, as conditional
Freeholds, and that though absolute Freeholds require a due Course of Law,
conditional do not; so that if a Man be deprived of his Office, his Benefice is
gone: This is an old Objection, which has thus been answered long ago.

Stillingfleet's Ecclesiastical Law.
That all Fees are conditional, that none are absolute with respect to the Law,
otherwise they could never be forfeited. -- A great Lawyer says, That all in
England are fiduciary, that is -- conditional Freeholders, except the King --
for that all Fees imply Fealty, the Nonperformance of which is Felony, that
is, in the original Signification of the Word, a Breach of Trust toward the
Lord of the Soil. It ought to be shown that Magna Charta, or the ancient Laws,
make such a Difference between Ecclesiastical Freeholds and others, which is
not even pretended; and therefore such a Distinction is not to be allowed,
especially as there is a positive Act of Parliament, 14 Edward III. C. 3. which
says that Clergymen shall not be ejected out of their Temporalties, but for a
true and just Cause, according to the Law of the Land, and Judgment thereupon
given.

The Revenues of the Clergy, wherever they have become any ways considerable,
have always been the Subject of popular Conversation, and often been made a
Topic fit for the Purpose of factious and designing Men to raise public
Discontent. But violent Changes have seldom proved for the better, and
Innovations in religious Matters have ever been of dangerous Consequence to a
State -- as we read in the English History, Four different Changes in Religion
took Place during the Course of a few Years, by the Authority of the Sovereign
alone. -- If the Act of 1701-2 be not in Force, we have no established Church
of England -- for no Church is deemed a settled and established Church, unless
a certain Income or Revenue is provided for its Ministers. There is no
Restraint on Marriages, either in respect of the Person solemnizing, or those
joined in Marriage; there is no Vestryman or Churchwarden; nay, no Edifice
properly called a Church; the Building itself may be turned into a Barn by the
Propietor of the Soil. -- And further -- the Act of Toleration, extended to
Protestant Dissenters and Quakers here by that Act, ceases, and they are liable
to all the Pains and Penalties of former Statutes.

If the Act of 1701-2 were a real Grievance to the People; if the Tax of 40 per
Poll were too heavy for their Circumstances to bear; if they were really
oppressed and rode by the Clergy, there is not a Man in the Province that would
be more ready with Heart and Hand to give a Lift to overturn the Act than
myself: But this is far from being the Case. --

The 40 per Poll is reckoned not a 20th Part of the Increase of that One
Commodity, and if the Inspection-Law had been continued, which would have been
much to the Clergy's Content, the 30 per Poll* therein assessed was One Fourth
less, and the Composition at 12 s.6 d. may be computed, for the Reasons before
assigned, scarcely One Hundredth Part of the Farmer's Increase.

In England the Farmer pays One Tenth Part of the Produce of his Lands, which,
his Labor inclusive, is nearly One Fifth of the Returns, either to the Church
or the Impropriator who claims under the same Title: yet he has no Reason to
complain. If he received the Land by Descent from his Ancestors, it was with
this Reservation; if he purchases it with his Money, or rents it of another, a
proportionable Deduction is made. What is not a Man's by Inheritance, or
Purchase, or Contract, cannot properly be his own. The Tithes in England and
the 40 per Poll in Maryland stand upon the same Principle, to wit, the Law of
the Land; and Law is the Fountain of Property: Remove the Landmark and the
Field lies in common -- and I speak of Property as inviolable, at least until
the Time comes, when inter Arma silent Leges. If then the Freeholder in England
has no just Cause of Complaint, how much less has the Inhabitant of Maryland,
who contributes so much less to the Maintenance and Support of an established
Clergy, which certainly tends to the Peace and civilizing of any Country, and
conduces as well to the temporal as to the eternal Welfare of a People.

The Right of Patronage is one of the richest Plumes in the Proprietor's Cap --
but as this falls to the Ground entirely with the Act of 1701-2 (for what is a
Right of Patronage worth without an Endowment?) so the splitting of Parishes
into small Portions is a great Diminution of the Value of that Right; it
deprives him of the Power of rewarding Merit, and cuts off, in great Measure,
the generous Emulation of excelling among the Clergy; the Hopes of Rewards
being the human Means for encouraging Virtue, and recommending Learning amongst
Mankind. This minute Division is not only incompatible with the infant State of
any Country, where the Inhabitants lie thinly scattered over a vast Tract of
Land, unless an additional Burden be laid on each Individual to maintain so
numerous a Clergy, but is highly impolitic in the back Parts of this Province,
where Three Fourths of the Inhabitants are Foreigners, invincibly attached to
their own Religion, Language and Manners, amongst whom no Clergyman of the
Church of England can hope for any more Respect than his Humanity entitles him
to or his Income commands.

The Clergy are at present divided in their political Character -- those
possessed of good Livings and secured by the Laws of the Province, unsolicitous
of further Promotion, have a natural Desire to promote the Happiness and secure
the Liberties of the People by whom they are maintained, and thus become
Friends of the Public. The expectant Clergy, who are in waiting for
Preferment, which flows from Government, will naturally fall in with, at least
not openly oppose, the Views and Designs of those Persons from whom they are to
receive Promotion. -- Power always follows Property -- a Balance of Power can
only be preserved by a Balance of Property -- but this Balance had like to have
been destroyed by a Bill in the Year 1768, establishing a Commission Court for
Ecclesiastical Matters -- which would have united and blended together the
Property and Influence of the whole Body of the Clergy with that of the
Government; for he that can punish, will command and must be obeyed too. It
will always be an Object worthy the Policy and Wisdom of the Lower House of
Assembly, to keep the Punishment of the Clergy out of the Hands of the
Government, lest by inculcating into the Minds of their Hearers that passive
Obedience to which they are subjected, the Contagion spread to the Laity too;
and the Government, if they are wise, will keep the Punishment as well as
Promotion of the Clergy out of the Hands of the People, lest they prove, as
they do in Virginia, a dead Weight against Government; and thus balanced will
they become an excellent Barrier, either when the Government would break
through that sacred Compact which makes the Interests of the governing and the
governed reciprocal, or the People would throw off all Obedience to Government,
by which they are protected in their Persons and Properties.

I should never have thought the Church of England Planter worth answering, had
I not found that the Idea of the Invalidity of the Law of 1701-2 had been
mentioned in a respectable Meeting, and had become popular under the Sanction
(by what Authority I know not) of one of the most considerable Men in the
Province. There cannot therefore be the least Doubt but that the Church is in
Danger. -- To neglect to provide for Self-defence at any Time is to sleep in a
Siege -- but to neglect it now is to sleep on an Attack. -- The Conscience as
well as the Interest of the Clergy is concerned in this Debate; the
Preservation of the purest Church on Earth is entrusted to their Care, and they
never will be able to answer it either here or hereafter, if they neglect so
sacred a Deposit. -- That the Notion of the Invalidity of the Act of 1701-2 is
a mere Fiction, calculated to raise an Alarm, there is not the least Doubt: But
the Clergy, if they are not dead to every Sense of their Duty as well as their
Interest, will, upon the first Attack upon any Individual, join their Purse,
Heart and Hand, to defend his and their own Rights against all Opposition. The
Church of England has at present the Right, and will be supported, doubtless,
by the Power both of the Proprietor and the King, if such Interposition be
necessary. The Church tolerates all other Persuasions, but should the Sectaries
obtain the Possession of the Loaves and Fishes, it would hardly meet even with
Toleration itself. Our Planter, ignorant and illiterate as he is, shows the
Design in Agitation. -- Our Colleges in North America have not been useless to
us, and that we can get Readers from them, and marry, etc. by the OTHER Clergy.
And again he recommends -- not to let them at Home force their Clergy on us, as
they have done their Revenue Officers. Ignorant that it was expressly to
encourage faithful and able Ministers to COME and RESIDE in this Province, that
the 40 per Poll was given -- and now they are come, have left their Country,
Friends and Connexions at Home, under the Security of Laws, under the Faith of
the Legislature, under the most solemn Engagements of Protection and Support,
they are to be deprived of their Freeholds without legal Process, plundered of
their Property by Chicane and Violence, and turned out with their Families and
their Religion to shift for themselves, and to seek for Refuge in some other
Wilderness Country.

Heu Pietas! Heu prisca Fides!

May the Divine Being, who is the GOD of Order and not of Confusion, inspire
the Government with Inclination to support the Establishment of our Holy
Church, the Clergy with Resolution to defend its Rights, and the People with
Submission to its Divine Ordinances, which teach to render to All their Dues --
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor.

A CONSTITUTIONALIST.

POSTSCRIPT.
AS the Partition of Parishes is at present a favorite Object of the Lower
House of Assembly, it may not be amiss to inquire how far such a Practice is
agreeable to public Faith, to Law and o Precedent.

The Charter gives Lord Baltimore "the Patronage and Advowson of all Churches,
which (with the increasing Worship and Religion of CHRIST) hereafter shall
happen to be built within the Province." -- The Act of 1701-2 appropriates "the
40 per Poll that is to be levied upon every taxable Person within each
respective Parish within this Province, as they have been, now are, or
hereafter shall be, laid out, limited or appointed by Laws of this Province, to
the Minister of each respective Parish, presented, inducted, or appointed by
his Excellency the Governor, or Commander in Chief for the Time being."

The different Modes or Variations of Payment since, refer to the same
original. The Question is, whether his Lordship, or his Lieutenant Governor,
having once presented or inducted a Parson into a Parish, can revoke or annul
that Induction by his own Act, or with the Concurrence of any other Power
within this Province. -- If he can, he has more Power than the King has in
England; for after Induction, a Church is full against the King; and the Rector
of a Parish here is no longer a Tenant for Life, but Tenant at Will. If he can
take away Part, by little and little he may take away the whole, and give the
same Thing Ten Times over.

It has been seen in the foregoing Sheets, how solemnly the Act of 1701-2 was
enacted, ratified and confirmed, by which 40 per Poll was settled on the
established Clergy, as an Encouragement for them to come and reside in this
Province. In consequence of which, many Clergymen of the Church of England have
come over from Time to Time, and made some little Settlement for themselves and
Families. The 40 per Poll may be considered in lieu of Tithes; both were given
for the same Intent; both belong to Ecclesiastical Persons; and both have the
Law of the Land for their Support. -- A Parson has, during his Life, the
Freehold in himself of the Parsonage House, the Glebe, the Tithes, and other
Dues. It were needless to quote Authorities for this Position, it never has
been contravened. This is a Right common to, and inherent in every Minister of
the Church, in every Country where it is established by Law. -- The public
Faith is pledged to a Minister of a Parish in this Province by Three solemn
Acts; First, by an Act of Assembly, conferring an Endowment here upon the
Church of England; Secondly, by another Act, fixing and ascertaining the Bounds
and Limits of each particular Parish; and Thirdly, by an Act of the
Proprietor's, by Virtue of his Charter-Powers, constituting and appointing the
Rector of a Parish, to have, hold and enjoy his Church, with all the Profits
and Advantages whatsoever, appertaining to a Minister of that Parish, and
requiring the Churchwardens, Vestrymen and Parishioners of the Parish, to
receive, acknowledge and assist him, in all Matters relating to the Discharge
of his Function.

This Act is absolute, unconditional, final and irrevocable; all which
Properties are necessary to make it legal. If it were conditional it would be
Simoniacal, and if revocable it would be void in Law. Even Bonds of
Resignation, which the Corruption of the Times has introduced into the English
Church, are held by some eminent Men to be null in Law, because they put a
Power of Deprivation in the Patron's Hands, which belongs only to a Court of
Judicature. A Division is a partial Deprivation, a Deprivation a Punishment, a
Punishment implies a Crime, and a Crime requires Proof, Process and Judgment --
but here, by a simple Vote, a Clergyman incurs the highest Punishment he can
merit in his official Character, without a Trial, and may be deprived of half
his Salary, of half his Glebe, of half his House, of half his Dues (they should
in Pity take half his Children too) without a Crime.

The Charter of this Province requires, " That the Laws of this Province be
consonant to Reason, and be not repugnant and contrary, but, so far as may be,
agreeable to the Laws, Customs and Rights of the Kingdom of England." I cannot
repeat too often, and I do it with Confidence, "that a Parson has during his
Life the Freehold in himself of the Parsonage House, the Glebe, the Salary,
whether accruing from Tithes or Modus, or 40 lb per Poll of Tobacco, and other
Dues, if not removed by voluntary Cession, or legal Deprivation by due Course
of Law."

And because the Idea of the Clergy's Property seems to be lightly considered
in the present Dispute, I would ask, What Reason can be given, why they should
be preclud'd the common Privileges of Mankind?

The third absolute Right, inherent in every Englishman, is that of Property;
which consists in the free Use and Enjoyment, and Disposal of all his
Acquisitions, without any Control or Diminution, save only by the Laws of the
Land. The original of private Property is probably founded in Nature; but the
Modifications under which we at present find it, the Method of conserving it to
the present Owner, and of translating it from Man to Man, are entirely derived
from Society; and are some of those civil Advantages, in Exchange of which
every Individual has resigned a Part of his natural Liberty. -- The Laws of
England are therefore, in Point of Honor and Justice, extremely watchful in
ascertaining and protecting this Right. Upon this Principle the Great Charter
has declared, that no Freeman shall be disseized or divested of his Freehold,
or of his Liberties, or free Customs, but by the Judgment of his Peers or by
the Law of the Land. And by a Variety of ancient Statutes it is enacted, that
no Man's Lands or Goods shall be seized into the King's Hands, against the
Great Charter and the Law of the Land, and that no Man shall be disinherited
nor put out of his Franchises or Freehold, unless he be duly brought to answer,
and be forejudged by Course of Law See Page 13.
: If any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be redressed, and holden for
none.

So great, moreover, is the Regard of the Law for private Property, that it
will not authorize the least Violation of it; no, not even for the general Good
of the Community. If a new Road, for instance, were to be made through the
Grounds of a private Person, it might, perhaps, be extensively beneficial to
the Public; but the Law permits no Man or Set of Men to do this without
Consent of the Owner of the Land. In vain may it be urged that the Good of the
Individual ought to yield to that of the Community; for it would be dangerous
to allow any private Man, or even public Tribunal, to be the Judge of this
common Good, and to decide whether it be expedient or no. Besides, the public
Good is in nothing more essentially interested than in the Protection of every
Individual's private Rights, as modelled by the municipal Laws. In this and the
like Cases, the Legislature a one can, and indeed frequently does, interpose
and compel the Individual to a quiesce. But how does it interpose and compel?
Not by absolutely stripping the Subject of his Property in an arbitrary Manner;
but by giving him a full Indemnification and Equivalent for the injury thereby
sustained. The Public is now considered as an Individual, treating with an
Individual for an Exchange: All that the Legislature does is to oblige the
Owner to alienate his Possessions for a reasonable Price; and even this is an
Exertion of Power which the Legislature indulges with Caution, and which
nothing but the Legislature can perform.

Such is the Practice of the British House of Commons; so just, so temperate,
so worthy of Imitation! So tender are they of private Property, that the most
immediate public Utility will not permit them to infringe it. A Canal is to be
cut for the Benefit of Trade; it intercepts and ruins the Navigation of a
River, made before at great Expense; many private Persons had embarked their
Property in clearing the River, and a Bill was rejected in the House of Commons
for cutting a Canal, until the Petitioner had satisfied all the Adventurers in
the Navigation of the River. A public Good is proposed; private Advantage
ought to submit: True; public Good implies more Good than Harm; but it would
be more Harm than Good to the Public to destroy the Idea of Property, and
forcibly to take away a Man's Possessions without due Satisfaction, either to
make a Road or cut a Canal; the Precedent would lead to Anarchy, Confusion and
Ruin -- Nor is the British Legislature less tender of the Property of the
Church: The Great Charter begins with granting all its Rights and Liberties to
the Church; the British Legislature protects the Property of the Church
inviolable. A Bill was agitated some Time ago, to defalcate Part of the rich
Dignities, and to apply it to the Augmentation of small Benefices. It was
rejected upon this Principle, that the Revenues were private Property, which
ought to be held sacred and inviolate; and if they admitted a Precedent of that
Nature, there would be no End to Applications, until the Crown was stripped of
every Piece of Preferment worth bestowing. -- To render a Division of a Parish
practicable in England, the Consent of the Ordinary, Patron and Incumbent, is
necessary. The Ordinary is a Party, as superintending the Affairs of the whole
Church; the Patron is a Party, having the Advowson thereof, which is a temporal
Right; and the Incumbent is a Party, as personating that particular Church, and
having it not only for his own Use, but in Trust for that of his Successors.
There is not One Instance in all the Parliamentary Proceedings of a forcible
Division of a Parish, to take Place during a Plenarty, without the Consent of
the Incumbent. -- Deprivation indeed is the Consequence of an Attainder by Act
of Parliament; but a Deprivation without a Crime is an Idea too arbitrary ever
to be brought into Contemplation. A Man is set apart for the Ministry; his
Youth is spent in Study; he is cut off by Law from the Exercise of any Trade or
handicraft Business, even from turning Agriculture into a Profit: He obtains a
Living; where he sits down, (...) the Duty of his Function, or, if his Charge
be too extensive, or Infirmities incapacitate, he discharges his Office by the
Assistance of another; he sits secure under his Vine or Fig Tree, depending on
his own Innocence and the Law of the Land. The Law directs what he is to do,
and what to avoid; and, whilst he executes the Condition to the best of his
Power, and avoids the Crimes, by which he may incur a Forfeiture, no Power on
Earth can in Justice deprive him.

Agreeable to these Principles has been the Practice of the Legislature of this
Province hitherto, in respect to the Division of Parishes.

When the Parish of Augustine was erected out of St. Stephen, in the Year 1744,
C. 3, the Act recites, that the Rev. Mr. Hugh Jones shall continue Incumbent of
both Parishes during his Life. -- When All Hallows Parish in Worcester County
was divided, and Worcester Parish erected thereout, 1744, C. 24. the Division
was directed to take Place after the Death of the Rev. Mr. Glasgow, the then
Incumbent -- When St. Paul's Parish in Baltimore County was divided, and Part
thereof, lying in Anne-Arundel County, was united to Westminster Parish, 1742,
C. 15. the Partition was directed to take Place after the Death of the Rev.
Benedict Bourdillon. -- When St. Mary Whitechapel Parish was erected out of
Great Choptank Parish, 1725, C. 10. the Act recites, that the Rev. Thomas Nowel
had Notice thereof, and assented thereto. -- By an Act appointing Commissioners
for dividing St. Mary's County into Four Parishes, and to erect Trinity Parish
in Charles County out of Part of All Faith, and King and Queen Parishes, 1744,
C. 14. it is provided by the 7th Section, that all the Part of All Faith and
King and Queen Parishes, now lying within Charles County, shall hereafter be
deemed and remain a distinct and separate Parish, by the Name of Trinity
Parish, but so as not to affect the 40 per Poll, until after the Decease or
Removal of the present Incumbent or Incumbents of the said Parishes of All
Faith and King and Queen. -- By the 9th Section it is provided, that such
Divisions or Alterations of the Parishes aforesaid, or the erecting the
aforesaid Trinity Parish in Charles County, shall not take Place or Effect,
until the Death or Removal of the present Incumbents respectively, so as to
alter the Income of any of the said present Incumbents in the Parishes they now
enjoy.

It were needless to multiply Examples. The Legislature has been hitherto too
just and considerate to deprive a Man of Part of his Property without his
Consent. The Precedent brought on the other Side proves nothing. When St.
Luke's Parish was erected out of St. Paul's in Queen Anne and Talbot Counties,
1728, C. 19. the Preamble recites, Whereas Mr. Christopher Wilkinson, the
present Incumbent of St. Paul's Parish aforesaid, having had due Notice
thereof, and making no material Objections against passing of an Act, as above
prayed, etc. It has been argued from the Words making no material Objections,
that the Division was made without the Consent of the Incumbent; which
Construction is not admissible. Those Words rather imply his Consent, and this
Explanation is confirmed by a similar Recital in an Act passed 1722, C. 3. to
unite Part of St. Paul's Parish in Baltimore County to Westminster Parish in
Anne-Arundel County, that the Rev. Mr. Tibbs, the present Incumbent of St.
Paul's Parish, had due Notice thereof, and makes no Objections against passing
of an Act as aforesaid.

Again, when the remaining Part of the said Parish of St. Paul was made a new
Parish, and Part of All Hallows and St. Anne's Parishes added, the Preamble
recites, that the Rev. Mess. Tibbs, John Humphreys and Joseph Golbatch, the
several Incumbents of the several Parishes, after having due Notice thereof,
and making no material Objections, etc.

In both these Instances, making no Objections, and making no material
Objections, are synonimously used, and imply the Consent rather than the
Dissent of the several Incumbents. For if they had made any Objections, that
such a Division, against their Will, was contrary to public Faith, to Law and
Precedent, they must have appeared material to any Legislature upon Earth.

It may be contended, that a Legislature can make a Precedent where they find
none; and that they are omnipotent within their Jurisdiction. But there are
some Things impossible for Omnipotence itself. God himself cannot contradict
his own Attributes; one of the principal of which is Justice. He cannot do an
unjust Thing. An Example worthy the Imitation of the Powers on Earth.

The Charter, which give the Legislature here its legal Existence, grants the
Clergy the Protection of the ecclesiastical Laws. The Church is directed to be
dedicated and consecrated according to the ecclesiastical Laws of the Kingdom
of England. The Rights of the Clergy and of the Laity are coeval and
coexistent: As the Layman claims a Trial by his Peers, so a Clergyman shall not
be deprived but by legal Process, and a final Sentence pronounced by a Bishop;
that is to say by canonical Censures, or in pursuance of diverse penal
Statutes, which declare the Benefice void, for some Non-feasance or Neglect, or
some Mal-feasance or Crime. The Extent of a Parish, or the Largeness of an
Income, are not Objects within the Cognizance of that Law; and if a Man perform
his Duty conscientiously and to the best of his Abilities, he is as free from
its Censures as its Punishments. If Property may be alienated by Violence,
because it is thought too much, no Man is secure, because each envious Person
thinks his Neighbor has too much.

Tithes in England are of common Right. They have the Protection and Support of
the common Law. If a Person be unjustly deprived of his Benefice by an
ecclesiastical Court, he has his Remedy in the Court of King's Bench, where a
Prohibition is granted. But old Age, Infirmity, or Non-residence, are not
sufficient, in the Eye of the common Law, to countenance a Deprivation. In such
Cases the Ordinary may provide, who has by Statute 12 Ann. St. 2. C. 12.
a Power of sequestering Part of the Income of the Parish to pay an Assistant.

An Induction in this Province is in the Nature of a Patent; and if an
Induction can be vacated, because it includes the Circumference of 100 Miles, a
Patent may be vacated upon the same Principle, because it contains Ten or
Twenty Thousand Acres of Land. The Public is much more injured by the latter
than by the former Grant. Immense Bodies of Land in a few Hands prevent the
Settlement and Population of a Country, in which its Wealth and Strength
consist -- but it is immaterial to the Public, if divine Service is performed,
and the Ceremonies of Marriage, Burial and Christening be done by a Person
legally authorized, whether it be done by a Rector or Curate of a Parish. If
the sacred Boundaries of Property be once violated by Authority, there will
soon be as little legal Security on this as on the other Side of the Allegany
Mountains; and our Lives will be as unsafe as our Property. To bereave a Man of
Life, or by Violence to confiscate his Estate, without Accusation or Trial,
would be so gross and notorious an Act of Despotism, as must at once convey the
Alarm of Tyranny throughout the whole Kingdom Blackstone.
.

The stirring up the People to petition against their respective Ministers,
without any just Cause of Complaint, is not only highly ungenerous, but shows a
factious and malignant Disposition, and tends to ruin the Peace and Happiness
of Society. It agitates and inflames the Minds of the People, makes them unfit
to receive those divine Precepts which recommend brotherly Love, Unity and
Concord, totally destroys that mutual Confidence that ought to subsist between
a Minister and his Congregation, and gives the Sectaries every possible
Advantage against the Established Church. A Man may perhaps gain a little
transitory popularity, an additional Vote at an Election, or the Huzzas of a
Mob, but can never have the Approbation of his own Conscience, or the Applause
of prudent Men, who disturbs the Peace of his Neighborhood, from such mean,
and apparently self-interested Considerations. -- The Clergy have now, however,
an Opportunity of counteracting those Measures, and of regaining the good Will
and Confidence of the People. They are looked upon as mercenary; I do not know
they are more so than other Men. Upon Failure of the Inspecting Act, the Law of
1701-2 will give them an indubitable Right to 40 lb of Tobacco per Poll: but
the Upper House has proposed during this Session, and the Lower House has
acceded to the Proposition, that the Clergy should receive on 32 Pounds of
Tobacco, at the Rate of 12 s6 per Hundred ( i. e. 4 s. common Money per Poll)
which additional Two Pounds in the Money Payments, to what was assessed under
the late Inspection Law, may, I apprehend, be founded on similar Reasons to
those explained in the Tenth Page of the foregoing Letter.

The Advantage hence to those who do not raise Tobacco will be considerable, as
they will be freed from the disagreeable Necessity of swearing off making
Tobacco for the future, or otherwise of lying at the Mercy of the Sheriff, who
may make them pay at the Tobacco Price; and the Benefit to the Tobacco makers
will be still greater, who, supposing Tobacco to average 20 s. Currency per
Hundred, may pay the Clergy off at 4 s. instead of 8 s. a Tax, the Value of 40
Pounds of Tobacco.

I submit it therefore, whether it would not be equally for the Ease of the
Clergy and of the People, that the Clergy agree, and publish their Consent in
the Gazette, that all Persons indebted to them for the 40 Pounds of Tobacco per
Poll, may discharge the same to the Sheriffs in Tobacco before the 10th of June
Yearly, or in common Money, at 4 s. per Poll, before the 10th of August Yearly,
until other Provision be made by Act of Assembly. -- The Clergy can give no
Umbrage to Government, as the Proposition flowed from the Upper House, and the
People will pay with Cheerfulness, as it was approved by their Representatives.
By this Conduct the Clergy will prevent the undue Advantages that may be taken
of them in the Collection of the 40 per Poll, will cut off many Occasions of
Dispute and Altercation, will stop many unnecessary Lawsuits, stand higher
than ever in the Opinion of their Friends, and even force their Enemies to
admire, what they would not have Virtue to imitate.

Nov. 20, 1770.
FINIS.

