ADVERTISEMENT.
A List of the encouragers names will be published in the third volume of this
work; and all gentlemen that now choose to become subscribers, may be supplied
with the first volume at the moderate price of one Dollar. Subscriptions are
received by Robert Bell, Bookseller, and by all the Printers and Booksellers in
America. The second and third volumes will be forwarded as expeditiously as
possible, and delivered to the subscribers, in blue boards, at the price of one
Dollar each.

Memorandum. THIS Volume can only be sold to those GENTLEMEN who are now
willing to Subscribe for the Second and Third Volumes of this celebrated
History, by giving in their Names as Encouragers.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF CHARLES THE FIFTH, EMPEROR OF GERMANY; And of all
the KINGDOMS and STATES in EUROPE, during his Age.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, From the
Subversion of the ROMAN EMPIRE, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

CONFIRMED BY Historical PROOFS and ILLUSTRATIONS.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH, and
HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND: Author of the late elegant History
of Scotland.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

AMERICA: PRINTED FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
I PRESUME to lay before Your Majesty the History of a Period, which, if the
abilities of the Writer were equal to the dignity of the Subject, would not be
unworthy the attention of a Monarch, who is no less a Judge than a Patron of
Literary Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her prerogative to offer instruction to KINGS, as well as
to their people. What reflections the Reign of the Emperor CHARLES V. may
suggest to your Majesty, it becomes not me to conjecture. But your Subjects
cannot observe the various calamities, which that Monarch's ambition to be
distinguished as a Conqueror, brought upon his dominions, without recollecting
the felicity of their own times, and looking up with gratitude to their
Sovereign, who, during the fervor of youth, and amidst the career of victory,
possessed such self-command, and maturity of judgment, as to set bounds to his
own triumphs, and prefer the blessings of peace to the splendor of military
glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate the Wisdom of Your Majesty's choice, but
will enumerate the many Virtues, which render Your Reign conspicuous for a
sacred regard to all the duties, incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the influence of these Virtues; and to live under
the dominion of a Prince, who delights more in promoting the Public Welfare,
than in receiving the just Praise of his royal beneficence. I am,

SIR, YOUR MAJESTY's Most faithful Subject, And most dutiful Servant, WILLIAM
ROBERTSON.

THIS AMERICAN EDITION, OF THE CELEBRATED HISTORY OF CHARLES THE FIFTH, Is most
respectfully and gratefully ADDRESSED TO JOHN DICKINSON, Esquire; And to all
GENTLEMEN SUBSCRIBERS, Whether of the BAR -- The PULPIT. The Faculty -- The
Mercantile -- Or manufacturing PROFESSIONS, who voluntarily, and without any
other application than public advertisements, contributed their names as
encouragers of American manufactures, thus practically demonstrating true
patriotism, a real affection for the welfare of their country, which inciteth
not only to mere words, but also to noble actions, that vivifieth individuals,
and tends toward the elevation and enriching of THE LAND WE LIVE IN.

GENTLEMEN, I remain, Your much obliged, Humble Servant, The EDITOR.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME THE FIRST.
View of the progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior
Government, Laws and Manners. SECTION FIRST.
The effects of the Roman power on the state of Europe -- The desolation which
it occasioned -- The improvements which it introduced -- The bad consequences
of their dominion -- The irruption of the barbarous nations -- State of the
countries from which they issued -- The people fit for daring enterprises --
The motives of their first excursions -- Their reasons for settling in the
countries which they conquered -- The extent of their settlements -- The
circumstances which occasioned the downfall of the Roman Empire -- The
circumstances which contributed to the success of the barbarous nations -- The
spirit with which they carried on war -- The desolation which they brought upon
Europe -- The universal change which they occasioned in the state of Europe --
From this state of disorder the laws of government, now established, must be
traced -- The principles on which the Northern nations made their settlements
in Europe -- The feudal government gradually established among them -- National
defense the great object of fedual policy -- The feudal government defective in
its provisions for interior order in society -- It prevented nations likewise
from acting with vigor in their external operations. -- The fatal effects of
this state of society on sciences and arts -- Upon religion -- Upon the
character and virtues of the human mind -- From the beginning of the eleventh
century government and manners begin to improve -- Necessary to point out the
causes and events which contribute toward this improvement -- The tendency of
the Crusades to introduce a change in government and manners -- The more remote
causes of these expeditions -- The immediate occasion of them -- The success of
the Crusades -- The beneficial effects of the Crusades on manners -- Their
influence on the state of property -- Their commercial effects -- The
establishment of communities favorable to government and order -- The ancient
state of cities -- The freedom of cities first established in Italy -- Is
introduced into France and into other countries of Europe -- Its happy effects
upon the condition of the inhabitants -- Upon the power of the nobility -- Upon
the power of the crown -- Upon the increase of industry -- The inhabitants of
cities acquire political power as members of the constitution -- The happy
effects of this upon government -- The people acquire liberty by
enfranchisement -- The motives and progress of this -- The effects of this upon
the improvement of society -- The introduction of a more regular administration
of justice, contributes to the improvement of society -- This effected by
abolishing the practice of private war -- Original ideas of men concerning
justice -- These lead to the practice of private war -- The pernicious effects
of it -- Various methods in order to abolish it -- The prohibition of trial by
judicial combat, another improvement in the administration of justice --
Defects in the judicial proceedings of the middle ages -- These introduced the
practice of appealing to heaven -- Particularly by judicial combat -- The
introduction of this practice favored by the superstition of the middle ages
-- and likewise by their martial spirit -- It becomes universal -- The
pernicious effects of it -- Various expedients for abolishing this practice. --
The privilege of appealing from the courts of the barons, another great
improvement in the administration of justice -- Origin of the supreme and
independent jurisdiction of the nobility -- The extent and bad effects of this
privilege -- Expedients employed in order to limit or abolish it -- The
regulations of the canon law promote a more perfect administration -- The
progress of ecclesiastical usurpation -- The plan of ecclesiastical
jurisprudence more perfect than that in the civil courts -- The good effects of
imitating and adopting it -- The revival of the Roman law contributes more
liberal ideas concerning justice and order -- The circumstances from which the
Roman law fell into oblivion -- Circumstances which favored the revival of it
-- The effects of this upon the ideas of men, and the dispensation of justice
-- From all these arose a distinction in professions -- The effects of this on
Society -- The spirit of chivalry introduces more liberal sentiments, and more
generous manners -- Origin of chivalry -- Its beneficial effects -- The
progress of science has great influence on the manners and characters of men --
Ignorance of the middle ages -- The first literary efforts ill directed and the
causes of this -- They had however considerable effects -- A circumstance which
prevented their being more extensive -- Its influence on manners merits
attention -- The progress of commerce had great influence on manners and
government -- Low state of commerce in the middle ages -- Causes of its revival
-- First among the Italians -- Then by means of the Hanseatick league --
Commerce makes progress in the Netherlands -- And in England -- The beneficial
effects of this.

From page 1, to page 65.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the
national force requisite in foreign operations. -- SECTION SECOND.
STATE of society greatly improved at the beginning of the fifteenth century --
Still defective with respect to the command of the national force -- The power
of Monarchs very limited -- Their revenues small -- Their armies unfit for
conquest -- They are incapable of forming any general or extensive plan of
operation -- They were little connected with each other -- A confirmation of
this from the affairs of France -- From those of Spain -- From those of Germany
-- This inactivity occasioned entirely by the state of government -- Events
happened during the fifteenth century which rendered the efforts of nations
more powerful and extensive -- The first of these was the depriving the English
of their territories on the continent -- The effect of this on increasing the
power of the French monarchy -- On the state of the military force in the
nation -- It occasions the introduction of standing armies -- The effects of
this -- The monarchs of France encouraged to extend their prerogative -- The
progress of the royal power under Charles VII. -- Under Louis XI. -- His
measures for humbling the nobility -- And of dividing them -- He adds to the
number of standing forces -- He augments the revenues of the crown -- His
address in managing the assembly of states -- He enlarges the bounds of the
French monarchy -- By all these the French government rendered more active and
enterprizing -- Steps taken toward extending the power of the crown in England
-- And in Spain -- Events happened, which called the several monarchs to exert
the new powers which they had acquired -- The first of these events was the
marriage of the heiress of the house of Burgundy -- The importance of this to
the state of Europe -- Views of Louis XI. with respect to it -- The singular
course which he followed -- The marriage of Maximilian with the heiress of
Burgundy -- The influence of that upon the state of Europe -- The next
considerable event was the invasion of Italy, by Charles VIII. -- The motives
of this -- His resources for this enterprise -- His preparations for it -- Its
success -- Its effects, particularly in giving rise to the system concerning a
balance of power -- This becomes the great object of policy, first in Italy,
and then over all Europe -- The wars in Italy render standing armies general --
Teach the Europeans the superior importance of infantry in war -- National
infantry established in Germany -- In Spain -- The Italian wars occasion an
increase of the public revenues in Europe -- The league of Cambray, another
important occurrence -- The motives of it -- The rapid progress of the
Confederates -- Division arises among them -- New objects of their policy and
ambition -- By this the intercourse among the European nations increases. --
They are prepared for the transactions of the sixteenth century.

From page 65, to page 97.

View of the political Constitution of the principal States of Europe, at the
Commencement of the sixteenth Century. SECTION THIRD.
A Considerable variety in the constitution of the different nations of Europe,
-- Necessary to explain the state of each when Charles V. began his reign --
The state of Italy -- The papal dignity the highest in Europe -- Origin and
progress of the Papal power -- The territories of the Popes inadequate to
support their spiritual jurisdiction -- Their authority in their own
territories extremely limited -- It was circumscribed by the ambition of the
Roman barons -- And by the turbulence of the Roman people -- Alexander VI. and
Julius II. render the Popes considerable princes -- Defects in the nature of
ecclesiastical dominion -- The Popes derive some advantages from the union of
their spiritual and temporal authority -- Constitution of the republic of
Venice with its rise and progress -- Desects in its government, particularly
with respect to its military operations -- Excellence of its naval institutions
-- The extent of its commerce -- The constitution of Florence -- The
constitution of the kingdom of Naples -- State of the dispute concerning the
right of succession to the crown -- Pretensions of the French and Spanish
monarchs -- State of the duchy of Milan, and the right of succession to it --
Rise and progress of the disputes concerning this -- The constitution and
government of Spain -- Conquered by the Vandals -- The Christians gradually
recover dominion in Spain -- The union of its various kingdoms -- Their ancient
customs and laws reserved amidst all their revolutions -- Which renders their
state in some degree similar to that of other nations of Europe -- Certain
peculiarities in their constitution and laws -- The prerogative more limited,
and the immunities of the people more extensive -- Instances of this -- The
constitution and government of Aragon -- Office and jurisdiction of the Justiza
-- The regal power circumscribed within very narrow limits -- Constitutionand
government of Castile -- Various causes of the limited authority of the Spanish
Monarchs -- Measures of different Princes in order to extend their power,
particularly of Ferdinand and Isabella -- Ferdinand's different schemes for
abridging the privileges and power of the nobility -- Particularly by annexing
the grand masterships of three orders to the crown. -- And by circumscribing
the jurisdiction of the nobility -- Notwithstanding all these, the government
of Spain still extremely free -- Constitution and government of France -- Power
of the general assemblies under the first race of Kings -- Under the second --
Under the third -- The power of the general assembly less considerable and less
extensive -- The crown begins to acquire legislative authority -- And the power
of levying taxes -- Government of France becomes purely monarchical -- The
exercise of prerogative restrained by the privileges of the nobility -- And by
the jurisdiction of the parliaments, particularly that of Paris -- Constitution
and government of the German empire -- Its state under Charlemagne and his
descendants -- Other families are raised to the imperial dignity -- The German
nobility acquire independent and sovereign authority -- The German
ecclesiastics raised to the same power -- The fatal effects of aggrandizing
the clergy -- The contests between the Popes and Emperors, and the consequences
of these -- The imperial authority gradually declines -- A total change in the
political constitution of the Empire -- Expedients for putting an end to this
state of anarchy -- Particularly by the institution of the imperial chamber --
At the beginning of the sixteenth century, the Empire an association of
sovereign states -- Peculiarities in the nature of this association -- The
defects in the constitution of the Empire -- Arising from the limited power of
the Emperors -- From the nature of their title and pretensions -- From the
manner in which they were elected -- From the different forms of government
established in the states which composed the Germanick body -- From the
opposition between the seculiar and ecclesiastical members -- From the unequal
distribution of wealth and power among the members -- All these render the
Germanick body incapable of acting with union and vigor -- View of the Turkish
government -- Its origin -- Its despotic genius -- Power of the Sultan limited
by religion -- And by the military -- Origin of the Janissaries -- Their vast
influence in the Turkish government -- Progress of the Turks toward dominion
-- Advantages which they possessed over the Christian powers in the sixteenth
century. --

From page 97, to page 154.

Historical Proofs and Illustrations being a confirmation and continuation of
the View of the Progress of Society in Europe from the subversion of the Roman
Empire to the beginning of the sixteenth century.
From page 165, to page 329.

The HISTORY of the Reign of CHARLES the Fifth. -- BOOK FIRST, PART FIRST.
THE birth of Charles V. -- His dominions, and the events by which he acquired
them -- Philip and Joanna, his father and mother visit Spain -- Ferdinand
jealous of Philip's power -- Isabella's solicitude with respect to him and her
daughter -- Disorder of Joanna's mind -- Birth of Ferdinand, afterward Emperor
-- Death of Isabella -- Her will appointing Ferdinand regent of Castile --
Ferdinand acknowledged as regent by the Cortes, The Castilians dissatisfied --
Philip endeavors to obtain the government of Castile -- He requires Ferdinand
to resign the regency -- Ferdinand abandoned by the Castilian nobles --
Ferdinand resolves to marry, in order to exclude his daughter from the throne
-- Marries a niece of the French King -- A treaty between Ferdinand and Philip.
-- Philip and Joanna set sail for Spain -- The nobility of Castile declare for
Philip -- Ferdinand resigns the regency of Castile and retires to Aragon --
Philip and Joanna acknowledged as King and Queen by the Cortes -- Death of
Philip -- The disorder of Joanna's mind increases -- She is incapable of
government -- Maximilian and Ferdinand competitors for the regency -- The
Emperor, Ferdinand, absent, on a visit to his kingdom of Naples. -- Acquires
the regency of Castile, chiefly through the influence of cardinal Ximenes --
Ferdinand returns to Spain -- His prudent administration -- Conquest of Oran --
Acquisition of Navarre -- Ferdinand jealous of his grandson Charles. Endeavors
to exclude him from the Spanish kingdoms, by a will in favor of young
Ferdinand -- Is persuaded to alter that will and dies -- Education of Charles
V. -- The first openings of his character -- The state of Spain requires a
vigorous administration -- Ferdinand had appointed cardinal Ximenes regent --
Cardinal Adrian appointed regent by Charles -- Ximenes obtains the sole
direction of affairs. His precautions against the infant Don Ferdinand --
Charles assumes the title of King -- Recognized as such through the influence
of Ximenes -- His schemes for extending the prerogative -- By depressing the
nobility -- By forming a body of troops depending on the crown -- By recalling
the grants of former monarchs to the nobility -- The nobles oppose his measures
-- But without success -- Thwarted by Charles's Flemish ministers -- An
additional number of regents appointed -- Ximenes retains the direction of
affairs.

From page 330 to page 360.

THE PREFACE.
NO period in the history of ones own country can be considered as altogether
uninteresting. Such transactions as tend to illustrate the progress of its
constitution, laws or manners, merit the utmost attention. Even remote and
minute events are objects of a curiosity, which, being natural to the human
mind, the gratification of it is attended with pleasure.

BUT, with respect to the history of foreign States, we must set other bounds
to our desire of information. The universal progress of science during the two
last centuries, the art of printing, and other obvious causes, have filled
Europe with such a multiplicity of histories, and with such vast collections of
historical materials, that the term of human life is too short for the study or
even the perusal of them. It is necessary, then, not only for those who are
called to conduct the affairs of nations, but for such as enquire and reason
concerning them, to remain satisfied with a general knowledge of distant
events, and to confine their study of history in detail chiefly to that period,
in which the several States of Europe having become intimately connected, the
operations of one power are so felt by all, as to influence their councils, and
to regulate their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed in order to separate these periods. An
era should be pointed out, prior to which, each country, little connected with
those around it, may trace its own history apart; after which, the transactions
of every considerable nation in Europe become interesting and instructive to
all. With this intention I undertook to write the history of the Emperor
CHARLES V. It was during his administration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in which each took a station, wherein
it has since remained with less variation, than could have been expected after
the shocks occasioned by so many internal revolutions, and so many foreign
wars. The great events which happened then have not hitherto spent their force.
The political principles and maxims, then established, still continue to
operate. The ideas concerning the balance of power, then introduced or rendered
general, still influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore be considered as the period at which the
political state of Europe began to assume a new form. I have endeavored to
render my account of it, an introduction to the history of Europe subsequent to
his reign. While his numerous Biographers describe his personal qualities and
actions; while the historians of different countries relate occurrences the
consequences of which were local or transient, it has been my purpose to
record only those great transactions in his reign, the effects of which were
universal, or continue to be permanent.

AS my readers could derive little instruction from such a history of the reign
of CHARLES V. without some information concerning the state of Europe previous
to the sixteenth century, my desire of supplying this has produced a
preliminary work, in which I have attempted to point out and explain the great
causes and events, to whose operation all the improvements in the political
state of Europe, from the subversion of the Roman Empire to the beginning of
the sixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have exhibited a view of the
progress of society in Europe, not only with respect to interior government,
laws and manners, but with respect to the command of the national force
requisite in foreign operations; and I have described the political
constitution of the principal states in Europe at the time when CHARLES V.
began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led into several critical disquisitions,
which belong more properly to the province of the lawyer or antiquary, than to
that of the historian. These I have placed near the end of the first volume,
under the title of Proofs and Illustrations. Many of my readers will, probably,
give little attention to such researches. To some they may, perhaps, appear the
most curious and interesting part of the work. I have carefully pointed out the
sources from which I have derived information, and have cited the writers on
whose authority I rely with a minute exactness, which might appear to border
upon ostentation, if it were possible to be vain of having read books, many of
which nothing but the duty of examining with accuracy whatever I laid before
the public, could have induced me to open. As my inquiries conducted me often
into paths which were obscure or little frequented, such constant recourse to
the authors who have been my guides, was not only necessary for authenticating
the facts which are the foundations of my reasonings, but may be useful in
pointing out the way to such as shall hereafter hold the same course, and in
enabling them to carry on their researches with greater facility and success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one omission in my work, the reason of
which it is necessary to explain. I have given no account of the conquests of
Mexico and Peru, or of the establishment of the Spanish colonies in the
continent and islands of America. The history of these events I originally
intended to have related at considerable length. But upon a nearer and more
attentive consideration of this part of my plan, I found that the discovery of
the new world; the state of society among its ancient inhabitants; their
characters, manners, and arts; the genius of the European settlements in its
various provinces, together with the influence of these upon the systems of
policy or commerce in Europe, were subjects so splendid and important, that a
superficial view of them could afford little satisfaction; to treat of them as
extensively as they merited, must produce an episode, disproportionate to the
principal work. I have therefore reserved these for a separate history; which,
if the performance now offered to the public shall receive its approbation, I
propose to undertake.

THOUGH, by omitting such considerable but detached articles in the reign of
CHARLES V. I have circumscribed my narration within more narrow limits, I am
yet persuaded, from this view of the intention and nature of the work which I
thought it necessary to lay before my readers, that the plan must still appear
to them too extensive, and the undertaking too arduous. I have often felt them
to be so. But my conviction of the utility of such a history prompted me to
persevere. With what success I have executed it, the public must now judge. I
wait, in solicitude, for its decision; to which I shall submit with a
respectful silence.

A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE. FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. SECTION I. View of the
Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and
Manners.
TWO great Revolutions have happened in the political state, and in the manners
of the European nations. The effects of the Roman power on the state of Europe.
The first was occasioned by the progress of the Roman power; the second by the
subversion of the Roman Empire. When the spirit of conquest led the armies of
Rome beyond the Alps, they found all the countries which they invaded,
inhabited by people whom they denominated barbarians, but who were nevertheless
brave and independent. These defended their ancient possessions with obstinate
valor. It was by the superiority of their discipline, rather than of their
courage, that the Romans gained any advantage over them. A single battle did
not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, decide the fate of a state.
The vanquished people resumed their arms with fresh spirit, and their
undisciplined valor, animated by the love of liberty, supplied the want of
conduct as well as of union. During these long and fierce struggles for
dominion or independence, The desolation which it occasioned.
the countries of Europe were successively laid waste, a great part of their
inhabitants perished in the field, many were carried into slavery, and a feeble
remnant, incapable of further resistance, submitted to the Roman power.

THE Romans having thus desolated Europe, set themselves to civilize it. The
improvements which it introduced.
The form of government which they established in the conquered provinces,
though severe, was regular, and preserved public tranquillity As a consolation
for the loss of liberty, they communicated their arts, sciences, language and
manners, to their new subjects. Europe began to breathe, and to recover
strength after the calamities which it had undergone; agriculture was
encouraged; population increased; the ruined cities were rebuilt; new towns
were founded; an appearance of prosperity succeeded, and repaired, in some
degree, the havoc of war.

THIS state, however, was far from being happy, or favorable to the
improvement of the human mind. The bad consequences of their dominion.
The vanquished nations were disarmed by their conquerors, and overawed by
soldiers kept in pay to restrain them. They were given up as a prey to
rapacious governors, who plundered them with impunity; and were drained of
their wealth by exorbitant taxes, imposed with so little attention to the
situation of the provinces, that the impositions were generally increased in
proportion to their inability to support them. They were deprived of their most
enterprizing citizens, who resorted to a distant capital in quest of
preferment, or of riches; and were accustomed in all their actions to look up
to a superior, and tamely to receive his commands. Under all these depressing
circumstances, it was impossible that they could retain vigor or generosity of
mind. The martial and independent spirit, which had distinguished their
ancestors, became extinct among all the people subjected to the Roman yoke;
they lost not only the habit but even the capacity of deciding for themselves,
or of acting from the impulse of their own minds; and the dominion of the
Romans, like that of all great Empires, degraded and debased the human species
NOTE I.
.

A SOCIETY in this state could not subsist long. There were defects in the
Roman government, The irruption of the barbarous nations.
even in its most perfect form, which threatened its dissolution. Time ripened
these original seeds of corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders. A
constitution, unsound, and worn out, must have fallen in pieces of itself,
without any external shock. The violent irruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns,
and other barbarians hastened this event, and precipitated the downfall of the
Empire. New nations seemed to arise, and to rush from unknown regions in order
to take vengeance on the Romans for the calamities which they had inflicted on
mankind. These fierce tribes either inhabited the various provinces in Germany,
which had never been subdued by the Romans, or were scattered over the vast
countries in the north of Europe, and north-west of Asia, which are now
occupied by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the subjects of the Russian
Empire, and the Tartars. Their condition, and transactions previous to their
invasion of the Empire are but little known. All our information with respect
to these is derived from the Romans; and as they did not penetrate far into
countries which were at that time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts of
their original state given by them are extremely imperfect. The rude
inhabitants themselves, destitute of science, and of records, without leisure,
or curiosity to enquire into remote events, retained, perhaps, some indistinct
memory of recent occurrences, but beyond these, all was buried in oblivion, or
involved in darkness, and in fable NOTE II.
.

THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon the Empire from the beginning of
the fourth century to the final extinction of the Roman power, have given rise
to an opinion that the countries whence they issued were crowded with
inhabitants; and various theories have been formed to account for such an
extraordinary degree of population, State of the countries from which they
issued.
as has procured these countries the appellation of the Storehouse of Nations.
But if we consider that the countries possessed by the people who invaded the
Empire were of vast extent; that a great part of these was covered with woods
and marshes; that some of the most considerable of the barbarous nations
subsisted entirely by hunting or pasturage, in both which states of society
large tracts of land are required for maintaining a few inhabitants; and that
all of them were strangers to the arts, and industry, without which population
cannot increase to any great degree, it is evident, that these countries could
not be so populous, in ancient times as they are at present, when they still
continue to be less peopled than any other part of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if these circumstances prevented the barbarous nations from becoming
populous, they contributed to inspire, The people fit for daring enterprises.
or to strengthen the martial spirit by which they were distinguished. Inured
by the rigor of their climate, or the poverty of their soil, to hardships
which rendered their bodies firm, and their minds vigorous; accustomed to a
course of life which was a continual preparation for action; and disdaining
every occupation but that of war; they undertook, and prosecuted their military
enterprises with an ardour and impetuosity, of which men softened by the
refinements of more polished times, can scarce form any idea NOTE III.
.

THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceeded rather from the love of plunder,
than from the desire of new settlements. The motives of their first excursions.
Roused to arms by some enterprizing or popular leader, they sallied out of
their forests; broke in upon her frontier provinces with irresistible violence;
put all who opposed them to the sword; carried off the most valuable effects of
the inhabitants; dragged along multitudes of captives in chains; wasted all
before them with fire or sword; and returned in triumph to their wilds and
fastnesses. Their success, together with the accounts which they gave of the
unknown conveniences and luxuries that abounded in the countries better
cultivated, or blessed with a milder climate than their own, excited new
adventurers, and exposed the frontier to new devastations.

WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the adjacent provinces ravaged by frequent
incursions, Their reasons for settling in the countries which they conquered.
they marched farther from home, and finding it difficult, or dangerous to
return, they began to settle in the countries which they had subdued. The
sudden and short excursions in quest of booty, which had alarmed, and
disquieted the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful calamity impended. Great bodies
of armed men with their wives and children, and slaves and flocks, issued
forth, like regular colonies, in quest of new settlements. People who had no
cities, and seldom any fixed habitation, were so little attached to their
native soil, that they migrated without reluctance from one place to another.
New adventurers followed them. The lands which they deserted were occupied by
more remote tribes of barbarians. These in their turn, pushed forward into more
fertile countries, and like a torrent continually increasing, rolled on, The
extent of their settlements.
and swept every thing before them. In less than two centuries from their first
irruption, barbarians of various names and lineage, plundered and took
possession of Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy, and
Rome itself. The vast fabric of the Roman power which it had been the work of
ages to perfect, was in that short period overturned from the foundation.

MANY concurring causes prepared the way for this great revolution, and ensured
success to the nations which invaded the Empire. The circumstances which
occasioned the downfall of the Roman Empire.
The Roman commonwealth had conquered the world by the wisdom of its civil
maxims, and the rigor of its military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the
former were forgotten or despised, and the latter was gradually relaxed. The
armies of the Empire in the fourth and fifth centuries bore scarce any
resemblance to those invincible legions which had been victorious wherever they
marched. Instead of freemen, who voluntarily took arms from the love of glory,
or of their country, provincials and barbarians were bribed or forced into
service. They were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the fatigue of
military duty. They even complained of the weight of their defensive armor, as
intolerable, and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the armies of ancient Rome
derived their vigor and stability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could scarce be brought to venture into
the field but on horseback. These wretched troops, however, were the only
guardians of the Empire. The jealousy of despotism had deprived the people of
the use of arms; and subjects oppressed and rendered incapable of defending
themselves, had neither spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders, from
whom they had little to fear, because they could scarce make their condition
more unhappy. As the martial spirit became extinct, the revenues of the Empire
gradually diminished. The taste for the luxuries of the East increased to such
a pitch in the Imperial Court, that great sums were carried into India, from
whence money never returns. By the vast subsidies paid to the barbarous nations
a still greater quantity of species was withdrawn from circulation. The
frontier provinces wasted by frequent incursions became unable to pay the
customary tribute; and the wealth of the world, which had long centered in the
capital of the Empire, ceased to flow thither in the same abundance, or was
diverted into other channels. The limits of the Empire continued to be as
extensive as ever, while the spirit requisite for its defense declined, and its
resources were exhausted. A vast body, languid, and almost unanimated, became
incapable of any effort to save itself, and was easily overpowered. The
Emperors, who had the absolute direction of this disordered system, sunk in the
softness of Eastern luxury, shut up within the walls of a palace ignorant of
war, unacquainted with affairs, and governed entirely by women and eunuchs, or
by ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the approach of danger, and under
circumstances which called for the utmost vigor in counsel as well as in
action, discovered all the impotent irresolution of fear, and of folly.

IN every respect, the condition of the barbarous nations was the reverse of
that of the Romans. Among them, The circumstances which contributed to the
success of the barbarous nations.
the martial spirit was in full vigor; their leaders were hardy and
enterprizing; the arts which had enervated the Romans were unknown among them;
and such was the nature of their military institutions, that they brought
forces into the field without any trouble, and supported them at little
expense. The mercenary and effeminate troops stationed on the frontier,
astonished at their fierceness, either fled at their approach, or were routed
in the first onset. The feeble expedient to which the Emperors had recourse, of
taking large bodies of the barbarians into pay, and of employing them to repel
new invaders, instead of retarding, hastened the destruction of the Empire.
They soon turned their arms against their masters, and with greater advantage
than ever: for, by serving in the Roman armies, they had acquired all the
discipline, or skill in war, which the Romans still retained; and upon adding
these to their native ferocity, they became altogether irresistible.

BUT though from these, and many other causes, the progress and conquests of
the nations which overran the Empire, The spirit with which they carried on
war.
became so extremely rapid, they were accompanied with horrible devastations,
and an incredible destruction of the human species. Civilized nations which
take arms upon cool reflection, from motives of policy or prudence, with a view
to guard against some distant danger or to prevent some remote contingency,
carry on their hostilities with so little rancour, or animosity, that war among
them is disarmed of half its terrors. Barbarians are strangers to such
refinements. They rush into war with impetuosity, and prosecute it with
violence. Their sole object is to make their enemies feel the weight of their
vengeance, nor does their rage subside until it be satiated with inflicting on
them every possible calamity. It is with such a spirit that the savage tribes
in America carry on their petty wars. It was with the same spirit that the more
powerful and no less fierce barbarians in the north of Europe, and of Asia,
fell upon the Roman Empire.

WHENEVER they marched, their rout was marked with blood. The desolation which
they bro't upon Europe.
They ravaged or destroyed all around them. They made no distinction between
what was sacred, and what was profane. They respected no age, or sex, or rank.
What escaped the fury of the first inundation perished in those which followed
it. The most fertile and populous provinces were converted into deserts, in
which were scattered the ruins of villages and cities, that afforded shelter to
a few miserable inhabitants whom chance had preserved, or the sword of the
enemy, wearied with destroying, had spared. The conquerors who first settled in
the countries which they had wasted were expelled or exterminated by new
invaders, who coming from regions farther removed from the civilized parts of
the world, were still more fierce and rapacious. This brought new calamities
upon mankind, which did not cease until the north, by pouring forth successive
swarms, was drained of people, and could no longer furnish instruments of
destruction. Famine and pestilence, which always march in the the train of war
when it ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every part of Europe,
and completed its sufferings. If a man were called to fix upon the period, in
the history of the world, during which the condition of the human race was most
calamitous and afflicted, he would without hesitation, name that which elapsed
from the death of Theodosius the Great, to the establishment of the Lombards in
Italy Theodosius died A. D. 395. The reign of Alboinus in Lombardy, began A. D.
571, so that this period was 176 years.
. The contemporary authors who beheld that scene of desolation, labor and are
at a loss for expressions to describe the horror of it. The scourge of God, The
destroyer of nations, are the dreadful epithets by which they distinguish the
most noted of the barbarous leaders; and they compare the ruin which they had
brought on the world, to the havoc occasioned by earthquakes, conflagrations,
or deluges, the most formidable and fatal calamities which the imagination of
man can conceive.

BUT no expressions can convey so perfect an idea of the destructive progress
of the barbarians, The universal change which they occasioned in the state of
Europe.
as that which must strike an attentive observer, when he contemplates the
total change, which he will discover in the state of Europe when it began to
recover some degree of tranquillity toward the close of the sixth century, The
Saxons were by that time masters of the southern, and more fertile provinces of
Britain; the Franks of Gaul; the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the
Goths and L^mbards of Italy and the adjacent provinces. Scarce any vestige of
the Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature remained. New forms of
government, new laws, new manners, new dresses, new languages, and new names of
men and countries, were every where introduced. To make a great or sudden
alteration with respect to any of these, unless where the ancient inhabitants
of a country have been almost totally exterminated, has proved an undertaking
beyond the power of the conquerors NOTE IV
. The total change which the settlement of the barbarous nations occasioned in
the state of Europe, may, therefore, be considered as a more decisive proof,
than even the testimony of contemporary historians, of the destructive violence
with which they carried on their conquests, and of the havoc which they had
made from one extremity of this quarter of the globe to the other NOTE. V.
.

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this general wreck of nations, we
must search for the seeds of order, and endeavor to discover the first
rudiments of the policy and laws now established in Europe. From this state of
disorder the laws of government now established must be traced.
To this source, the historians of its different kingdoms, have attempted,
though with less attention and industry than the importance of the enquiry
merits, to trace back the institutions, and customs peculiar to their
countrymen. It is not my province to give a minute detail of the progress of
government and manners in each particular nation, whose transactions are the
object of the following history. But in order to exhibit a just view of the
state of Europe at the opening of the sixteenth century, it is necessary to
look back, and to contemplate the condition of the northern nations upon their
first settlement in those countries which they occupied. It is necessary to
mark the great steps by which they advanced from barbarism to refinement, and
to point out those general principles and events which by their uniform as well
as extensive operation, conducted all of them to that degree of improvement in
policy and in manners, which they had attained at the period when Charles V.
began his reign.

WHEN nations subject to despotic government make conquests, The principles on
which the northern nations made their settlements in Europe.
these serve only to extend the dominion and the power of their master. But
armies composed of freemen conquer for themselves, not for their leaders. The
people who overturned the Roman Empire, and settled in its various provinces,
were of the latter class. Not only the different nations that issued from the
north of Europe, which has always been considered as the seat of liberty, but
the Huns and Alans who inhabited part of those countries which have been marked
out as the peculiar region of servitude, De L'esprit des loix, live. 17, chapter 3.
enjoyed freedom and independence to such a high d^e as seems to be scarce
compatible with a state of social union, or with the subordination necessary to
maintain it. They followed the chieftain, who led them forth in quest of new
settlements, not by constraint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom he could
order to march, but as volunteers who offered to accompany him NOTE VI.
. They considered their conquests as a common property, in which all had a
title to share, as all had contributed to acquire them NOTE. VII.
. In what manner, or by what principles, they divided among them the lands
which they seized, we cannot now determine with any certainty. There is no
nation in Europe whose records reach back to this remote period; and there is
little information to be got from the uninstructive and meagre chronicles,
compiled by writers ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with the proper
objects of history.

THIS new division of property, however, together with the maxims and manners
to which it gave rise, The feudal government gradually established among them.
gradually introduced a species of government formerly unknown. This singular
institution is now distinguished by the name of the Feudal system: and though
the barbarous nations which framed it, settled in their new territories at
different times, came from different countries, spoke various languages, and
were under the command of separate leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were
established with little variation, in every kingdom of Europe. This amazing
uniformity has induced some authors Procop. de Bello Vandal. ap. Script. Byz.
edit. Ven. vol. i. p. 345.
to believe that all these nations, notwithstanding so many apparent
circumstances of distinction, were originally the same people. But it may be
ascribed with greater probability to the similar state of society and of
manners to which they were accustomed in their native countries, and to the
similar situation in which they found themselves on taking possession of their
new domains.

AS the conquerors of Europe had their acquisitions to maintain, not only
against such of the ancient inhabitants as they had spared, National defense
the great object of feudal policy.
but against the formidable inroads of new invaders, self-defence was their
chief care, and seems to have been the sole object of their first institution
and policy. Instead of those loose associations, which, though they scarce
diminished their personal independance, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries, they saw the necessity of
confederating more closely together, and of relinquishing some of their private
rights in order to attain public safety. Every freeman, upon receiving a
portion of the lands which were divided, bound himself to appear in arms
against the enemies of the community. This military service was the condition
upon which he received and held his lands, and as they were exempted from every
other burden, that tenure, among a warlike, people, was deemed both easy and
honorable, The king or General, who led them to conquest, continuing still to
be the head of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion allotted to him.
Having thus acquired the means of rewarding past services, as well as of
gaining new adherents, he parcelled (...) his lands with this view, binding
those on whom they were bestowed, to follow his standard with a number of men
in proportion to the extent of the territory, which they received, and to bear
arms in his defense. His chief officers imitated the example of the sovereign,
and in distributing portions of their lands among their dependants, annexed the
same condition to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom resembled a military
establishment, rather than a civil institution. The victorious army cantoned
out in the country which it had seized, continued ranged under its proper
officers, and subordinate to military command. The names of a soldier and of a
freeman were synonimous Du Cange Glossar. voc. Miles.
. Every proprietor of land, girt with a sword, was ready to march at the
summons of his superior, and to take the field against the common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so admirably calculated for defense
against the assaults of any foreign power, The feudal government defective in
its provisions for interior order in society.
its provisions for the interior order and tranquillity of society were
extremely defective. The principles of disorder and corruption are discernable
in that constitution under its best and most perfect form. They soon unfolded
themselves, and spreading with rapidity through every part of the system,
produced the most fatal effects. The bond of political union was extremely
feeble; the sources of anarchy were innumerable. The monarchical and
aristocratical parts of the constitution, having no intermediate power to
balance them, were perpetually at variance, and justling with each other The
powerful vassals of the crown soon extorted a confirmation for life of those
grants of land, which being at first purely gratuitous, had been bestowed only
during pleasure. Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to have them converted
into hereditary possessions. One step more completed their usurpations, and
rendered them unalienable NOTE VIII.
. With an ambition no less enterprizing, and more preposterous, they
appropriated to themselves titles of honor, as well as offices of power or
trust. These personal marks of distinction, which the public admiration
bestows on illustrious merit, or which the public confidence confers on
extraordinary abilities, were annexed to certain families, and transmitted like
fiefs, from father to son by hereditary right. The crown vassals having thus
secured the possession of their lands and dignities, the nature of the Feudal
institutions, which though founded in subordination, verged to independence,
led them to new, and still more dangerous encroachments on the prerogatives of
the sovereign. They obtained the power of supreme jurisdiction both civil and
criminal within their own territories; the right of coining money; together
with the privilege of carrying on war against their private enemies in their
own name, and by their own authority. The ideas of political subjection were
almost entirely lost, and frequently scarce any appearance of Feudal
subordination remained. Nobles who had acquired such enormous power, scorned to
consider themselves subjects. They aspired openly at being independent: the
bonds which connected the principal members of the constitution with the crown,
were dissolved. A kingdom considerable in name and in extent, was broken into
as many separate principalities as it contained powerful barons. A thousand
causes of jealousy and discord subsisted among them, and gave rise to as many
wars. Every country in Europe, wasted or kept in continual alarm during these
endless contests, was filled with castles and places of strength, erected for
the security of the inhabitants, not against foreign force, but against
internal hostilities. An universal anarchy, destructive in a great measure, of
all the advantages which men expect to derive from society, prevailed. The
people, the most numerous as well as the most useful part of the community,
were either reduced to a state of actual servitude, or treated with the same
insolence and rigor as if they had been degraded into that wretched condition
NOTE IX.
. The King, stripped of almost every prerogative, and without authority to
enact or to execute salutary laws, could neither protect the innocent, nor
punish the guilty. The nobles, superior to all restraint, harrassed each other
with perpetual wars, oppressed their fellow subjects, and humbled or insulted
their sovereign. To crown all, time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable
this pernicious system, which violence had established.

SUCH was the state of Europe with respect to the interior administration of
government from the seventh to the eleventh century. It prevented nations
likewise from acting with vigor in their external operations.
All the external operations of its various states, during this period, were,
of course, extremely feeble. A kingdom dismembered, and torn with dissension,
without any common interest to rouse, or any common head to conduct its force,
was incapable of acting with vigor. Almost all the wars in Europe, during the
ages which I have mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and productive of no
considerable event. They resembled the short incursions of pirates or banditii,
rather than the steady operations of a regular army. Every baron at the head of
his vassals carried on some petty enterprise to which he was prompted by his
own ambition, or revenge. The state itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make any effort, that served only to
discover its impotence. The superior genius of Charlemagne, it is true, united
all these disjointed and discordant members, and forming them again into one
body, restored that degree of activity to government which distinguish his
reign, and render the transactions of it, objects not only of attention but of
admiration to more enlightened times. But this state of union and vigor not
being natural to the feudal government, was of short duration. Immediately upon
his death, the spirit which animated and sustained the vast system which he had
established, being withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities which
flow from anarchy and discord, returning with additional force, afflicted the
different kingdoms into which his empire was split. From that time to the
eleventh century, a succession of uninterested events, a series of wars, the
motives as well as the consequences of which were equally unimportant, fill and
deform the annals of all the nations in Europe.

TO these pernicious effects of the feudal anarchy may be added its fatal
influence on the character and improvement of the human mind. The fatal effects
of this state of society on sciences and arts.
If men do not enjoy the protection of regular government, together with the
certainty of personal security which naturally flows from it, they never
attempt to make progress in science, nor aim at attaining refinement in taste,
or in manners. That period of turbulence oppression, and rapine, which I have
described, was ill suited to favor improvement in any of these. In less than a
century after the barbarous nations settled in their new conquest, almost all
the effects of the knowledge and civility which the Romans had spread through
Europe disappeared. Not only the arts of elegance which minister to luxury, and
are supported by it, but many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be considered as comfortable, were neglected or lost. Literature,
science, taste, were words scarce in use during the ages we are contemplating;
or if they occur at any time, eminence in them is ascribed to persons and
productions so contemptible, that it appears their true import was little
understood. Persons of the highest rank, and in the most eminent stations could
not read or write. Many of the clergy did not understand the breviary which
they were obliged daily to recite; some of them could scarce read it NOTE X.
. All memory of past transactions was lost, or preserved in annals filled with
trifling events, or legendary tales. Even the codes of laws published by the
several nations which established themselves in the different countries of
Europe, fell into disuse, while in their place, customs, vague and capricious,
were substituted. The human mind neglected, uncultivated and depressed, sunk
into the most profound ignorance. Europe did not produce, during four
centuries, one author who merits to be read, either on account of the elegance
of his composition, or the justness and novelty of his sentiments. There is
scarce one invention useful or ornamental to society of which that long period
can boast.

EVEN the Christian religion, though its precepts are delivered, Upon religion.
and its institutions are fixed in scripture with a precision which should have
exempted them from being misinterpreted or corrupted, degenerated during those
ages of darkness into an illiberal superstition. The barbarous nations when
converted to Christianity changed the object, not the spirit of their religious
worship. They endeavored to conciliate the favor of the true God by means not
unlike to those which they had employed in order to appease their false
deities. Instead of aspiring to sanctity and virtue, which alone can render men
acceptable to the great author of order and of excellence, they imagined that
they satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous observance of external
ceremonies NOTE XI.
. Religion, according to their conception of it, comprehended nothing else; and
the rites, by which they persuaded themselves that they could gain the favor
of heaven, were of such a nature as might have been expected from the rude
ideas of the ages which devised and introduced them. They were either so
unmeaning as to be altogether unworthy of t^^ Being to whose honor they were
consecrated; or so absurd as to be a disgrace to reason and humanity NOTE XII
. Charlemagne in France, and Alfred the Great in England, endeavored to dispel
this darkness, and gave their subjects a short glimpse of light and knowledge.
But the ignorance of the age was too powerful for their efforts and
institutions. The darkness returned, and settled over Europe more thick and
heavy than formerly.

AS the inhabitants of Europe during these centuries were strangers to the arts
which embellish a polished age, Upon the character and virtues of the human
mind.
they were destitute of the virtues which abound among people who continue in a
simple state. Force of mind, a sense of personal dignity, gallantry in
enterprise, invincible perseverance in execution, and contempt of danger and of
death, are the characteristic virtues of uncivilized nations. But these are all
the offspring of equality and independence, both which the feudal institutions
had destroyed. The spirit of domination corrupted the nobles; the yoke of
servitude depressed the people; the generous sentiments inspired by a sense of
equality were extinguished, and nothing remained to be a check on ferocity and
violence. Human society is in its most corrupted state at that period when men
have lost their original independence and simplicity of manners, but have not
attained that degree of refinement which introduces a sense of decorum and of
propriety in conduct, as a restraint on those passions which lead to heinous
crimes. Accordingly, a greater number of those attrocious actions which fill
the mind of man with astonishment and horror, occur in the history of the
centuries under review, than in that of any period of the same extent in the
annals of Europe. If we open the history of Gregory of Tours, or of any
contemporary author, we meet with a series of deeds of cruelty, persidy, and
revenge, so wild and enormous as almost to exceed belief.

From the beginning of the eleventh century government and manners begin to
improve.
BUT, according to the observation of an elegant and profound historian Hume's
History of England, vol. ii p. 441.
, there is an ultimate point of depression, as well as of exaltation, from
which human affairs naturally return in a contrary progress, and beyond which
they seldom pass either in their advancement or decline. When defects, either
in the form, or in the administration of government, occasion such disorders in
society as are excessive and intolerable, it becomes the common interest to
discover and to apply such remedies as will most effectually remove them.
slight inconveniences may be long overlooked or endured, but when abuses grow
to a certain pitch, the society must go to ruin, or must attempt to reform
them. The disorders in the feudal system, together with the corruption of taste
and manners consequent upon these, which had gone on increasing during a long
course of years, seem to have attained their utmost point of excess toward the
close of the eleventh century. From that era, we may date the return of
government and manners in a contrary direction, and can trace a succession of
causes and events which contributed, some with a nearer and more powerful,
others with a more remote and less perceptible influence, to abolish confusion
and barbarism, and to introduce order, regularity, and refinement.

Necessary to point out the causes and events which contribute toward this
improvement
IN pointing out and explaining these causes and events, it is not necessary to
observe the order of time with a chronological accuracy; it is of more
importance to keep in view their mutual connection and dependence, and to show
how the operation of one event, or of one cause, prepared the way for another,
and augmented its influence. We have hitherto been contemplating the progress
of that darkness which spread over Europe from its first approach, to the
period of greatest obscuration; a more pleasant exercise begins here, to
observe the first dawnings of returning light, to mark the various accessions
by which it gradually increased and advanced toward the full splendor of day.

I. THE Crusades, The tendency of the Crusades to introduce a change in
government and manners.
or expeditions in order to rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infidels,
seem to be the first event that roused Europe from the lethargy in which it had
been long sunk, and that tended to introduce any change in government, or in
manners. It is natural to the human mind to view those places which have been
distinguished by being the residence of any illustrious personage, The more
remote causes of these expeditions.
or the scene of any great transaction, with some degree of delight and
veneration. From this principle flowed the superstitious devotion with which
Christians, from the earliest ages of the church, were accustomed to visit that
country which the Almighty had selected as the inheritance of his favorite
people, and in which the son of God had accomplished the redemption of mankind.
As this distant pilgrimage could not be performed without considerable expense,
fatigue and danger, it appeared the more meritorious, and came to be considered
as an expiation for almost every crime. An opinion which spread with rapidity
over Europe about the close of the tenth and beginning of the eleventh century,
and which gained universal credit, wonderfully augmented the number of these
credulous pilgrims, and increased the ardour with which they undertook this
useless voyage. The thousand years mentioned by St. John (...) 4.
were supposed to be accomplished, and the end of the world to be at hand. A
general consternation seized mankind; many relinquished their possessions; and
abandoning their friends and families, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Christ would quickly appear to judge the world
Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet R^^^il des Historians de France. tom. x. p.
262. Vita Ablonis, ibid. p. 332. Chronic. S. (...). Lecard. Corp. Script. medu
avi, vol i. p. 9^9. (...) 176.
. While Palestine continued subject to the Caliphs, they had encouraged the
resort of pilgrims to Jerusalem; and considered this as a beneficial species of
commerce, which brought into their dominions gold and silver, and carried
nothing out of them but relics and consecrated trinkets. But the Turks having
conquered Syria about the middle of the eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed
to outrages of every kind from these fierce barbarians. This change happening
precisely at the juncture when the panic terror which I have mentioned rendered
pilgrimages most frequent, filled Europe with alarm and indignation. Every
person who returned from Palestine related the dangers which he had
encountered, in visiting the holy city, and described with exaggeration the
cruelty and vexations of the Turks.

The immediate occasion of them.
WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared, the zeal of a fanatical monk, who
conceived the idea of leading all the forces of Christendom against the
infidels, and of driving them out of the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient
to give a beginning to that wild enterprise. Peter the hermit, for that was the
name of this martial apostle, ran from province to province with a crucifix in
his hand, exciting Princes and people to this Holy war, and wherever he came
kindled the same enthusiastic ardour for it with which he himself was ani^d.
The council of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand persons were
assembled, pronounced the scheme to have been suggested by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont, still more numerous, as soon
as the measure was proposed, all cried out with one voice, "It is the will of
God." Persons of all ranks were smitten with the contagion* not only the
gallant nobles of that age, with their martial followers, whom the boldness of
a romantic enterprise might have been apt to allure, but men in the more humble
and pacific stations of life; ecclesiastics of every order, and even women and
children engaged with emulation in an undertaking which was deemed sacred and
meritorious. If we may believe the concurring testimony of contemporary
authors, six millions of persons assumed the cross Fulcherius Carnotensis ap.
Bonga^sii Gesta Dei per Francos, vol. i. 387. edit. Ran. 1611.
, which was the badge that distinguished such as devoted themselves to this
holy warfare. All Europe, says the Princess Anna Comnena, torn up from the
foundation, seemed ready to precipitate itself in one united body upon Asia
Alexias. lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 224.
. Nor did the fumes of this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: the frenzy was
as lasting, as it was extravagant. During two centuries, Europe seems to have
had no object but to recover, or keep possession of the Holy Land, and through
that period, vast armies continued to march thither NOTE XIII.
.

THE first efforts of valor animated by enthusiasm were irresistible; The
success of the Crusades.
part of the lesser Asia, all Syria and Palestine were wrested from the
infidels; the banner of the cross was displayed on Mount Sion; Constantinople
the capital of the Christian empire in the East, was seized by a body of these
adventurers, who had taken arms against the Mahometans, and an Earl of
Flanders, and his descendants, kept possession of the Imperial throne during
half a century. But though the first impression of the Crusaders was so
unexpected that they made their conquests with great ease, they found infinite
difficulty in preserving them. Establishments so distant from Europe,
surrounded by warlike nations, animated with fanatical zeal scarce inferior to
that of the Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in danger of being
overturned. A. D. 1291
Before the expiration of the thirteenth century, the Christians were driven
out of all their Asiatic possessions, in acquiring of which incredible numbers
of men had perished, and immense sums of money had been wasted. The only common
enterprise in which the European nations ever engaged, and which all undertook
with equal ardour, remains a singular monument of human folly.

The beneficial effects of the Crusades on manners.
BUT from these expeditions, extravagant as they were, beneficial consequences
followed, which had neither been foreseen nor expected. In their progress
toward the Holy Land, the followers of the cross marched through countries
better cultivated, and more civilized than their own. Their first rendezvous
was commonly in Italy, in which Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and other cities had begun
to apply themselves to commerce, and had made some advances toward wealth as
well as refinement. They embarked there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued their
route by land to Constantinople. Though the military spirit had been long
extinct in the eastern empire, and a despotism of the worst species had
annihilated almost every public virtue, yet Constantinople having never felt
the destructive rage of the barbarous nations, was the greatest, as well as the
most beautiful city in Europe, and the only one in which there remained any
image of the ancient elegance in manners, and arts. The naval power of the
eastern Empire was considerable. Manufactures of the most curious fabric were
carried on in its dominions. Constantinople was the only mart in Europe for the
commodities of the East Indies. Although the Saracens and Turks had torn from
the Empire many of its richest provinces, and had reduced it within very narrow
bounds, yet great wealth flowed into the capital from these various sources,
which not only cherished such a taste for magnificence, but kept alive such a
relish for the sciences as appear considerable when compared with what was
known in other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the Europeans who had assumed the
cross found the remains of the knowledge and arts which the example and
encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused through their empire. Although the
attention of the historians of the Crusades was fixed on other objects than the
state of society and manners among the nations which they invaded, although
most of them had neither taste nor discernment enough to describe them, they
relate, however, such signal acts of humanity and generosity in the conduct of
Saladin as well as some other leaders of the Mahometans, as give us a very high
idea of their manners. It was not possible for the Crusaders to travel through
so many countries, and to behold their various customs and institutions without
acquiring information and improvement. Their views enlarged; their prejudices
wore off; new ideas crowded into their minds; and they must have been sensible
on many occasions of the rusticity of their own manners when compared with
those of a more polished people. These impressions were not so slight as to be
effaced upon their return to their native countries. A close intercourse
subsisted between the East and West during two centuries; new armies were
continually marching from Europe to Asia, while former adventurers returned
home and imported many of the customs to which they had been familiarized by a
long residence abroad. Accordingly we discover, soon after the commencement of
the Crusades, greater splendor in the courts of Princes, greater pomp in
public ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasure and amusements, together
with a more romantic spirit of enterprise spreading gradually over Europe; and
to these wild expeditions, the effect of superstition or folly, we owe the
first gleams of light which tended to dispel barbarity and ignorance.

BUT these beneficial consequences of the Crusades took place slowly; Their
influence on the state of property.
their influence upon the state of property, and consequently of power, in the
different kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate as well as discernible. The
nobles who assumed the cross, and bound themselves to march to the Holy Land,
soon perceived that great sums were necessary toward defraying the expenses of
such a distant expedition, and enabling them to appear with suitable dignity at
the head of their vassals. But the genius of the feudal system was averse to
the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and subjects in that age were
unaccustomed to pay them. No expedient remained for levying the sums requisite,
but the sale of their possessions. As men were inflamed with romantic
expectations of the splendid conquests which they hoped to make in Asia, and
possessed with such zeal for recovering the Holy Land as swallowed up every
other passion, they relinquished their ancient inheritances without any
reluctance, and for prices far below their value, that they might sally forth
as adventurers in quest of new settlements in unknown countries. The Monarchs
of the different kingdoms, none of whom had engaged in the first Crusade,
eagerly seized this opportunity of annexing considerable territories to their
crowns at small expense Willelm. Malmsb. Guibert. Abbas. ap. Bongars. vol. i.
481.
. Besides this, several great barons who perished in the Holy war, having left
no heirs, their fiefs reverted of course to their respective sovereigns, and by
these accessions of property as well as power taken from the one scale and
thrown into the other, the regal authority increased in proportion as that of
the aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of many potent vassals, accustomed
to control and give law to their sovereigns, afforded them an opportunity of
extending their prerogative, and of acquiring a degree of weight in the
constitution which they did not formerly possess. To these circumstances, we
may add, that as all who assumed the cross, were taken under the immediate
protection of the church, and its heaviest anathemas were denounced against
such as should disquiet or annoy those who had devoted themselves to this
service; the private quarrels and hostilities which banished tranquillity from
a feudal kingdom were suspended or extinguished; a more general* and steady
administration of justice began to be introduced, and some advances were made
toward the establishment of regular government in the several kingdoms of
Europe Du Cange Glossar. voc. Cruce ^g^^t^s. Guii. Abbas ap. Bongars. vol. i.
480, 482.
NOTE XIV.
.

THE commercial effects of the Crusades were not less considerable than those
which I have already mentioned. Their commercial effects.
The first armies under the standard of the cross which Peter the hermit and
Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and Hungary to Constantinople, suffered
so much by the length of the march, as well as the fierceness of the barbarous
people who inhabited those countries, that it deterred others from taking the
same route; so that rather than encounter so many dangers, they chose to go by
sea. Venice, Genoa, and Pisa furnished the transports on which they embarked.
The sum which these cities received merely for freight from such numerous
armies was immense Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii. aevi, vol. ii. ^05.
. This, however, was but a small part of what they gained by the expeditions to
the Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted with them, for military stores and
provisions; their st^^ts kept on the coast as the army advanced by land; and
supplying them with whatever was wanting, engrossed all the profits of that
lucrative branch of commerce. The success which attended the arms of the
Crusaders was productive of advantages still more permanent. There are charters
yet extant, containing grants to the Venetians, Pisans, and Genoese of the most
extensive immunities in the several settlements which the Christians made in
Asia. All the commodities which they imported or exported are thereby exempted
from every imposition; the property of entire suburbs in some of the maritime
towns, and of large streets and houses in others, is vested in them; and all
questions arising among persons settled within their precincts, or who traded
under their protection, are appointed to to be tried by their own laws and by
judges of their own appointment Murat. ibid. 906, etc.
. When the Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed one of their own number
on the Imperial throne, the Italian states were likewise gainers by that event.
The Venetians who had planned the enterprise, and took a considerable part in
carrying it into execution, did not neglect to secure to themselves the chief
advantages redounding from its success. They made themselves masters of part of
the ancient Peleponnesus in Greece, together with some of the most fertile
islands in the Archipelago. Many valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were transferred to Venice, Genoa or Pisa.
Thus a succession of events occasioned by the Holy war, opened various sources,
from which wealth flowed in such abundance into these cities Villehardouin
hist. de Constant. sous l'Emperours Francois, 105, etc.
, as enabled them, in concurrence with another institution which shall be
immediately mentioned, to secure their own liberty and independence.

The establishment of communities favorable to government and order.
II. THE institution to which I alluded was the forming of cities into
communities, corporations, or bodies politic, and granting them the privilege
of municipal jurisdiction, which contributed more, perhaps, than any other
cause, to introduce regular government, police and arts, and to diffuse them
over Europe. The feudal government had degenerated into a system of opression.
The usurpations of the nobles were become unbounded and intolerable; they had
reduced the great body of the people into a state of actual servitude: the
condition of those dignified with the name of freemen, was often little
preferable to that of the other. Nor was such oppression the portion of those
alone who dwelt in the country, and were employed in cultivating the estate of
their master. The cities and villages held of some great lord, The ancient
state of cities.
on whom they depended for protection, and were no less subject to his
arbitrary jurisdiction. The inhabitants were deprived of the natural, and most
unalienable rights of humanity. They could not dispose of the effects which
their own industry had acquired, either by a latter will, or by any deed
executed during their life Dacherli Spiceleg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4^0.
Ordonances des Rois de France tom. iii. 204 No. 2. 6.
. They had no right to appoint guardians for their children, during their
minority. They were not permitted to marry without purchasing the consent of
the lord on whom they depended Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22.
tom. iii. 203. No. 1. Murat Antiq. Ital. vol. iv p. 20. Dacher. Spicel. vol.
xi. 325, 341.
. If once they had commenced a law suit, they durst not terminate it by an
accommodation, because that would have deprived the lord in whose court they
pleaded, of the perquisites due to him on passing sentence Dacher. Spicel. vol
ix. 182.
. Services of various kinds, no less disgraceful than oppressive, were exacted
from them without mercy or moderation. The spirit of industry was choked in
some cities by absurd regulations, and in others by unreasonable exactions: nor
would the narrow and oppressive maxims of a military aristocracy have permitted
it ever to rise to any degree of height or vigor M. l'Abbe Mably observat sur
l'hist de France, tom. ii. p. 2. 96.
.

BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn their attention toward
commerce, The freedom of cities first established in Italy.
and to conceive some idea of the advantages which they might derive from it,
they became impatient to shake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and to
establish among themselves such a free and equal government as would render
property secure, and industry flourishing. The German Emperors, especially
those of the Franconian and Suabian lines, as the seat of their government was
far distant from Italy, possessed a feeble and imperfect jurisdiction in that
country. Their perpetual quarrels either with the Popes or with their own
turbulent vassals diverted their attention from the interior police of Italy,
and gave constant employment to their arms. These circumstances encouraged the
inhabitants of some of the Italian cities, toward the beginning of the
eleventh century, to assume new privileges, to unite together more closely, and
to form themselves into bodies politic governed by laws established by common
consent Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.
. The rights, which many cities acquired by bold or fortunate usurpations,
others purchased from the Emperors, who deemed themselves gainers when they
received large sums for immunities which they were no longer able to withold;
and some cities obtained them gratuitously from the generosity or facility of
the Princes on whom they depended. The great increase of wealth which the
Crusades brought into Italy, occasioned a new kind of fermentation and activity
in the minds of the people, and excited such a general passion for liberty and
independence, that before the conclusion of the last Crusade all the
considerable cities in that country had either purchased or had extorted large
immunities from the Emperors NOTE XV.
.

Is introduced into France and into other countries of Europe.

A. D. 1108. -- 1137.


THIS innovation was not long known in Italy before it made its way into France.
Louis the Gross, in order to create some power that might counterbalance those
potent vassals who controuled, or gave law to the crown, first adopted the plan
of conferring new privileges on the towns situated within his own domaine.
These privileges were called charters of community, by which he enfranchised
the inhabitants, abolished all marks of servitude, and formed them into
corporations or bodies politic, to be governed by a council and magistrates of
their own nomination. These magistrates had the right of administering justice
within their own precincts, of levying taxes, of embodying and training to arms
the militia of the town, which took the field when required by the sovereign,
under the command of officers appointed by the community. The great barons
imitated the example of their monarch, and granted like immunities to the towns
within their territories. They had wasted such great sums in their expeditions
to the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold on this new expedient for
raising money, by the sale of these charters of liberty. Though the institution
of communities was as repugnant to their maxims of policy, as it was adverse to
their power, they disregarded remote consequences, in order to obtain present
relief. In less than two centuries servitude was abolished in most of the towns
in France, and they became free corporations, instead of dependant villages
without jurisdiction or privileges NOTE XVI.
. Much about the same period, the great cities in Germany began to acquire like
immunities, and laid the foundation of their present liberty and independence
NOTE XVII.
. The practice spread quickly over Europe, and was adopted in Germany, Spain,
England, Scotland, and all the other feudal kingdoms NOTE XVIII.
.

THE good effects of this new institution were immediately felt, Its happy
effects upon the condition of the inhabitants;
and its influence on government as well as manners was no less extensive than
salutary. A great body of the people was released from sevitude, and from all
the arbitrary and grievous impositions to which that wretched condition had
subjected them. Towns upon acquiring the right of community, became so many
little republics, governed by known and equal laws; and liberty was deemed
such an essential and characteristic part in their constitution, that if any
slave took refuge in one of them, and resided there during a year without being
claimed, he was instantly declared a freeman, and admitted as a member of the
community St^t^t. H^m^erti B^llojo^l. Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182, 185. Charta
Commit. Forens. ibid. 193.
.

Upon the power of the nobility;
AS one part of the people owed their liberty to the erection of communities,
another was indebted to them for their security. Such had been the state of
(...) several centuries, that self-preservation obliged every man to court the
patronage of some powerful baron, and in times of danger his castle was the
place to which all resorted for safety. But towns surrounded with walls, whose
inhabitants were regularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, as well as
by the most solemn engagements, reciprocally to defend each other, afforded a
more commodious and secure retreat. The nobles began to be considered as of
less importance, when they ceased to be the sole guardians to whom the people
could look up for protection against violence.

Upon the power of the crown;
IF the nobility suffered some diminution of their credit and power by the
privileges granted to the cities, the crown acquired an increase of both. As
there were no regular troops kept on foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the
Monarch could bring no army into the field but what was composed of soldiers
furnished by the crown-vassals; always jealous of the regal authority, and
often in rebellion against it; nor had he any funds for carrying on the public
service, but such as they granted him with a very sparing hand. But when the
members of communities were permitted to bear arms, and were trained to the use
of these, this in some degree supplied the first defect, and gave the crown the
command of a body of men independent of its great vassals. The attachment of
the cities to their sovereigns, whom they respected as the first authors of
their liberties, and whom they were obliged to court as the protectors of their
immunities against the domineering spirit of the nobles, contributed somewhat
toward removing the second evil, as it frequently engaged them to grant the
crown such supplies of money as added new force to government Ordon. des Rois
de France, tom. i 602, 76^. tom. ii. 318, 422.
.

THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy change in the condition of all
the members of communities, Upon the increase of industry.
as roused them from that stupidity and ^ction into which they had been sunk by
the wretchedness of their former state. The spirit of industry revived.
Commerce became an object of attention, and began to flourish. Population
increased. Independence was established; and wealth flowed into cities which
had long been the seat of poverty and oppression. Wealth was accompanied by its
usual attendants, ostentation and luxury; and though the former was inelegant
and cumbersome, and the latter indelicate, they led gradually to greater
refinement in manners, and in the habits of life. Together with this
improvement in manners, a more regular species of government and police was
introduced. As cities grew to be more populous, and the occasions of
intercourse among men increased, statutes and regulations multiplied of course,
and all became sensible that their common safety depended on observing them
with exactness, and on punishing such as violated them, with promptitude and
rigor. Laws and subordination, as well as polished manners, took their rise in
cities, and diffused themselves insensibly through the rest of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained personal freedom and municipal
jurisdiction soon acquired civil liberty and political power. The inhabitants
of cities acquire political power as members of the constitution.
It was a fundamental principle in the feudal system of policy, that no freeman
could be governed or taxed unless by his own consent. In consequence of this,
the vassals of every baron were called to his court, in which they established
by mutual consent such regulations as they deemed most beneficial to their
small society, and granted their superior such supplies of money as were
proportionable to their abilities, or to his wants. The barons themselves,
conformable to the same maxim, were admitted into the supreme assembly of the
nation, and concurred with the sovereign in enacting laws, or in imposing
taxes. As the superior lord, according to the original plan of feudal policy,
retained the direct property of those lands which he granted, in temporary
possession, to his vassals, the law, even after fiefs became hereditary, still
supposed this original practice to subsist, and a baron continued to be
considered as the guardian of all who resided within his territories. The great
council of each nation, whether distinguished by the name of a parliament, a
diet, the Cortes, or the states general, was composed entirely of such barons
and dignified ecclesiastics, as held immediately of the crown. Towns, whether
situated in the royal domaine, or on the lands of a subject, depended for
protection on the lord of whom they held. They had no legal name, no political
existence, which could entitle them to be admitted into the legislative
assembly, or could give them any authority there. But as soon as they were
enfranchised, and formed into Bodies Corporate, they became legal and
independent members of the constitution, and acquired all the rights essential
to freemen. Amongst these, the most valuable, was the privilege of a decisive
voice in enacting laws, and in granting subsidies. It was natural for cities,
accustomed to a form of municipal government, according to which no regulation
could be established, and no money could be raised without their own consent,
to claim this privilege. The wealth, the power and consideration which they
acquired on recovering their liberty added weight to their claim; and
favorable events happened, or fortunate conjunctures occurred in the different
kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated or forwarded their obtaining possession
of this important right. In England, one of the first countries in which the
representatives of boroughs were admitted into the great council of the nation,
A. D. 1265.
the barons wh^ (...) arms against Henry III. summoned (...) to attend
parliament in order to add greater popularity to their party* and to strengthen
the barrier (...) the encroachment of regal power. In France, Philip the Fair,
a Monarch no less sagacious than enterprizing, considered them as instruments
which might be employed with equal advantage to extend the royal prerogative,
to counterbalance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and to facilitate the
imposition of new taxes. With these views, he introduced the deputies of such
towns as were formed into communities into the states general of the nation
Pasquier Recherches de la France, p. 81. edit. Par. 1633.
. In the Empire, the wealth and immunities of the Imperial cities placed them
on a level with the most considerable members of the Germani^ body. Conscious
of their own power and dignity, A. D. 1293.
they pretended to the privilege of forming a separate bench in the diet; and
made good their pretension Pfeffel Abrege de l'histoire and droit d'Allemague,
p. 408. 451.
.

BUT in what way soever the representatives of cities first gained a place in
the legislature, The happy effects of this upon government.
that event had great influence on the form and genius of government. It
tempered the rigor of aristocratical oppression, with a proper mixture of
popular liberty: It secured to the great body of the people, who had formerly
no representatives, active and powerful guardians of their rights and
privileges: It established an intermediate power between the King and nobles,
to which each had recourse alternately, and which at some times opposed the
usurpations of the former, on other occasions checked the encroachments of the
latter. As soon as the representatives of communities gained any degree of
credit and influence in the legislature, the spirit of laws became different
from what it had formerly been; it flowed from new principles; it was directed
toward new objects; equality, order, the public good, and the redress of
grievances, were phrases and ideas brought into use, and which grew to be
familiar in the statutes and jurisprudence of the European nations. Almost all
the efforts in favor of liberty in every country of Europe have been made by
this new power in the legislature. In proportion as it rose to consideration
and influence, the severity of the aristocratical spirit decreased; and the
privileges of the people became gradually more extensive as the ancient and
exorbitant jurisdiction of the nobles was abridged NOTE XIX.
.

The people acquire liberty by enfranchisement.
IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been declared free by the charters of
communities, that part of the people which resided in the country, and was
employed in agriculture, began to recover liberty by enfranchisement. During
the rigor of feudal government, as has been already observed, the great body
of the lower people was reduced to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the
soil which they cultivated, and together with it were transferred from one
proprietor to another, by sale, or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy
did not favor the enfranchisement of that order of men. It was an established
maxim that no vassal could legally diminish the value of a fief, to the
detriment of the lord from whom he had received it. In consequence of this,
manumission by the authority of the immediate master was not valid; and unless
it was confirmed by the superior lord of whom he held, slaves of this species
did not acquire a complete right to their liberty. Thus it became necessary to
ascend through all the gradations of feudal holding to the King, the lord
Paramount Etablissemens de St. Louis, live. ii. chapter 34. Ordon. tom. i. 283. not.
(a).
. A form of procedure so tedious and troublesome discouraged the practice of
manumission. Domestic or personal slaves often obtained liberty from the
humanity or beneficence of their masters, to whom they belonged in absolute
property. The condition of slaves fixed to the soil was much more unalterable.

BUT the freedom and independence which one part of the people had obtained by
the institution of communities, The motives and progress of this.
inspired the other with the most ardent desire of acquiring the same
privileges; and their superiors, sensible of the benefits which they themselves
had derived from former concessions, were less unwilling to gratify them by the
grant of new immunities. The enfranchisement of slaves became more frequent;
and the Monarchs of France prompted by necessity, no less than by their
inclination to reduce the power of the nobles, endeavored to render it
general. Louis X. and his brother Philip issued ordonances, declaring, A. D.
1315. and 1318.
"That as all men were by nature freeborn, and as their kingdom was called the
kingdom of Franks, they determined that it should be so in reality as well as
in name; therefore they appointed that enfranchisements should be granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and reasonable conditions Ordon. tom.
i. p. 583, 653.
." These edicts were carried into immediate execution within the royal domain.
The example of their sovereigns, together with the expectation of the
considerable sums which they might raise by this expedient, led many of the
nobles to set their dependants at liberty; and servitude was gradually
abolished in almost every province of the kingdom NOTE XX.
. In Italy, the establishment of republican government in their great cities,
the genius and maxims of which were extremely different from those of the
feudal policy, together with the ideas of equality which the progress of
commerce had rendered familiar, gradually introduced the practice of
enfranchising the ancient predial slaves. In some provinces of Germany, the
persons who had been subject to this species of bondage, were released; in
others, the rigor of their state was mitigated. In England, as the spirit of
liberty gained ground, the very name and idea of personal sevitude, without any
formal interposition of the legislature to prohibit it, was totally banished.

THE effects of such a remarkable change in the condition of so great a part of
the people, The effects of this upon the improvement of society.
could not fail of being considerable and extensive. The husbandman, master of
his own industry, and secure of reaping for himself the fruits of his labor,
became the farmer of the same fields where he had formerly been compelled to
toil for the benefit of another. The odious names of master and of slave, the
most mortifying and depressing of all distinctions to human nature, were
abolished. New prospects opened, and new incitements to ingenuity and
enterprise presented themselves, to those who were emancipated. The expectation
of bettering their fortune, as well as that of raising themselves to a more
honorable condition, concurred in calling forth their activity and genius; and
a numerous class of men, who formerly had no political existence, and were
employed merely as instruments of labor, became useful citizens and
contributed toward augmenting the force or riches of the society, which
adopted them as members.

The introduction of a more regular administration of justice, contributes to
the improvement of society.
V. THE various expedients which were employed in order to introduce a more
regular, equal and vigorous administration of justice, contributed greatly
toward the improvement of society. What was the particular mode of dispensing
justice in the several barbarous nations which overran the Roman Empire, and
took possession of its different provinces, cannot now be determined with
certainty. We may conclude from the form of government established among them,
as well as from their ideas concerning the nature of society, that the
authority of the magistrate was extremely limited, and the independance of
individuals proportionably great. History and records, as far as they reach
back, justify this conclusion, and represent the ideas and exercise of justice
in all the countries of Europe, as little different from those which must take
place in a state of nature. To maintain the order and tranquillity of society
by the regular execution of known laws; to inflict vengeance on crimes
destructive of the peace and safety of individuals, by a prosecution carried on
in the name, and by the authority of the community; to consider the punishment
of criminals as a public example to deter others from violating the laws; were
objects of government little understood in theory, and less regarded in
practice. The magistrate could scarce be said to hold the sword of justice; it
was left in the hands of private persons. Resentment was almost the sole motive
for prosecuting crimes; and to gratify that passion, was the end and rule in
punishing them. He who suffered the wrong, was the only person who had a right
to pursue the aggressor, and to exact or to remit the punishment. From a system
of judicial procedure, so crude and defective as seems to be scarce compatible
with the subsistence of civil society, disorder and anarchy flowed.
Superstition concurred with this ignorance concerning the nature of government,
in obstructing the administration of justice, or in rendering it capricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for these evils, so as to give a more regular
course to justice, was, during several centuries, one great object of political
wisdom. The regulations for this purpose, may be reduced to three general
heads: to explain these, and to point out the manner in which they operated is
an important article in the history of society among the nations of Europe.

1. THE first considerable step toward establishing an equal administration of
justice, This effected by abolishing the practice of private war.
was the abolishment of the right which inindividuals claimed of waging war
with each other, in their own name, and by their own authority. To repel
injuries, and to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man than to cultivate
friendship; Original ideas of men concerning justice.
and while society remains in its most simple state, the former is considered
as a personal right no less unalienable than the latter. Nor do men in this
situation deem that they have a title to redress their own wrongs alone; they
are touched with the injuries of those with whom they are connected, or in
whose honor they are interested; and are no less prompt to avenge them. The
savage, how imperfectly soever he may comprehend the principles of political
union, feels warmly the sentiments of social affection, and the obligations
arising from the ties of blood. On the appearance of an injury or affront
offered to his family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pursues the authors
of it with the keenest resentment. He considers it as cowardly to expect
redress from any arm but his own, and as infamous to give up to another the
right of determining what reparation he should accept, or with what vengeance
he should rest satisfied.

These lead to the practice of private war.
THE maxims and practice of all uncivilized nations, with respect to the
prosecution and punishment of offenders, particularly those of the ancient
Germans, and other Barbarians who invaded the Roman empire, are perfectly
conformable to these ideas Tacit. de Mor. German. cap. 21. Vell. Patere. lib.
ii. c. 118.
. While they retained their native simplicity of manners, and continued to be
divided into small tribes or societies, the defects in this imperfect system of
criminal Jurisprudence (if it merits that name) were less sensibly felt. When
they came to settle in the extensive provinces which they had conquered, and to
form themselves into great monarchies; when new objects of ambition presenting
themselves, increased both the number and the violence of their dissensions,
they ought to have adopted new maxims concerning the redress of injuries and to
have regulated by general and equal laws, that which they formerly left to be
directed by the caprice of private passion. But fierce and haughty chieftains,
accustomed to avenge themselves on such as had injured them, did not think of
relinquishing a right which they considered as a privilege of their order, and
a mark of their independence. Laws enforced by the authority of Princes and
Magistrates who possessed little power, commanded no great degree of reverence.
The administration of justice among rude illiterate people, was not so accurate
or decisive, or uniform, as to induce men to submit implicitly to its
determinations. Every offended baron buckled on his armor, and sought redress
at the head of his vassals. His adversary met him in like hostile array.
Neither of them appealed to impotent laws which could afford them no
protection. Neither of them would submit points, in which their passions were
warmly interested, to the slow determination of a judicial enquiry. Both
trusted to their swords for the decision of the contest. The kindred and
dependants of the aggressor, as well as of the defender, were involved in the
quarrel. They had not even the liberty of remaining neutral. Such as refused to
act in concert with the party to which they belonged, were not only exposed to
infamy, but subjected to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn and afflicted, during several
centuries, The pernicious effects of it.
by intestine wars, excited by private animosities, and carried on with all the
rage natural to men of fierce manners, and of violent passions. The estate of
every baron was a kind of independent territory, disjoined from those around
it, and the hostilities between them were perpetual. The evil became so
inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and laws of private war were
ascertained, and regulation^ concerning it made a part in the system of
jurisprudence Beaumanoir Coustumes de Beauvoisis, chapter 59, et les notes de
Thaumassiere, p. 447.
, in the same manner as if this practice had been founded in some natural right
of humanity, or in the original constitution of civil society.

SO great was the disorder, Various methods employed in order to abolish it.
and such the calamities which these perpetual hostilities occasioned, that
various efforts were made to wrest from the nobles this pernicious privilege
which they claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign to abolish a
practice which almost annihilated his authority. Charlemagne prohibited it by
an express law, as an invention of the devil to destroy the order and happiness
of society Capitul. A. D. 808. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 371.
; but the reign of one Monarch, however vigorous and active, was too short to
extirpate a custom so firmly established. Instead of enforcing this
prohibition, his feeble successors durst venture on nothing more than to apply
palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any person to commence war, until he
had sent a formal defiance to the kindred and dependants of his adversary; they
ordained that, after the commission of the trespass or crime which gave rise to
a private war, forty days must elapse before the person injured should attack
the vassals of his adversary; they enjoined all persons to suspend their
private animosities, and to cease from hostilities when the king was engaged in
any war against the enemies of the nation. The church cooperated with the civil
magistrate, and interposed its authority in order to extirpate a practice so
repugnant to the spirit of Christianity. Various councils issued decrees,
prohibiting all private wars; and denounced the heaviest anathemas against such
as should disturb the tranquillity of society, by claiming or exercising that
barbarous right. The aid of religion was called in to combat and subdue the
ferocity of the times. The Almighty was said to have manifested, by visions and
revelations to different persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of revenge,
which armed one part of his creatures against the other. Men were required, in
the name of God, to sheath their swords, and to remember the sacred ties which
united them as Christians, and as members of the same society. But this
junction of civil and ecclesiastic authority, though strengthened by every
thing most apt to alarm and to overawe the credulous spirit of those ages,
produced no other effect than some temporary suspensions of hostilities, and a
cessation from war on certain days and seasons consecrated to the more solemn
acts of devotion. The nobles continued to assert this dangerous privilege; they
refused to obey some of the laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonstrated; they struggled for the right
of private war as the highest and most honorable distinction of their order.
Even so late as the fourteenth century, we find the nobles in several provinces
of France contending for their ancient method of terminating their differences
by the sword, in preference to that of submitting them to the decision of any
judge. The final abolition of this practice in that kingdom, and the other
countries in which it prevailed, is not to be ascribed so much to the force of
statutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase of the royal authority, and to
the imperceptible progress of juster sentiments concerning government, order,
and public security NOTE XXI.
.

2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by judicial combat, The prohibition of
trial by judicial combat, another improvement in the administration of justice.
was another considerable step toward the introduction of such regular
government as secured public order and private tranquillity. As the right of
private war left many of the quarrels among individuals to be decided, like
those between nations, by arms; the form of trial by judicial combat, which was
established in every country of Europe, banished equity from courts of justice,
and rendered chance or force the arbiter of their determinations. In civilized
nations, all transactions of any importance are concluded in writing. Defects
in the judicial proceedings of the middle ages.
The exhibition of the deed or instrument is full evidence of the fact, and
ascertains with precision what each party has stipulated to perform. But among
a rude people, when the arts of reading and writing were such uncommon
seize, that to be master of either, entitled a person to the appellation
of a clerk or learned man, scarce any thing was committed to writing but
treaties between Princes, their grants and charters to their subjects, or such
transactions between private parties as were of extraordinary consequence, or
had an extensive effect. The greater part of affairs in common life and
business were carried on by verbal contracts or promises. This, in many civil
questions, not only made it difficult to bring proof sufficient to establish
any claim, but encouraged falsehood and fraud, by rendering them extremely
easy. Even in criminal cases, where a particular fact must be ascertained, or
an accusation be disproved, the nature and effect of legal evidence was little
understood by barbarous nations. To define with accuracy that species of
evidence which a court had reason to expect; to determine when it ought to
insist on positive proof, and when it should be satisfied with a proof from
circumstances; to compare the testimony of discordant witnesses; and to fix the
degree of credit due to each; were discussions too intricate and subtle for
the jurisprudence of ignorant ages. In order to avoid encumbering themselves
with these, a more simple form of procedure was introduced into courts as well
civil as criminal. In all cases, where the notoriety of the fact did not
furnish the clearest and most direct evidence, the person accused, or he
against whom an action was brought, was called legally, or offered voluntarily
to purge himself by oath; and upon his declaring his innocence, he was
instantly acquitted Leg. Burg^nd. Tit. 8, and 45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. 89. Leg.
Baiwar. Tit. 8. 5. 2. etc.
. This absurd practice effectually screened guilt and fraud from detection or
punishment, by rendering the temptation to perjury so powerful, that it was not
easy to resist it. The pernicious effects of it were sensibly felt; and in
order to guard against them, the laws ordained that oaths should be
administered with great solemnity, and accompanied with every circumstance
which could inspire religious reverence, or superstitious terror Du Cange
Glossar. voc. Juramentum, vol. iii. p. 1607. Edit. Benedict.
. This, however, proved a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites became
familiar, and their impression on the imagination gradually diminished; men who
could venture to disregard truth, were not apt to startle at the solemnities of
an oath. Their observation of this, put legislators upon devising a new
expedient for rendering the purgation by oath more certain and satisfactory.
They required the person accused to appear with a certain number of freemen,
his neighbors or relations, who corroborated the oath which he took, by
swearing that they believed all that he had uttered to be true. These were
called Compurgators, and their number varied according to the importance of the
subject in dispute, or the nature of the crime with which a person was charged
Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1599.
. In some cases, the concurrence of no less than three hundred of these
auxiliary witnesses was requisite to acquit the person accused Spelman Glossar.
voc. Assath. Gregor. Turon. Hist. lib. viii. c.
. But even this device was found to be ineffectual. It was a point of honor
with every man in Europe, during several ages, not to desert the chief on whom
he depended, and to stand by those with whom the ties of blood connected him.
Whoever then was bold enough to violate the laws, was sure of devoted
adherents, willing to abet, and eager to serve him in whatever manner he
required. The formality of calling Compurgators, proved an apparent, not a real
security, against falsehood and perjury; and the sentences of courts, while
they continued to refer every point in question to the oath of the defendant,
became so flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal indignation against this
method of procedure Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. 34.
.

SENSIBLE of these defects, but strangers to the manner of correcting them,
These introduced the practice of appealing to heaven.
or of introducing a more proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible method
of discovering truth, and of guarding against deception, appealed to heaven,
and referred every point in dispute to be determined, as they imagined, by the
decisions of unerring wisdom and impartial justice. The person accused, in
order to improve his innocence, submitted, in some cases, to trial, by plunging
his arm in boiling water; by lifting a red hot iron with his naked hand; by
walking barefoot over burning plough-shares; or by other experiments equally
perilous and formidable. On other occasions, Particularly by judicial combat.
he challenged his accuser to fight him in single combat. All these various
forms of trial were conducted with many devout ceremonies; the ministers of
religion were employed, the Almighty was called upon to interpose for the
manifestation of guilt, and for the protection of innocence; and whoever
escaped unhurt, or came off victorious, was pronounced to be acquitted by the
Judgment of God Murat. Dissertatio de judiciis Dei. Antiquit. Italic. vol. iii.
p. 612.
.

The introduction of this practice favored by the superstition of the middle
ages.
AMONG all the whimsical and absurd institutions which owe their existence to
the weakness of human reason, this, which-submitted questions that affected the
property, the reputation, and the lives of men, to the determination of chance,
or of bodily strength and address, appears to be the most extravagant and
preposterous. There were circumstances, however, which led the nations of
Europe to consider this equivocal mode of deciding any point in contest, as a
direct appeal to heaven, and a certain method of discovering its will. As men
are unable to comprehend the manner in which the Almighty carries on the
government of the universe, by equal, fixed and general laws, they are apt to
imagine that in every case which their passions or interest render important in
their own eyes, the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to display his power, in
vindicating innocence and punishing vice. It requires no inconsiderable degree
of science and philosophy to correct this popular error. But the sentiments
prevalent in Europe during the dark ages, instead of correcting, strengthened
it. Religion, for several centuries, consisted chiefly in believing the
legendary history of those saints whose names crowd and disgrace the Romish
calendar. The fabulous tales concerning their miracles, had been declared
authentic by the bulls of Popes, and the decrees of councils; they made the
great subject of the instructions which the clergy offered to the people, and
were received by them with implicit credulity and admiration. By these, men
were accustomed to believe that the established laws of nature might be
violated on the most frivolous occasions, and were taught to look rather for
particular and extraordinary acts of power under the divine administration,
than to contemplate the regular progress and execution of a general plan. One
superstition prepared the way for another; and whoever believed that the
Supreme Being had interposed miraculously on those trivial occasions mentioned
in legends, could not but expect his intervention in matters of greater
importance, when solemnly referred to his decision.

WITH this superstitious opinion, the martial spirit of Europe, during the
middle ages, And likewi^^ by their martial spirit.
concurred in establishing the mode of trial by judicial combat. To be ready to
maintain with his sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first maxim of
honor with every gentleman. To assert their own rights by force of arms, to
inflict vengeance on those who had injured or affronted them, were the
distinction and pride of high-spirited nobles. The form of trial by combat
coinciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified these passions. Every man
was the guardian of his own honor, and of his own life; the justice of his
cause, as well as his future reputation, depended on his own courage and
prowess. This mode of decision was considered, accordingly, as one of the
happiest efforts of wise policy; and as soon as it was introuduced, all the
forms of trial by fire or water, and other superstitious experiments, fell into
disuse, or were employed only in controversies between persons of inferior
rank. The trial by combat was authorized over all Europe, and received in every
country with equal satisfaction. Not only questions concerning uncertain or
contested facts, but general and abstract points in law were determined by the
issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a method of discovering truth more
liberal as well as more satisfactory, than that by examination and argument.
Not only might parties, whose minds were exasperated by the eagerness and the
hostility of opposition, defy their antagonist, and require him to make good
his charge, or to prove his innocence, with his sword; but witnesses, who had
no interest in the issue of the question, though called to declare the truth by
laws which ought to have afforded them protection, were equally exposed to the
danger of a challenge, and equally bound to assert the veracity of their
evidence by dint of arms. To complete the absurdities of this military
jurisprudence, even the character of a judge was not sacred from its violence.
Any one of the parties might interrupt a judge when about to deliver his
opinion; might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in the most reproachful
terms, and throwing down his gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his
integrity in the field; nor could he, without infamy, refuse to accept the
defiance, or decline to enter the lists against such an adversary.

It becomes universal.
THUS the form of trial by combat, like other abuses, spread gradually, and
extended to all persons and almost to all cases. Ecclesiastics, women, minors,
superannuated and infirm persons, who could not with decency or justice be
compelled to take arms, and to maintain their own cause, were obliged to
produce champions, whom they engaged by affection or rewards, to fight their
battles. The solemnities of a judicial combat were such as were natural in an
action, which was considered both as a formal appeal to God, and as the final
decision of questions of the highest moment. Every circumstance relating to
them was regulated by the edicts of Princes, and explained in the comments of
lawyers, with a minute and even superstitious accuracy. Skill in these laws and
rites was the only science of which warlike nobles boasted, or which they were
ambitious to attain See a curious discourse concerning the laws of judicial
combat, by Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, uncle to Richard II. in
Spelman's Glossar. voc. Campus.
.

The pernicious effects of it.
BY this barbarous custom the natural course of proceeding, both in civil and
criminal questions, was entirely perverted. Force usurped the place of equity
in courts of judicature, and justice was banished from her proper mansion.
Discernment, learning, integrity, were qualities less necessary to a judge than
bodily strength, and dexterity in the use of arms. Daring courage, and superior
vigor or address, were of more moment toward securing the favorable issue of
a suit, than the equity of a cause, or the clearness of the evidence. Men, of
course, applied themselves to cultivate the talents which they found to be of
greatest utility. As strength of body and address in arms were no less
requisite in those lists which they were obliged to enter in defense of their
private rights, than in the field of battle, where they met the enemies of
their country, it became the great object of education, as well as the chief
employment in life, to acquire these martial accomplishments. The
administration of justice, instead of accustoming men to listen to the voice of
equity, or to reverence the decisions of law, added to the ferocity of their
manners, and taught them to consider force as the great arbiter of right and
wrong.

THESE pernicious effects of the trial by combat were so obvious, Various
expedients for abolishing this practice.
that they did not altogether escape the view of the unobserving age in which
it was introduced. The clergy, from the beginning, remonstrated against it as
repugnant to the spirit of Christianity, and subversive of justice and order Du
Cange Glossar. voc. Duellum, vol. ii. p. 1675.
. But the maxims and passions which favor it, had taken such hold of the minds
of men, that they disregarded admonitions and censures, which, on other
occasions, would have struck them with terror. The evil was too great and
inveterate to yield to that remedy, and continuing to increase, the civil power
at length found it necessary to interpose. Conscious, however, of their own
limited authority, monarchs proceeded with caution, and their first attempt to
restrain, or to set any bounds to this practice, were extremely feeble. One of
the earliest restrictions of this practice which occurs in the history of
Europe, is that of Henry I. of England. It extended no farther than to prohibit
the trial by combat in questions concerning property of small value Brussel
Usage des Fiefs. vol. ii. p. 96^.
. Louis VII. of France imitated his example, and issued an edict to the same
effect Ordon. tom. i. p. 16.
. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legislator, were far superior to those of his
age, endeavored to introduce a more perfect jurisprudence, and to substitute
the trial by evidence, in place of that by combat. But his regulations, with
respect to this, were confined to his own domains; for the great vassals of the
crown, possessed such independent authority, and were so fondly attached to the
ancient practice, that he durst not venture to extend it to the whole kingdom.
Some barons voluntarily adopted his regulations. The spirit of courts of
justice became averse to the mode of decision by combat, and discouraged it on
every occasion. The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honorable to depend
for the security of their lives and fortunes on their own courage alone, and
contended with so much vehemence for the preservation of this favorite
privilege of their order, that the successors of St. Louis, unable to oppose,
and afraid of offending such powerful subjects, were obliged not only to
tolerate, but to authorize the practice which he had attempted to abolish
Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 390, 435.
. In other countries of Europe, efforts equally zealous were employed to
maintain the established custom; and similar concessions were extorted from
their respective sovereigns. It continued, however, to be an object of policy
with every monarch of abilities or vigor, to explode the trial by combat; and
various edicts were issued for this purpose. But the observation which was made
concerning the right of private war, is equally applicable to the mode of trial
under review. No custom, how absurd soever it may be, if it has subsisted long,
or derives its force from the manners and prejudices of the age in which it
prevails, was ever abolished by the bare promulgation of laws and statutes. The
sentiments of the people must change, or some new power sufficient to
counteract it must be introduced. Such a change, accordingly, took place in
Europe, as science gradually increased and society advanced toward more
perfect order. In proportion as the prerogative of Princes extended, and came
to acquire new force, a power, interested in suppressing every practice
favorable to the independance of the nobles, was introduced. The struggle,
nevertheless, subsisted for several centuries; sometimes the new regulations
and ideas seemed to gain ground; sometimes ancient habits recurred; and though,
upon the whole, the trial by combat went more and more into disuse, yet
instances of it occur, as late as the sixteenth century, in the history both of
France and of England. In proportion as it declined, the regular administration
of justice was restored, the proceedings of courts were directed by known laws,
the study of these became an object of attention to judges, and the people of
Europe advanced fast toward civility, when this great cause of the ferocity of
their manners was removed NOTE XXII.
.

3. The privilege of appealing from the courts of the barons, another great
improvement in the administration of justice.
By authorizing the right of appeal from the courts of the Barons to those of
the King, and subjecting the decisions of the former to the review of the
latter, a new step, not less considerable than these which I have already
mentioned, was taken toward establishing the regular, consistent, and vigorous
administration of justice. Among all the encroachments of the feudal nobles on
the prerogative of their Monarchs, their usurping the administration of justice
with supreme authority, both in civil and criminal causes, within the precincts
of their own estates, was the most singular. In other nations, subjects have
contended with their Princes, and have endeavored to extend their own power
and privileges; but in the history of their struggles and pretensions, we
discover nothing similar to this right which the feudal barons claimed, Origin
of the supreme and independent jurisdiction of the nobility.
and acquired. It must have been something peculiar in their genius and manners
that suggested this idea, and prompted them to insist on such a claim. Among
the rude people who conquered the various provinces of the Roman Empire, and
established new kingdoms there, the passion of resentment, too impetuous to
bear control, was permitted to remain almost unrestrained by the authority of
laws. The person offended, as has been observed, retained not only the right of
prosecuting but of punishing his adversary. To him it belonged to inflict such
vengeance as satiated his rage, or to accept of such satisfaction as appeased
it. But while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole judges in their own
cause, their enmities were implacable, and immortal; they set no bounds either
to the degree of their vengeance, or to the duration of their resentment. The
excesses which this occasioned, proved so destructive of peace and order in
society, as forced them to think of some remedy. At first, arbiters interposed
and by persuasion or entreaty prevailed on the party offended to accept of a
fine or composition from the aggressor, and to drop all farther prosecution.
But as submission to persons who had no legal or magisterial authority, was
altogether voluntary, it became necessary to establish judges with power
sufficient to enforce their own decisions. The leader whom they were accustomed
to follow and to obey, whose courage they respected, and in whose integrity
they placed confidence, was the person to whom a martial people naturally
committed this important prerogative. Every chieftain was the commander of his
tribe in war, and their judge in peace. Every baron led his vassals to the
field, and administered justice to them in his hall. Their high-spirited
dependants would not have recognized any other authority, or have submitted to
any other jurisdiction. But in times of turbulence and violence, the exercise
of this new function was attended not only with trouble, but with danger. No
person could assume the character of a judge, if he did not possess power
sufficient to protect the one party from the violence of private revenge, and
to compel the other to accept of such reparation as he enjoined. In
consideration of the extraordinary efforts which this office required, judges,
besides the fine which they appointed to be paid as a compensation to the
person or family who had been injured, levied an additional sum as a recompense
for their own labor; and in all the feudal kingdoms the latter was as
precisely ascertained, and as regularly exacted, as the former.

The extent and bad effects of this privilege.
THUS, by the natural operation of circumstances peculiar to the manners or
political state of the feudal nations, separate and territorial jurisdictions
came not only to be established in every kingdom, but were established in such
a way, that the interest of the barons concurred with their ambition in
maintaining and extending them. It was not merely a point of honor with the
feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vassals; but from the exercise of
that power arose one capital branch of their revenue; and the emoluments of
their courts were frequently the main support of their dignity. It was with
infinite zeal that they asserted and defended this high privilege of their
order. By this institution, however, every kingdom in Europe was split into as
many separate principalities as it contained powerful barons. Their vassals,
whether in peace or in war, were scarce sensible of any authority, but that of
their superior lord. They felt themselves subject to no other command. They
were amenable to no other jurisdiction. The ties which linked together these
smaller confederacies became close and firm; the bonds of public union relaxed,
or were dissolved. The nobles strained their invention in devising regulations
that tended to ascertain and perpetuate this distinction. In order to guard
against any appearance of subordination in their courts to those of the crown,
they constrained their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from entering
their territories, or from claiming any jurisdiction there; and if, either
through mistake, or from the spirit of encroachment, any royal judge ventured
to extend his authority to the vassals of a baron, they might plead their right
of exemption, and the lord of whom they held could not only rescue them out of
his hands, but was entitled to legal reparation for the injury and affront
offered to him. The jurisdiction of the royal judges scarce reached beyond the
narrow limits of the King's demesnes. Instead of a regular gradation of courts,
all acknowledging the authority of the same general laws, and looking up to
these as the guides of their decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom a
thousand independent tribunals, the proceedings of which were directed by local
customs and contradictory forms. The collision of jurisdiction between these
numerous courts, often retarded the execution of justice: The variety and
caprice of their modes of procedure must have for ever kept the administration
of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or perfection.

ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these encroachments on their
jurisdiction, Expedients employed in order to limit or abolish it.
and bore them with impatience. But the usurpations of the nobles were so
firmly established, and the danger of endeavoring to overturn them by open
force was so manifest, that they were obliged to remain satisfied with attempts
to undermine them. Various expedients were employed for this purpose; each of
which merit attention, as they mark the progress of law and equity in the
several kingdoms of Europe. At first, Princes endeavored to circumscribe the
jurisdiction of the barons, by permitting them to take cognizance only of
smaller offenses, reserving those of greater moment, under the appellation of
Pleas of the Crown, and Royal Causes, to be tried in the King's courts. This
affected only the barons of inferior note; the more powerful nobles scorned
such a distinction, and not only claimed unlimited jurisdiction, but obliged
their sovereigns to grant them charters, conveying or recognizing this
privilege in the most ample form. The attempt, nevertheless, was productive of
some good consequences, and paved the way for more. It turned the attention of
men toward a jurisdiction distinct from that of the baron whose vassals they
were; it accustomed them to the pretensions of superiority which the crown
claimed over territorial judges; and taught them, when oppressed by their own
superior lord to look up to their sovereign as their protector. This
facilitated the introduction of appeals, by which Princes brought the decisions
of the baron's courts under the review of the royal judges. While trial by
combat subsisted in full vigor, no point decided according to that mode, could
be brought under the review of another court. It had been referred to the
judgment of God; the issue of battle had declared his will; and it would have
been impious to have called in question the equity of the divine decision. But
as soon as that barbarous custom began to fall into disuse, Princes encouraged
the vassals of the barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the royal courts.
The progress, however, of this practice, was slow and gradual. The first
instances of appeals were on account of the delay, or the refusal of justice in
the baron's court; and as these were countenanced by the ideas of subordination
in the feudal constitution, the nobles allowed them to be introduced without
much opposition. But when these were followed by appeals on account of the
injustice, or iniquity of the sentence, the nobles then began to be sensible,
that if this innovation became general, the shadow of power alone would remain
in their hands, and all real authority and jurisdiction would center in those
courts which possessed the right of review. They instantly took the alarm,
remonstrated against the encroachments, and contended boldly for their ancient
privileges. But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of Europe pursued their
plan with steadiness and prudence. Though forced to suspend their operations,
on some occasions, and seemingly to yield when any formidable confederacy of
their vassals united against them, they resumed their measures, as soon as they
observed the nobles to be remiss or feeble, and pushed them with vigor. They
appointed the royal courts which originally were ambulatory, and irregular with
respect to their times of meeting, to be held in a fixed place, and at stated
seasons. They were solicitous to name judges of more distinguished abilities
than such as presided in the courts of the barons. They added dignity to their
character, and splendor to their assemblies. They labored to render their
forms regular, and their decrees consistent. Such judicatories became, of
course, the objects of public confidence as well as veneration. The people,
relinquishing the partial tribunals of their lords, were eager to bring every
subject of contest under the more equal and discerning eye of those whom their
sovereign had chosen to give judgment in his name. Thus Kings became once more
the heads of the community, and the dispensers of justice to their subjects.
The barons, in some kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of jurisdiction,
because it sunk into contempt; in others, it was circumscribed by such
regulations as rendered it innocent, or it was entirely abolished by express
statutes. Thus the administration of justice taking its rise from one source,
and following one direction, held its course in every state with more
uniformity, and with greater force NOTE XXIII.
.

VI. The regulations of the canon law promote a more perfect administration.
THE forms and maxims of the canon law, which were become universally
respectable from their authority in the spiritual courts, contributed not a
little toward these improvements in jurisprudence which I have enumerated. If
the canon law be considered politically, either as a system framed on purpose,
to assist the clergy in usurping powers and jurisdiction no less repugnant to
the nature of their function, than inconsistent with the order of government;
or as the chief instrument in establishing the dominion of the Popes which
shook the throne, and endangered the liberties of every kingdom in Europe, we
must pronounce it one of the most formidable engines ever formed against the
happiness of civil society. But if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws
respecting the rights and property of individuals, and attend only to the civil
effects of its decisions concerning these, we must view it in a different, and
a much more favorable light. The progress of ecclesiastical usurpation.
In ages of ignorance and credulity, the ministers of religion are the objects
of superstitious veneration. When the barbarians who overran the Empire first
embraced the Christian faith, they found the clergy in possession of
considerable power; and they naturally transferred to these new guides the
profound submission and reverence which they were accustomed to yield to the
priests of that religion which they had forsaken. They deemed their persons to
be as sacred as their function; and would have considered it as impious to
subject them to the profane jurisdiction of the laity. The clergy were not
blind to the advantages which the weakness of mankind afforded them. The
established courts, in which every question relating to their own character,
their function, or their property, was tried. They pleaded, and obtained an
almost total exemption from the authority of civil judges. Upon different
pretexts, and by a multiplicity of artifices, they communicated this privilege
to so many persons, and extended their jurisdiction to such a variety of cases,
that the greater part of those affairs which give rise to contest and
litigation, was drawn under the cognizance of the spiritual courts.

BUT in order to dispose the laity to suffer these usurpations without
murmuring or opposition, The plan of ecclesiastical jurisprudence more perfect
than that in the civil courts.
it was necessary to convince them, that the administration of justice would be
rendered more perfect by the establishment of this new jurisdiction. This was
not a difficult undertaking, at the period when the clergy carried on their
encroachments with the greatest success. That scanty portion of science which
served to guide men in the ages of darkness, was wholly engrossed by the
clergy. They alone were accustomed to read, to enquire, and to reason. Whatever
knowledge of ancient jurisprudence had been preserved, either by tradition, or
in such books as had escaped the destructive rage of barbarians, was possessed
only by them. Upon the maxims of that excellent system, they founded a code of
laws consonant to the great principles of equity. Being directed by fixed and
known rules, the forms of their courts were ascertained, and their decisions
became uniform and consistent. Nor did they want authority sufficient to
enforce their sentences. Excommunication and other ecclesiastical censures,
were punishments more formidable than any that civil judges could inflict in
support of their decrees.

IT is not suprising, then, The good effects of imitating and adopting it.
that ecclesiastical jurisprudence should become such an object of admiration
and respect; that exemption from civil jurisdiction was courted as a privilege,
and conferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that even to rude people, the
maxims of the canon law should appear more equal and just than that
ill-digested jurisprudence which directed all proceedings in the civil courts.
According to the latter, the differences between contending barons were
terminated, as in a state of nature, by the sword; according to the former,
every matter was subjected to the decision of laws. The one, by permitting
judicial combats, left chance and force to be arbiters of right or wrong, of
truth or falsehood; the other, passed judgment with respect to these by the
maxims of equity, and the testimony of witnesses. Any error or iniquity in a
sentence pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurisdiction belonged, was
irremediable, because originally it was subject to the review of no superior
tribunal; the ecclesiastical law established a regular gradation of courts,
through all which a cause might be carried by appeal, until it was determined
by that authority which was held to be supreme in the church. Thus the genius
and principles of the canon law prepared men for approving these three great
alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which I have mentioned. But it was not
with respect to these points alone that the canon law suggested improvements
beneficial to society. Many of the regulations, now deemed the barriers of
personal security, or the safe-guards of private property, are contrary to the
spirit, and repugnant to the maxims of the civil jurisprudence, known in Europe
during several centuries, and were borrowed from the rules and practice of the
ecclesiastical courts. By observing the wisdom and equity of the decisions in
these courts, men began to perceive the necessity either of deserting the
martial tribunals of the barons, or of attempting to reform them NOTE XXIV.
.

VII. THE revival of the knowledge and study of the Roman law, The revival of
the Roman law contributes more liberal ideas concerning justice and order.
co-operated with the causes which I have mentioned, in introducing more just
and liberal ideas concerning the nature of government, and the administration
of justice. Among the calamities which the devastations of the barbarians who
broke in upon the Empire brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was their
overturning the system of Roman jurisprudence, the noblest monument of the
wisdom of that great people, formed to subdue and to govern the world. The
circumstances from which the Roman law fell into oblivion.
The laws and regulations of a civilized community, were altogether repugnant
to the manners and ideas of these fierce invaders. They had respect to objects,
of which a rude people had no conception; and were adapted to a state of
society with which they were entirely unacquainted. For this reason* wherever
they settled the Roman jurisprudence soon sunk into oblivion, and lay buried
for some centuries under the load of those institutions which the inhabitants
of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But toward the middle of the
twelfth century, a copy of Justinian's Pandects was accidently discovered in
Italy. By that time, the state of society was so far advanced, and the ideas of
men so much enlarged and improved by the occurrences of several centuries,
Circumstances which favored the revival of it.
during which they had continued in political union, that they were struck with
admiration of a system which their ancestors could not comprehend. Though they
had not hitherto attained such a degree of refinement, as to catch from the
ancients a relish for true philosophy, or speculative science; though they were
still insensible to the beauty and elegance of classical composition; they were
sufficiently qualified to judge with respect to the merit of their system of
laws, in which all the points most interesting to mankind, and the chief
objects of their attention in every age, were settled with discernment,
precision and equity. All men of letters studied this new science with
eagerness; and within a few years after the discovery of the Pandects,
professors of civil law were appointed, who taught it publicly in most
countries of Europe.

THE effects of having such a perfect model to study and to imitate were soon
manifest. Men, The effects of this upon the ideas of men, and the dispensation
of justice.
as soon as they were acquainted with fixed and general laws, perceived the
advantage of them, and became impatient to ascertain the principles and forms
by which judges should regulate their decisions. Such was the ardour with which
they carried on an undertaking of so great importance to society, that before
the close of the twelfth century, the feudal law was reduced into a regular
system; the code of canon law was enlarged and methodized; and the loose
uncertain customs of different provinces or kingdoms, were collected and
arranged with an order and accuracy acquired from the knowledge of Roman
jurisprudence. In some countries of Europe the Roman law was adopted as
subsidiary to their own municipal law; and all cases to which the latter did
not extend, were decided according to the principles of the former. In others,
the maxims as well as forms of Roman jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with
the laws of the country, and had a powerful, though less sensible, influence,
in improving and perfecting them NOTE XXV.
.

THESE various improvements in the system of jurisprudence, From all these
arose a distinction in professions.
and administration of justice, occasioned a change in manners of great
importance, and of extensive effect. They gave rise to a distinction of
professions; they obliged men to cultivate different talents, and to aim at
different accomplishments, in order to qualify themselves for the various
departments and functions which became necessary in society Dr. Ferguson's
Essay on the history of Civil Society, part. iv. sect. 1.
. Among uncivilized nations, there is but one profession honorable, that of
arms. All the ingenuity and vigor of the human mind are exerted in acquiring
military skill, or address. The functions of peace are few and simple; and
require no particular course of education or study, as a preparation for
discharging them. This was the state of Europe during several centuries. Every
gentleman, born a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was taught no
science but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes were feats of martial
prowess. Nor did the judicial character, which persons of noble birth were
alone entitled to assume, demand any degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers possessed. To recollect a few traditionary customs which
time had confirmed, and rendered respectable; to mark out the lists of battle
with due formality; to observe the issue of the combat; and to pronounce
whether it had been conducted according to the laws of arms; included every
thing that a baron who acted as a judge, found it necessary to understand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were fixed, The effects of this on
society.
when the rules of decision were committed to writing, and collected into a
body, law became a science, the knowledge of which required a regular course of
study, together with long attention to the practice of courts. Martial and
illiterate nobles, had neither leisure nor inclination to undertake a task so
laborious, as well as so foreign from all the occupations which they deemed
entertaining, or suitable to their rank. They gradually relinquished their
places in courts of justice, where their ignorance exposed them to contempt.
They became weary of attending to the discussion of cases, which grew too
intricate for them to comprehend. Not only the judicial determination of points
which were the subject of controversy, but the conduct of all legal business
and transactions was committed to persons trained by previous study and
application to the knowledge of law. An order of men to whom their
fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice, and to whom they looked up for
decision in their most important concerns, naturally acquired consideration and
influence in society. They were advanced to honors which had been considered
as the peculiar rewards of military virtue. They were entrusted with offices of
the highest dignity, and most extensive power. Thus, another profession than
that of arms, came to be introduced among the laity, and was reputed
honorable. The functions of civil life were attended to. The talents requisite
for discharging them were cultivated. A new road was opened to wealth and
eminence. The arts and virtues of peace were placed in their proper rank, and
received their due recompense NOTE XXVI.
.

VIII. WHILE improvements so important with respect to the state of society,
The spirit of chivalry introduces more liberal sentiments, and more generous
manners.
and the administration of justice, gradually made progress in Europe,
sentiments more liberal and generous had begun to animate the nobles. These
were inspired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though considered, commonly, as
a wild institution, the effect of caprice and the source of extravagance, arose
naturally from the state of society at that period, and had a very serious
influence in refining the manners of the European nations. The feudal state was
a state of perpetual war, Origin of chivalry.
rapine, and anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed were exposed every
moment to insults or injuries. The power of the sovereign was too limited to
prevent these wrongs; and the administration of justice too feeble to redress
them. There was scarce any protection against violence and oppression, but what
the valor and generosity of private persons afforded. The same spirit of
enterprise which had prompted so many gentlemen to take arms in defense of the
oppressed pilgrims in Palestine, incited others to declare themselves the
patrons and avengers of injured innocence at home. When the final reduction of
the Holy Land under the dominion of Infidels put an end to these foreign
expeditions, the latter was the only employment left for the activity and
courage of adventurers. To check the insolence of overgrown oppressors; to
succor the distressed; to rescue the helpless from captivity; to protect, or
to avenge women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could not bear arms in their
own defense; to redress wrongs and to remove grievances; were deemed acts of
the highest prowess and merit. Valor, humanity, courtesy, justice, honor,
were the characteristic qualities of chivalry. To these were added religion,
which mingled itself with every passion and institution during the middle ages,
and by infusing a large proportion of enthusiastic zeal, gave them such force,
as carried them to romantic excess. Men were trained to knighthood by a long
previous discipline; they were admitted into the order by solemnities no less
devout than pompous, every person of noble birth courted that honor; it was
deemed a distinction superior to royalty; and monarchs were proud to receive it
from the hands of private gentlemen.

THIS singular institution, Its beneficial effects.
in which valor, gallantry, and religion, were so strangely blended, was
wonderfully adapted to the taste and genius of martial nobles; and its effects
were soon visible in their manners. War was carried on with less ferocity, when
humanity came to be deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than courage.
More gentle and polished manners were introduced, when courtesy was recommended
as the most amiable of knightly virtues. Violence and oppression decreased,
when it was reckoned meritorious to check and to punish them. A scrupulous
adherence to truth, with the most religious attention to fulfill every
engagement, became the distinguished characteristic of a gentleman, because
chivalry was regarded as the school of honor, and inculcated the most delicate
sensibility with respect to that point. The admiration of these qualities,
together with the high distinctions and prerogatives conferred on knighthood in
every part of Europe, inspired persons of noble birth on some occasions with a
species of military fanaticism, and led them to extravagant enterprises. But
they imprinted deeply in their minds the principles of generosity and honor.
These were strengthened by every thing that can affect the senses, or touch the
heart. The wild exploits of those romantic knights who sallied forth in quest
of adventures, are well known, and have been treated with proper ridicule. The
political and permanent effects of the spirit of chivalry have been less
observed. Perhaps, the humanity which accompanies all the operations of war,
the refinements of gallantry, and the point of honor, the three chief
circumstances which distinguish modern from ancient manners, may be ascribed in
a great measure to this whimsical institution, seemingly of little benefit to
mankind. The sentiments which chivalry inspired, had a wonderful influence on
manners and conduct, during the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
centuries. They were so deeply rooted, that they continued to operate after the
vigor and reputation of the institution itself began to decline. Some
considerable transactions, recorded in the following history, resemble the
adventurous exploits of chivalry, rather than the well regulated operations of
sound policy. Some of the most eminent personages, whose characters will be
delineated, were strongly tinctured with this romantic spirit. Francis I. was
ambitious to distinguish himself by all the qualities of an accomplished
knight, and endeavored to imitate the enterprizing genius of chivalry in war,
as well as its pomp and courtesy during peace. The fame which he acquired by
these splendid actions, so far dazzled his more temperate rival, that he
departed on some occasions from his usual prudence and moderation, and emulated
Francis in deeds of prowess, or of gallantry NOTE. XXVII.
.

The progress of science has great influence on the manners and characters of
men.
IX. THE progress of science and the cultivation of literature, had considerable
effect in changing the manners or the European nations, and introducing that
civility and refinement by which they are now distinguished. At the time when
their Empire was overturned, the Romans, though they had lost that correct
taste which has rendered the productions of their ancestors the standards of
excellence, and models for imitation to succeeding ages, still preserved their
love of letters, and cultivated the arts with great ardour. Ignorance of the
middle ages.
But rude barbarians were so far from being struck with any admiration of these
unknown accomplishments, that they despised them. They were not arrived at that
state of society, in which those faculties of the human mind, that have beauty
and elegance for their objects, begin to unfold themselves. They were strangers
to all those wants and desires which are the parents of ingenious invention;
and as they did not comprehend either the merit or utility of the Roman arts,
they destroyed the monuments of them, with industry not inferior to that with
which their posterity have since studied to preserve or to recover them. The
convulsions occasioned by their settlement in the Empire; the frequent as well
as violent revolutions in every kingdom which they established; together with
the interior defects in the form of government which they introduced, banished
security and leisure; prevented the growth of taste, or the culture of science;
and kept Europe, during several centuries, in that state of ignorance which has
been already described. But the events and institutions which I have
enumerated, produced great alterations in society. As soon as their operation,
in restoring liberty and independence to one part of the community, began to be
felt; as soon as they began to communicate to all the members of society some
taste of the advantages arising from commerce, from public order, and from
personal security, the human mind became conscious of powers which it did not
formerly perceive, and fond of occupations or pursuits of which it was formerly
incapable. Toward the beginning of the twelfth century, we discern the first
symptoms of its awakening from that lethargy in which it had long been sunk,
and observe it turning with curiosity and attention toward new objects.

THE first literary efforts, however, The first literary efforts ill directed,
and the causes of this.
of the European nations in the middle ages, were extremely ill-directed. Among
nations, as well as individuals, the powers of imagination attain some degree
of vigor before the intellectual faculties are much exercised in speculative
or abstract disquisition. Men are poets before they are philosophers. They feel
with sensibility, and describe with force, when they have made but little
progress in investigation or reasoning. The age of Homer and of Hesiod long
preceded that of Thales, or of Socrates. But, unhappily for literature, our
ancestors deviating from this course which nature points out, plunged at once
into the depths of abstruse and and metaphysical inquiry. They had been
converted to the Christian faith, soon after they settled in their new
conquests. But they did not receive it pure. The presumption of men had added
to the simple and instructive doctrines of Christianity, the theories of a vain
philosophy, that attempted to penerate into mysteries, and to decide questions
which the limited faculties of the human mind are unable to comprehend, or to
resolve. These overcurious speculations were incorporated with the system of
religion, and came to be considered as the most essential part of it. As soon,
then, as curiosity prompted men to enquire and to reason, these were the
subjects which first presented themselves, and engaged their attention. The
scholastic theology, with its infinite train of bold disquisitions, and subtle
distinctions concerning points which are not the object of human reason, was
the first production of the spirit of enquiry after it began to resume some
degree of activity and vigor in Europe. It was not this circumstance alone
that gave such a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they began again to
exercise talents which they had so long neglected. Most of the persons who
attempted to revive literature in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, had
received instruction, or derived their principles of science from the Greeks in
the Eastern Empire, or from the Arabians in Spain and Africa. Both these
people, acute and inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences which they
cultivated. The former rendered theology a system of speculative refinement, or
of endless controversy. The latter communicated to philosophy a spirit of
metaphysical and frivolous subtlety. Misled by these guides, the persons who
first applied to science were involved in a maze of intricate inquiries.
Instead of allowing their fancy to take its natural range, and to produce such
works of invention as might have improved their taste, and refined their
sentiments; instead of cultivating those arts which embellished human life, and
render it comfortable; they were fettered by authority, they were led astray by
example, and wasted the whole force of their genius in speculations as
unavailing as they were difficult.

They had however considerable effects.
BUT fruitless and ill-directed as these speculations were, their novelty
rouzed, and their boldness interested the human mind. The ardour with which men
pursued these uninviting studies, was astonishing. Genuine philosophy was never
cultivated, in any enlightened age, with greater zeal. Schools, upon the model
of these instituted by Charlemange, were opened in every cathedral, and almost
in every monastery of note. Colleges and universities were erected, and formed
into communities or corporations governed by their own laws, and invested with
separate and extensive jurisdiction over their own members. A regular course of
studies was planned. Privileges of great value were conferred on masters and
scholars. Academical titles and honors of various kinds were invented, as a
recompense for both. Nor was it in the schools alone that superiority in
science led to reputation and authority; it became the object of respect in
life, and advanced such as acquired it to a rank of no inconsiderable eminence.
Allured by all these advantages, an incredible number of students resorted to
these new seats of learning, and crowded with eagerness into that new path
which was opened to fame and distinction.

BUT how considerable soever these first efforts may appear, A circumstance
which prevented their being more extensive.
there was one circumstance which prevented the effects of them from being as
extensive as they ought to have been. All the languages in Europe, during the
period under review, were barbarous. They were destitute of elegance, of force,
and even of perspicuity. No attempt had been hitherto made to improve or to
polish them. The Latin tongue was consecrated by the church to religion. Custom
with authority scarce less sacred, had appropriated it to literature. All the
sciences cultivated in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were taught in
Latin. All books with respect to them were written in that language. To have
treated of any important subject in a modern language, would have been deemed a
degradation of it. This confined science within a very narrow circle. The
learned alone were admitted into the temple of knowledge; the gate was shut
against all others, who were allowed to remain involved in their former
darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, Its influence on manners merits
attention.
during several ages, from diffusing itself through society, and its influence
was circumscribed; the progress of it may be mentioned, nevertheless, among the
great causes which contributed to introduce a change of manners into Europe.
That ardent, though ill-judged spirit of enquiry which I have described,
occasioned a fermentation of mind which put ingenuity and invention in motion,
and gave them vigor. It led men into a new employment of their faculties,
which they found to be agreeable as well as interesting. It accustomed them to
exercises and occupations which tended to soften their manners, and to give
them some relish for those gentle virtues, which are pecular to nations among
whom science has been cultivated with success NOTE XXVIII.
.

The progress of commerce had great influence on manners and government.
X. THE progress of commerce had considerable influence in polishing the manners
of the European nations, and in leading them to order, equal laws, and
humanity. The wants of men, in the original and most simple state of society,
are so few, and their desires so limited, that they rest contented with the
natural productions of their climate and soil, or with what they can add to
these by their own rude industry. They have no superfluities to dispose of, and
few necessities that demand a supply. Every little community subsisting on its
own domestic stock, and satisfied with it, is either unacquainted with the
states around it, Low state of commerce in the middle ages.
or at variance with them. Society and manners must be considerably improved,
and many provisions must be made for public order and personal security, before
a liberal intercourse can take place between different nations. We find,
accordingly, that the first effect of the settlement of the barbarians in the
Empire, was to divide those nations which the Roman power had united. Europe
was broken into many separte communities. The communication between these
divided states ceased almost totally during several centuries. Navigation was
dangerous in seas infested by pirates; nor could strangers trust to a friendly
reception in the ports of uncivilized nations. Even between distant parts of
the same kingdom, the intercourse was rare and difficult. The lawless rapine of
banditti, together with the avowed exactions of the nobles, scarce less
formidable and oppressive, rendered a journey of any length a perilous
enterprise. Fixed to the spot in which they resided, the greater part of the
inhabitants of Europe lost, in a great measure, the knowledge of remote
regions, and were unacquainted with their names, their situations, their
climates, and their commodities.

VARIOUS causes, Causes of its revival.
contributed to revive the spirit of commerce, and to renew in some degree the
intercourse between different nations. The Italians, by their connection with
Constantinople and other cities of the Greek empire, preserved in their own
country some relish for the precious commodities, and curious manufactures of
the East. They communicated some knowledge of these to the countries contiguous
in Italy. This commerce, however, was extremely limited, nor was the
intercourse considerable which it occasioned between different nations. The
Crusades, by leading multitudes from every corner of Europe into Asia, opened a
more extensive communication between the East and West, which subsisted for two
centuries; and though the object of these expeditions was conquest and not
commerce; though the issue of them proved as unfortutunate, as the motives for
undertaking them were wild and enthusiastic, their commercial effects, as has
been shown, were both beneficial and permanent. During the continuance of the
Crusades, the great cities in Italy and in other countries of Europe acquired
liberty, and together with it such privileges as rendered them respectable and
independent communities. Thus, in every state there was formed a new order of
citizens, to whom commerce presented itself as their proper object, and opened
to them a certain path to wealth and dignity. Soon after the close of the Holy
war, the mariner's compass was invented, which, by rendering navigation more
secure as well as more adventrous, facilitated the communication between remote
nations, and brought them nearer to each other.

First among the Italians.
THE Italian States, during the same period, established a regular commerce with
the East in the ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all the rich products of
the Indies. They introduced into their own territories manufactures of various
kinds, and carried them on with great ingenuity and vigor. They attempted new
arts; and transplanted from warmer climates, to which they had been hitherto
deemed peculiar, several natural productions which now furnish the materials of
a lucrative and extended commerce. All these commodities, whether imported from
Asia, or produced by their own skill, they disposed of to great advantage among
the other people of Europe, who, began to acquire some taste of elegance
unknown to their ancestors, or despised by them. During the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, the commerce of Europe was almost entirely in the hands
of the Italians, more commonly known in those ages by the name of Lombards.
Companies or societies of Lombard merchants settled in every different kingdom.
They were taken under the immediate protection of the several governments. They
enjoyed extensive privileges and immunities. The operation of the ancient
barbarous laws concerning strangers was suspended with respect to them. They
became the carriers, the manufacturers, and the bankers of all Europe.

Then by means of the Hanseatick.
WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, cultivated trade with such industry
and success, the commercial spirit awakened in the north, toward the middle of
the thirteenth century. As the nations around the Baltic were, at that time,
extremely barbarous, and infested that sea with their piracies, this obliged
the cities of Lubeck and Hamburgh, soon after they began to open some trade
with these people, to enter into a league of mutual defense. They derived such
advantages from this union, that other towns acceded to their confederacy, and,
in a short time, eighty of the most considerable cities scattered through those
vast countries which stretch from the bottom of the Baltic to Cologne on the
Rhine, joined in the famous Hanseatick league, which became so formidable, that
its alliance was courted, and its enmity was dreaded by the greatest monarchs.
The members of this powerful association formed the first systematick plan of
commerce known in the middle ages, and conducted it by common laws enacted in
their general assemblies. They supplied the rest of Europe with naval stores,
and pitched on different towns, the most eminent of which was Bruges in
Flanders, where they established staples in which their commerce was regularly
carried on. Thither the Lombards brought the productions of India, together
with the manufactures of Italy, and exchanged them for the more bulky, but not
less useful commodities of the North. The Hanseatick merchants disposed of the
cargoes which they received from the Lombards, in the ports of the Baltic, or
carried them up the great rivers into the interior parts of Germany.

THIS regular intercourse opened between the North and South of Europe,
Commerce makes progress in the Netherlands.
made them sensible of their mutual wants, and created such new and vast
demands for commodities of every kind, that it excited among the inhabitants of
the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in carrying on the two great
manufactures of wool and flax, which seem to have been considerable in that
country as far back as the age of Charlemagne. As Bruges became the center of
communication between the Lombard and Hanseatick merchants, the Flemings traded
with both in that city to such extent as well as advantage, as spread among
them a general habit of industry, which long rendered Flanders and the adjacent
provinces the most opulent, the most populous, and best cultivated countries in
Europe.

STRUCK with the flourishing state of these provinces, And in England
of which he discerned the true cause, Edward III. of England endeavored to
excite a spirit of industry among his own subjects, who, blind to the
advantages of their situation, and ignorant of the source from which opulence
was destined to slow into their country, totally neglected commerce, and did
not even attempt those manufactures, the materials of which they furnished to
foreigners. By alluring Flemish artisans to settle in his dominions, as well as
by many wise laws for the encouragement and regulation of trade, he gave a
beginning to the woolen manufactures of England, and first turned the active
and enterprizing genius of his people toward those arts which have raised the
English to the highest rank among commercial nations.

The beneficial effects of this.
THIS increase of commerce, and of intercourse between nations, how
inconsiderable soever it may appear in respect of their rapid and extensive
progress during the last and present age, seems vast, when we compare it with
the state of both in Europe previous to the twelfth century. It did not fail of
producing great effects. Commerce tends to wear off those prejudices which
maintain distinction and animosity between nations. It softens and polishes the
manners of men. It unites them, by one of the strongest of all ties, the desire
of supplying their mutual wants. It disposes them to peace, by establishing in
every state an order of citizens bound by their interest to be the guardians of
public tranquillity. As soon as the commercial spirit begins to acquire vigor,
and to gain an ascendant in any society, we discover a new genius in its
policy, its alliances, its wars, and its negociations. Conspicuous proofs of
this occur in the history of the Italian States, of the Hanseatick league, and
the cities of the Netherlands during the period under review. In proportion as
commerce made its way into the different countries of Europe, they successively
turned their attention to those objects, and adopted those manners, which
occupy and distinguish polished nations NOTE XXIX.
.

A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. SECTION II. View of the
Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national
force requisite in foreign operations.
SUCH are the events and institutions, State of society greatly improved at the
beginning of the fifteenth century.
which by their powerful operation contributed, gradually, to introduce more
regular government and more polished manners into the various nations of
Europe. When we survey the state of society, or the character of individuals,
at the opening of the fifteenth century, and then turn back to view the
condition of both at the time when the barbarous tribes which overturned the
Roman power completed their settlement in their new conquests, the progress
which mankind had made toward order and refinement will appear immense.

GOVERNMENT, however, Still defective with respect to the command of the
national force.
was still far from having attained that state, in which extensive monarchies
act with united vigor, or carry on great undertakings with perseverance and
success. Small tribes or communities, even in their rudest state, may operate
in concert, and exert their utmost force. They are excited to act not by the
distant objects, and subtle speculations which interest or affect men in
polished societies, but by their present feelings. The insults of an enemy
kindle resentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens emulation; these
passions communicate from breast to breast, and all the members of the
community, with united ardour, rush into the field in order to gratify their
revenge, or to acquire distinction. But in widely extended states, such as the
great kingdoms of Europe at the beginning of the fifteenth century, where there
is little intercourse between the distant members of the community, and where
every great enterprise requires previous concert and long preparation, nothing
can rouse and call forth their united strength, but the absolute command of a
Despot, or the powerful influence of regular policy. Of the former the vast
Empires in the East are an example; the irresistible mandate of the Sovereign
reaches the most remote provinces of his dominions, and compels whatever number
of his subjects he is pleased to summon, to follow his standard. The kingdoms
of Europe, in the present age, are an instance of the latter; the Prince, by
the less violent, but no less effectual operations of laws and a well regulated
government, is enabled to avail himself of the whole force of his state, and to
employ it in enterprises which require strenuous and persevering efforts.

The power of Monarchs very limited
BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, the political constitution in all
the kingdoms of Europe was very different from either of these states of
government. The several monarchs, though they had somewhat enlarged the
boundaries of prerogative by successful encroachments on the immunities and
privileges of the nobility, were possessed of an authority extremely limited.
The laws and interior police of kingdoms, though much improved by the various
events and regulations which I have enumerated were still feeble and imperfect.
In every country, a numerous body of nobles, still formidable notwithstanding
the various expedients employed to depress them, watched all the motions of
their sovereign with a jealous attention, which set bounds to his ambition, and
either prevented his forming schemes of extensive enterprise, or thwarted the
execution of them.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so extremely small as to be
inadequate to any great undertaking. Their revenues small.
He depended for extraordinary supplies on the good will of his subjects, who
granted them often with a reluctant and always with a sparing hand.

AS the revenues of Princes were inconsiderable, Their armies unfit for
conquest.
the armies which they could bring into the field were unfit for long and
effectual service. Instead of being able to employ troops trained to skill in
arms, and to military subordination, by regular discipline, Monarchs were
obliged to depend on such forces as their vassals conducted to their standard
in consequence of their military tenure. These, as they were bound to remain
under arms only for a short time, could not march far from their usual place of
residence, and being more attached to the lord of whom they held, than to the
Sovereign whom they served, were often as much disposed to counteract as to
forward his schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been more subject to the
command of the monarch, proper instruments to carry into execution any great
and arduous enterprise. The strength of an army formed either for conquest or
defense lies in infantry. To the stability and discipline of their legions,
consisting chiefly of infantry, the Romans during the times of the republic
were indebted for all their victories; and when their descendants, forgetting
the institutions which had led them to universal dominion, so far altered their
military system as to place their principal confidence in a numerous cavalry,
the undisciplined impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought mostly on
foot, was sufficient, as I have already observed, to overcome them. These
nations soon after they settled in their new conquests, uninstructed by the
fatal error of the Romans, relinquished the customs of their ancestors and
converted the chief force of their armies into cavalry. Among the Romans this
change was occasioned by the effeminacy of their troops, who could not endure
the fatigues of service, which their more virtuous and hardy ancestors
sustained with ease. Among the people who established the new monarchies into
which Europe was divided, this innovation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorning to mingle with persons of
inferior rank, aimed at being distinguished from them in the field, as well as
during peace. The institution of chivalry, and the frequency of Tournaments, in
which knights, in complete armor, entered the lists on horseback with
extraordinary splendor, displaying amazing address, and force, and valor,
brought cavalry into still greater esteem. The fondness for that service
increased to such a degree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, the armies of Europe were composed almost entirely of cavalry. No
gentleman would appear in the field but on horseback. To serve in any other
manner he would have deemed derogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of
distinction, was called The battle, and on it alone depended the fate of every
action. The infantry, collected from the dregs and refuse of the people, ill
armed and worse disciplined, was of no account.

AS these circumstances rendered the operations of particular kingdoms less
considerable and less vigorous, They are incapable of forming any general or
extensive plan of operation.
so they long kept the Princes of Europe from giving such attention to the
schemes and transactions of their neighbors, as led them to form any regular
system of public security. They prevented them from uniting in confederacy, or
from acting with concert, in order to establish such a distribution and balance
of power, as should hinder any state from rising to a superiority, which might
endanger the general liberty and independance. During several centuries, the
nations of Europe appear to have considered themselves as separate societies,
scarce connected together by any common interest, and little concerned in each
others affairs or operations. An extensive commerce did not afford them an
opportunity of observing and penetrating into the schemes of every different
state. They had not ambassadors residing constantly in every court to watch and
give early intelligence of all its motions. The expectation of remote
advantages, or the prospect of distant and contingent evils were not sufficient
to excite nations to take arms. They only, who were within the sphere of
immediate danger, and unavoidably exposed to injury or insult, thought
themselves interested in any contest, or bound to take precautions for their
own safety.

WHOEVER records the transactions of any of the more considerable European
states during the two last centuries, They were little connected with each
other.
must write the history of Europe. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
period, have been formed into one great system, so closely united, that each
holding a determinate station, the operations of one are so felt by all, as to
influence their councils and regulate their measures. But previous to the
fifteenth century, unless when vicinity of territory rendered the occasions of
discord frequent and unavoidable, or when national emulation fomented or
embittered the spirit of hostility, the affairs of different countries are
seldom interwoven. In each kingdom of Europe great events and revolutions
happened, which the other powers beheld with the same indifference as if they
had been uninterested spectators, to whom the effect of these transactions
could never extend.

DURING the violent struggles between France and England, A confirmation of
this from the affairs of France.
and notwithstanding the alarming progress which was made toward rendering one
Prince the master of both of these kingdoms, hardly one measure which can be
considered as the result of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in order
to guard against an event so fatal to Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy and
Bretagne, whom their situation would not permit to remain neutral, engaged, it
is true, in the contest; but they more frequently took the part to which their
passions prompted them, than that which a just discernment of the danger which
threatened themselves and the tranquillity of Europe should have pointed out.
The other Princes, seemingly unaffected by the alternate successes of the
contending parties, left them to decide the quarrel, or interposed only by
feeble and ineffectual negociations.

From those of Spain.
NOTWITHSTANING the perpetual hostilities in which the various kingdoms of Spain
were engaged during several centuries, and the successive occurrences which
visibly tended to unite that part of the continent into one great monarchy, the
Princes of Europe scarce took a single step, which discovers that they gave any
attention to that important event. They permitted a power to arise
imperceptibly, and to acquire strength there, which soon became formidable to
all its neighbors.

AMIDST the violent convulsions with which the spirit of domination in the Sea
of Rome, From those of Germany.
and the turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitated the Empire, neither
the authority of the Popes, seconded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor
the solicitations of the Emperors, could induce any of the powerful monarchs in
Europe, to engage in their quarrel, or to avail themsevles of many favorable
opportunities of interposing with effect and advantage.

THIS amazing inactivity, during transactions so interesting, This inactivity
occasioned entirely by the state of government.
is not to be imputed to any incapacity of discerning their political
consequences. The power of judging with sagacity, and of acting with vigor, is
the portion of men in every age. The Monarchs who reigned in the different
kingdoms of Europe during several centuries were not blind to their particular
interest, negligent of the public safety, of strangers to the method of
securing both. If they did not adopt that salutary system, which teaches modern
politicians to take the alarm at the prospect of distant dangers, which prompts
them to check the first encroachments of any formidable power, and which
renders each state the guardian, in some degree, of the rights and independance
of all its neghbours, this was owing entirely to the imperfections and
disorders in the civil government of each country, which made it impossible for
sovereigns to act suitably to those ideas which the posture of affairs, and
their own observation must have suggested.

BUT during the course of the fifteenth century, various events happened,
Events happened during the 15th century which rendered the efforts of nations
more powerful and extensive.
which by giving Princes more entire command of the force in their respective
dominions, rendered their operations more vigorous and extensive. In
consequence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms becoming more frequently
as well as more intimately connected, they were gradually accustomed to act in
concert and confederacy, and were insensibly prepared for forming a system of
policy, in order to establish or to preserve such a balance of power as was
most consistent with the general security. It was during the reign of Charles
the fifth, that the ideas, on which this system is founded, first came to be
fully understood. It was then, that the maxims by which it has been uniformly
maintained since that era were universally adopted. On this account, a view of
the causes and events which contributed to establish a plan of policy more
salutary and extensive than any that has taken place in the conduct of human
affairs, is not only a necessary introduction to the following work, but is a
capital object in the history of Europe.

THE first event, The first of these was the depriving the English of their
territories on the continent.
that occasioned any consderable alteration in the arrangement of affairs in
Europe, was the annexation of the extensive territories, which England
possessed on the continent, to the crown of France. While the English were
masters of several of the most fertile and opulent provinces in France, and a
great part of its most martial inhabitants were bound to follow their standard,
their monarchs considered themselves rather as the rivals, than as the vassals
of the sovereign of whom they held. The Kings of France, circumscribed and
thwarted in their schemes and operations by an adversary no less jealous than
formidable, durst not venture upon any enterprise of importance or of
difficulty. The English were always at hand, ready to oppose them. They
disputed even their right to their crown, and being able to penetrate, with
ease, into the heart of the kingdom, could arm against them those very hands
which ought to have been employed in their defense. Timid counsels, and feeble
efforts were natural to monarchs in such a situation. France, dismembered and
overawed, could not attain its proper station in the system of Europe. But the
death of Henry of England, happily for France, and not unfortunately for his
own country, delivered the French from the calamity of having a foreign master
seated on their throne. The weakness of along minority, the dissensions in the
English court, together with the unsteady and languid conduct which these
occasioned, afforded the French a favorable opportunity of recovering the
territories which they had lost. The native valor of the nobility of France
heightened to an enthusiastic confidence, by a supposed interposition of
heaven in their behalf; conducted in the field by skilful leaders; and directed
in the cabinet by a prudent monarch; was exerted with such vigor and success,
during this favorable juncture, as not only wrested from the English their new
conquests, but stripped them of their ancient possessions, and reduced them
within the narow precincts of Calais, and its petty territory.

The effect of this on increasing the power of the French monarchy.
AS soon as so many considerable provinces were reunited to their dominions,
the Kings of France, conscious of this acquisition of strength, began to form
bolder schemes of interior policy, as well as of foreign operations. They
immediately became formidable to their neighbors, who began to fix their
attention on their measures and motions, the importance of which they fully
perceived. From this era, France, possessed of the advantages which it derives
from the situation and contiguity of its territories, as well as from the
number and valor of its people, rose to new influence in Europe, and was the
first power in a condition to give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the states
around it.

On the state of the military force in the nation.
NOR was France indebted for this increase of importance merely to the reunion
of the provinces which had been torn from it. A circumstance attended the
recovery of these, which, though less considerable, and less observed,
contributed not a little to give additional vigor and decision to all the
efforts of that monarchy. During the obstinate struggles between France and
England, all the defects of the military system under the feudal government
were sensibly felt. A war of long continuance languished, when carried on by
troops bound and accustomed to keep the field only for a few weeks. Armies,
composed chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, were unfit either for the attack or
the defense of the many towns and castles, which it became necessary to guard
or to reduce. In order to obtain such permanent and effective force, as became
requisite during these lengthened contests, the Kings of France took into their
pay considerable bands of mercenary soldiers, levied sometimes among their own
subjects, and sometimes in foreign countries. But as the feudal policy provided
no sufficient fund for such extraordinary service, these adventurers were
dismissed at the close of every campaign, or upon any prospect of
accommodation; and having been little accustomed to restraints of discipline,
they frequently turned their arms against the country which they had been hired
to defend, and desolated it with no less cruelty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept constantly on foot and regularly trained to military
subordination, It occasions the introduction of standing armies.
would have supplied what was wanting in the feudal constitution, and have
furnished Princes with the means of executing enterprises, to which they were
then unequal. Such an establishment, however, was so repugnant to the genius of
feudal policy, and so incompatible with the privilege* and pretensions of the
nobles, that during several centuries no monarch was either so bold, or so
powerful, as to venture on any step toward introducing it. At last, Charles
VII. availing himself of the reputation which he had acquired by his successes
against the English, and taking advantage of the impressions of terror which
such a formidable enemy had left upon the minds of his subjects, executed that
which his predecessors durst not attempt. Under pretense of keeping always on
foot a force sufficient to defend the kingdom against any sudden invasion of
the English, he, A. D. 1445.
at the time when he disbanded his other troops, retained under arms a body of
nine thousand cavalry, and of sixteen thousand infantry. He appropriated funds
for the regular payment of these; he stationed them in different places of the
kingdom, according to his pleasure; and appointed the officers, who commanded
them and disciplined them. The prime nobility co^^^^ this service, in which
they were taught to depend on their sovereign, to execute his orders, and to
look up to him as the judge and rewarder of their merit. The feudal militia,
composed of the vassals whom the nobles could call out to follow their
standard, as it was in no degree comparable to a body of soldiers regularly
trained to war, sunk gradually in reputation. The strength of armies came to be
estimated only by the number of disciplined men which they contained. In less
than a century, the nobles and their military tenants, though sometime summoned
to the field, according to ancient form, were considered as an encumbrance upon
the troops with which they acted; and were viewed with contempt by soldiers
accustomed to the vigorous and steady operations of regular service.

The effects of this.
THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, by establishing the first standing
army known in Europe, occasioned an important revolution in its affairs and
policy. By depriving the nobles of that direction of the military force of the
state, which had raised them to such high authority and importance, it gave a
deep wound to the feudal aristocracy, in that part where its power seemed to be
most complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular troops, at a time when there was
scarce a squadron or company kept in constant pay in any other part of Europe,
acquired such advantages, either for attack or defense, ever its neighbors,
that self-preservation made it necessary for them to imitate its example.
Mercenary troops were introduced into all the considerable kingdoms on the
continent. They gradually became the only military force that was employed or
trusted. It has long been the chief object of policy to increase and to support
them, and the great aim of Princes or ministers to discredit and to annihilate
all other means of national activity or defense.

AS the Kings of France get the start of other powers in establishing in their
dominions a military force, The monarchs of France encouraged to extend their
prerogative.
which enabled them to carry on foreign operations with more vigor, and to
greater extent, so they were (...) first who effectually broke the feudal
aristocracy, and humbled the great vassals of the crown, who by their
exorbitant power had long circumscribed the royal prerogative within very
narrow limits, and had rendered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe
inconfiderable. Many things concurred to undermine, gradually, the power of the
feudal aristocracy in France. The wealth and property of the nobility were
greatly impaired during the long wars, which the kingdom was obliged to
maintain with the English. The extraordinary zeal with which they exerted
themselves in defense of their country against its ancient enemies, exhausted
the fortunes of some great families. As almost every province in the kingdom
was, in its turn, the seat of war, the lands of others were exposed to the
depredations of the enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary troops which their
sovereigns hired occasionally, but could not pay, or were desolated with rage
still more destructive by the peasants, in their different insurrections. At
the same time, the necessities of government having forced their Kings upon the
desperate expedient of making great and sudden alterations in the current coin
of the kingdom, the fines, quit-rents, and other payments, fixed by ancient
custom, sunk much in value, and the revenues of a fief were reduced far below
the sum which it had once yielded. During their contests with the English, in
which a generous nobility courted every station where danger appeared, or
honor could be gained, many families of note became extinct, and their fiefs
were reunited to the crown. Other fiefs, in a long course of years, ^ell to
female heirs, and were divided among them; were diminished by profuse donations
to the church, or were broken and split by the succession of remote collateral
heirs Boul^i^villiers Histoire de Government de France, L^t^^ ^ii.
.

The progress of the royal power under Charles VII.
ENCOURAGED by these manifest symptom^ of decline in that body which he wished
to depress, Charles VII. during the first interval of peace with England, made
several efforts toward establishing the regal prerogative on the ruins of the
aristocracy. But his obligations to the nobles were so many, as well as recent,
and their services in recovering the kingdom so splendid, as made it necessary
for him to proceed with moderation and caution. Such, however, was the
authority which the crown had acquired by the progress of its arms against the
English, and so much was the power of the nobility diminished, that, without
any opposition, he soon made innovations of great consequence in the
constitution. He not only established that formidable body of regular troops,
which has been mentioned, but he was the first monarch of France, who, by his
royal edict, without the concurrence of the States General of the kingdom, A.
D. 1440.
levied an extraordinary subsidy on his people. He prevailed likewise with his
subjects, to render several taxes perpetual, which had formerly been imposed
occasionally, and exacted during a short time. By means of all these, he
acquired such an increase of power, and extended his prerogative so far beyond
its ancient limits, that, from being the most dependant Prince who had ever sat
upon the throne of France, he came to possess, durring the latter years of his
reign, a degree of authority which none of his predecessors had enjoyed for
several ages Histoire de France par Velly and Villaret, tom. xv. 331, etc, 389
tom, xvi. 324, Variations de la Monarchy Francoise, tom. iii. 162.
.

Under Louis XI.
THAT plan of humbling the nobility which Charles formed, his son Louis XI.
carried on with a bolder spirit, and with greater success. Louis was formed by
nature to be a tyrant; and at whatever period he had been called to ascend the
throne, his reign must have abounded with schemes to oppress his people, and to
render his own power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel; a stranger to every
principle of integrity, and regardless of decency, he scorned all the
restraints which a sense of honor, or the desire of fame, impose even on
ambitious (...) Sagacious, at the same time, to discern his true interest, and
influenced by that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with a persevering
industry, and of adhering to it with a systematic spirit from which no object
could divert, and no danger could deter him.

THE maxims of his administration were as profound as they were fatal to the
privileges of the nobility. His measures for humbling the nobility.
He filled all the departments of government with new men, and often with
persons, whom he called from the lowest as well as most despised functions in
life, and raised at pleasure to stations of great power or trust. These were
his only confidents, whom he consulted in forming his plans, and to whom he
committed the execution of them: While the nobles, accustomed to be the
companions, the favorites, and the ministers of their sovereigns, were treated
with such studied and mortifying neglect, that if they would not submit to
follow a court, in which they appeared without any shadow of their ancient
power, they were obliged to retire to their castles, where they remained
unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied with having rendered the nobles of less
consideration, by taking out of their hands the sole direction of affairs,
Louis added insult to neglect; and by violating their most valuable privileges,
endeavored to degrade the order, and to reduce the members of it to the same
level with other subjects. Persons of the highest rank among them, if so bold
as to oppose his schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken the jealousy of his
capricious temper, were prosecuted with rigor, from which all who belonged to
the order of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they were tried by judges who had
no right to take cognizance of their actions; and were subjected to torture, or
condemned to an infamous death, without regard to their birth or condition. The
people, accustomed to see the blood of the most illustrious personages shed by
the hands of the common executioner, to behold them shut up in dungeons, and
carried about in cages of iron, began to view the nobility with less reverence
than formerly, and looked up with terror to the royal authority, which seemed
to have humbled or annihilated every other power in the kingdom.

And of dividing them.
AT the same time, Louis, being afraid that opposition might rouse the nobles,
whom the rigor of his government had intimidated, or that self-preservation
might teach them, at last, to unite, dexterously scattered among them the seeds
of discord; and industriously fomented those ancient animosities between the
great families, which the spirit of jealousy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and still kept alive. To accomplish
this, all the arts of intrigue, all the mysteries and refinements of his
fradulent policy were employed, and with such success, that at a juncture which
required the most strenuous efforts, as well as the most perfect union, the
nobles never acted, except during one short sally of resentment at the
beginning of his reign, either with vigor or with concert.

He adds to the number of standing forces.
AS he stripped the nobility of their privileges, he added to the power and
prerogative of the crown. In order to have at command such a body of soldiers
as might be sufficient to crush any force that his disaffected subjects could
draw together, he not only kept on foot the regular troops which his father had
raised, but took into his pay six thousand Swiss, the best disciplined and most
formidable infantry, at that time in Europe Mem. de Comines, tom. ^i. ^67. Dan.
Hist. de la Milice Frencoise, tom. i. ^^2.
. From the jealousy natural to tyrants, he confided in these foreign
mercenaries, as the most devoted instruments of oppression, and the most
faithful guardians of the power which he had acquired.

He augmentsed the revenues of the crown.
GREAT funds were requisite, not only to defray the expense of this additional
establishment, but to supply the sums employed in the various enterprises which
the restless activity of his genius prompted him to undertake. But the
prerogative that his father had assumed of levying taxes, without the
concurrence of the States General, which he was careful not only to retain but
extend, enabled him to provide in some measure for the increasing charges of
government.

WHAT his prerogative, His address in managing the assembly of states.
enlarged as it was, could not furnish, his address procured. He was the first
monarch in Europe who discovered the method of managing those great assemblies,
in which the feudal policy had vested the power of granting subsidies and of
imposing taxes. He first taught other princes the fatal art of beginning their
attack on public liberty, by corrupting the source from which it should flow.
By exerting all his power and address in influencing the election of
representatives, by bribing or overawing the members, and by various changes
which he artfully made in the form of their deliberations, Louis acquired such
entire direction of these assemblies, that, from being the vigilant guardians
of the privileges and property of the people, he rendered them tamely
subservient, in promoting the most odious measures of his reign Mem. de Comin.
tom. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid. tom. ii. p. 71.
. As no power remained to set bounds to his exactions, he not only continued
all the taxes imposed by his father, but made immense additions to them, which
amounted to a sum that appeared astonishing to his contemporaries Mem. de Com.
tom. i. 334.
. Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of 1,800,000 francs; Louis XI. raised
4,700,000. The former had in pay 9000 cavalry, and 16,000 infantry. The letter
augmented the cavalry to 15,000, and the infantry to 26,000. Mem. de Comines,
i. 384. During the latter years of his reign, he kept the greater part of these
encamped in one place, and ready to march on the shortest ^^rning. Ibid. 381.


NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the crown that Louis increased; He
enlarges the bounds of the French monarchy.
he extended its territories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got
possession of Rousillon by purchase; Provence was conveyed to him by the will
of Charles de Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold, he seized with a
strong hand Burgundy and Artois, which had belonged to that Prince. Thus,
during the course of a single reign, France was formed into one compact
kingdom, and the steady unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued the
haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but established a species of government,
scarce less absolute, or less terrible, than eastern despotism.

By all these the French government rendered more active and enterprizing.
BUT fatal as his administration was to the liberties of his subjects, the
authority which he acquired, the resources of which he became master, and his
freedom from restraint both in concerting his plans and in executing them,
rendered his reign active and enterprizing. Louis negociated in all the courts
of Europe; he observed the motions of all his neighbors; he engaged either as
principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great transaction; his resolutions were
prompt; his operations vigorous; and upon every emergence he could call forth
into action the whole force of his kingdom. From the era of his reign, instead
of the feeble efforts of monarchs fettered and circumscribed by a jealous
nobility, the Kings of France, more masters at home, have exerted themselves
more abroad, have formed more extensive schemes of foreign conquests, and have
carried on war with a spirit and vigor long unknown in Europe.

Steps taken toward extending the power of the crown in England.
THE example which Louis set was too inviting not to be imitated by other
Princes. Henry VII. as soon as he was seated on the throne of England, formed
the plan of enlarging his own prerogative, by breaking the power of the
nobility. The circumstances under which he undertook to execute it, were less
favorable than those under which Charles VII. had made the same attempt; and
the spirit with which he conducted it, was very different from that of Louis
XI. Charles, by the success of his arms against the English, by the merit of
having expelled them out of so many provinces, had established himself so
firmly in the confidence of his people, as encouraged him to make bold
encroachments on the ancient constitution. The daring genius of Louis broke
through every barrier, and endeavored to overturn or to remove every obstacle
that stood in his way. But Henry held the scepter by a disputed title; a
popular faction was ready every moment to take arms against him; and after long
civil wars, during which the nobility had often displayed their power in
creating and deposing Kings, he felt that the regal authority had been so much
relaxed, and that he entered into possession of a prerogative so much abridged,
as made it necessary to carry on his measures deliberately, and without any
violent exertion. He endeavored to undermine that formidable structure, which
he durst not attack with open force. His schemes, though cautious and slow in
their operation, were prudent, and productive in the end of great effects. By
his laws, permitting the barons to break the entails of their estates, and to
expose them to sale; by his regulations to prevent the nobility from keeping in
their service those numerous bands of retainers, which rendered them
formidable, and turbulent; by encouraging population, agriculture and commerce;
by securing to his subjects, during a long reign, the enjoyment of the
blessings which flow from the arts of peace; by accustoming them to an
administration of government, under which the laws were executed with
steadiness and vigor; he made imperceptibly such alterations in the English
constitution, that he transmitted to his successor authority so extensive, as
rendered him one of the most absolute Monarchs in Europe, and capable of the
greatest and most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, And in Spain.
the union of all its crowns by the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the
glory that they acquired by the conquest of Granada, which brought the odious
dominion of the Moors to a period; the command of the great armies which it had
been necessary to keep constantly on foot, in order to accomplish this; the
wisdom and steadiness of their administration; and the address with which they
availed themselves of every incident to humble the nobility, and to extend
their own prerogative, conspired in raising these monarchs to such eminence and
authority, as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed. Though several
causes, which shall be explained in another place, prevented their attaining
the same extensive powers with the Kings of France and England, and preserved
the feudal constitution in Spain longer entire, their great abilities supplied
the defects of their prerogative, and improved with such dexterity all the
advantages which they possessed, that Ferdinand carried on all his foreign
operations, which were very extensive, with extraordinary vigor and effect.

Events happened, which called the several monarchs to exert the new powers
which they had acquired.
WHILE these Princes were thus enlarging the boundaries of prerogative, and
taking such steps toward rendering their kingdoms capable of acting with union
and with force, events occurred, which called them forth to exert the new
powers which they had acquired. These engaged them in such a series of
enterprises and negociations, that the affairs of all the considerable nations
in Europe came to be insensibly interwoven with each other; and a great
political system was gradually formed, which grew to an object of universal
attention.

The first of these events was the marriage of the heiress of the house of
Burgundy.
THE first event which merits notice, on account of its influence in producing
this change in the state of Europe, was the marriage of the daughter of Charles
the Bold, the sole heiress of the house of Burgundy. For some years before her
father's death, she had been considered as the apparent successor to his
territories, and Charles had made proposals of marrying her to several
different Princes, with a view of alluring them, by that offer, to favor the
schemes which his restless ambition was continually forming.

The importance of this to the state of Europe.
THIS rendered the alliance with her an object of general attention; and all the
advantages of acquiring possession of her territories, the most opulent at that
time and best cultivated of any on this side of the Alps, were perfectly
understood. As soon, then, as the untimely death of Charles opened the
succession, the eyes of all the Princes in Europe were turned toward Mary, A.
D. 1477. January 5.
and they felt themselves deeply interested in the choice which she was about
to make of the person, on whom she would bestow that rich inheritance.

LOUIS XI. from whose kingdom several of the provinces which she possessed had
been dismembered, Views of Louis XI. with respect to it.
and whose dominions stretched along the frontier of her territories, had every
inducement to court her alliance. He had, likewise, a good title to expect the
favorable reception of any reasonable proposition he should make, with respect
to the disposal of a Princess, who was the vassal of his crown, and descended
from the royal blood of France. There were only two propositions, however,
which he could make with propriety. The one was the marriage of the Dauphin,
the other that of the Count of Angouleme, a Prince of the blood, with the
heiress of Burgundy. By the former, he would have annexed all her territories
to his crown, and have rendered France at once the most respectable monarchy in
Europe. But the great disparity of age between the two parties, Mary being
twenty, and the Dauphin only eight years old; the avowed resolution of the
Flemings, not to choose a master possessed of such power as might enable him to
form schemes dangerous to their liberties; together with their dread of falling
under the odious and oppressive government of Louis, were obstacles in the way
of executing this plan, which it was vain to think of surmounting. By the
latter, the accomplishment of which might have been attained with ease, Mary
having discovered some inclination to a match with the Count of Angouleme Mem.
de Comines, i. 358.
, Louis would have prevented the dominions of the house of Burgundy from being
conveyed to a rival power, and in return for such a splendid establishment for
the Count of Angouleme, he must have obtained, or would have extorted from him
concessions highly beneficial to the crown of France. But Louis had been
accustomed so long to the intricacies of a crooked and insidious policy, that
he could not be satisfied with what was obvious and simple; and was so fond of
artifice and refinement, that he came to consider these as his ultimate object,
not as the means only of conducting affairs. From this principle, no less than
from his unwillingness to aggrandize any of his own subjects, or from his
desire of oppressing the house of Burgundy, which he hated, he neglected the
course which a Prince less able and artful would have taken, and followed one
more suited to his own genius.

The singular course which he ^ol^ed.
He proposed to render himself master, by force of arms, of those provinces,
which Mary held of the crown of France, and even to push his other conquests
into her territories, while he amused her with insisting continually on the
impracticable match with the Dauphin. In prosecuting this plan, he displayed
wonderful talents and industry, and exhibited such scenes of treachery,
falsehood and cruelty, as are amazing even in the history of Louis XI.
Immediately upon the death of Charles, he put his troops in motion, and
advanced toward the Netherlands. He corrupted the leading men in the provinces
of Burgundy and Artois, and seduced them to desert their sovereign. He got
admission into some of the frontier towns by bribing the governors; the gates
of others were opened to him in consequence of his intrigues with the
inhabitants. He negociated with Mary; and, in order to render her odious to her
subjects, he betrayed to them her most important secrets. He carried on a
private correspondence with the two ministers whom she chiefly trusted, and
then communicated the letters which he had received from them to the states of
Flanders, who, enraged at their perfidy, brought them immediately to trial,
tortured them with most extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the tears and
entreaties of their sovereign, who knew and approved of all that the ministers
had done, they beheaded them in her presence Mem. de Comines, (...). v. chapter 15.
p. 309, etc.
.

WHILE Louis, by this conduct, unworthy of a great monarch, The effects of
this, the marriage of Maximilian with the heiress of Burgundy, A. D. 1477.
was securing the possession of Burgundy, Artois, and the towns on the Sum,
the states of Flanders carried on a negotiation with the Emperor Frederick III.
and concluded a treaty of marriage between their sovereign and his son
Maximilian, Archduke of Austria. The illustrious birth of that Prince, as well
as the high dignity of which he had the prospect, rendered the alliance
honorable for Mary, while, from the distance of his hereditary territories,
and the scantiness of his revenues, his power was so inconsiderable as did not
excite the jealousy or fear of the Flemings.

THUS Louis, The influence of that upon the state of Europe.
by the caprice of his temper, and the excess of his refinements, put the house
of Austria in possession of this noble inheritance. By this acquisition, the
foundation of the future grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became master
of those territories, which enabled him to carry on his most formidable and
decisive operations against France. Thus, too, the same monarch who first
united the interior force of France, and established it on such a footing as to
render it formidable to the rest of Europe, contributed, far contrary to his
intention, to raise up a rival power, which, during two centuries, has thwarted
the measures, opposed the arms, and checked the progress of his successors.

THE next event of consequence in the fifteenth century, The next considerable
event was the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII A. D. 1494.
was the expedition of Charles VIII. into Italy. This occasioned revolutions no
less memorable; produced alterations, which, were more immediately perceived,
both in the military and political system; roused the states of Europe to
bolder efforts; and blended their affairs and interests more closely together.
The mild administration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince seems to have
revived the spirit and genius of the French nation, The motives of this.
which the rigid despotism of his father had depressed, and almost
extinguished. The ardour for military service, natural to the French nobility,
returned, and their young monarch was impatient to distinguish his reign by
some splendid enterprise. While he was uncertain toward what quarter he should
turn his arms, the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian politician, no
less infamous on account of his crimes, than eminent for his abilities,
determined his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the design of deposing
his nephew the duke of Milan, and of placing himself on the ducal throne, was
so much afraid of a combination of the Italian powers to thwart this measure,
and to support the injured Prince, with whom most of them were connected by
blood or alliance, that he saw the necessity of securing the aid of some able
protector. The King of France was the person to whom he applied; and without
disclosing to him his own intentions, he labored to prevail with him to march
into Italy, at the head of a powerful army, in order to seize the crown of
Naples, to which he had pretensions as heir of the house of Anjou. The right to
that kingdom, claimed by the Angevian family, had been conveyed to Louis XI. by
Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and Provence. But that sagacious monarch,
though he took immediate possession of those territories of which Charles was
really master, totally disregarded his ideal title to a kingdom, over which
another Prince reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly declined involving
himself in the labyrinth of Italian politics. His son more adventurous, or
more inconsiderate, embarked eagerly in this enterprise; and contemning all the
remonstrances of his most experienced counselors, prepared to carry it on with
the utmost vigor.

CHARLES wanted not power equal to such a great undertaking. His resources for
this enterprise.
His father had transmitted to him such an ample prerogative, as gave him the
entire command of his kingdom. He himself had added considerably to the extent
of his dominions, by his prudent marriage with the heiress of Bretagne, which
rendered him master of that province, the last of the great fiefs that remained
to be annexed to the crown. He soon assembled forces which he thought
sufficient; and so impatient was he to enter on his career as a conqueror, that
sacrificing what was real, for what was chimerical, he restored Rousillon to
Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's acquisitions in Artois to
Maximilian, with a view of inducing these Princes not to molest France, while
he was carrying on his operations in Italy.

BUT so different were the efforts of the States of Europe in the fifteenth
century, His preparations for it.
from those which we shall behold in the course of this history, that the army,
with which Charles undertook this great enterprise, did not exceed twenty
thousand men. The train of artillery, however, the ammunition, and warlike
stores of every kind provided for its use, were so great as to bear some
resemblance to the immense apparatus of modern war Mezeray Hist. tom. ii. 777.
.

WHEN the French entered Italy, Its success.
they met with nothing able to resist them. The Italian powers having remained,
during a long period, undisturbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy, had
formed a system with respect to their affairs, both in peace and war, peculiar
to themselves. In order to adjust the interests, and balance the power of the
different states into which Italy was divided, they were engaged in perpetual
and endless negociations with each other, which they conducted with all the
subtlety of a refining and deceitful policy. Their contests in the field, when
they had recourse to arms, were decided in mock battles, by innocent and
bloodless victories. Upon the first appearance of the danger which now
impended, they had recourse to the arts which they had studied, and employed
their utmost skill in intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffectual, their effeminate mercenaries, the only military force that
remained in the country, being fit only for the parade of service, were
terrified at the aspect of real war, and shrunk at its approach. The
impetuosity of the French valor appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pisa,
and Rome opened their gates as the French army advanced. The prospect of this
dreadful invasion struck one King of Naples with such panic terror, that he
died, (if we may believe historians) of the fright. Another abdicated his
throne from the same pusillanimous spirit. A third fled out of his dominions,
as soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapolitan frontiers. Charles after
marching thither from the bottom of the Alps, with as much rapidity, and almost
as little opposition, as if he had been on a progress through his own
dominions, took quiet possession of the throne of Naples, and intimidated or
gave law to every power in Italy.

Its effects, particularly in giving rise to the system concerning a balance of
power.
SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition, which must be considered as the
first great exertion of those new powers which the Princes of Europe had
acquired, and now began to exercise. Its effects were no less considerable than
its success had been astonishing. The Italians, unable to resist the impression
of the enemy which broke in upon them, permitted him to hold on his course
undisturbed. They quickly perceived that no single power, which they could
rouse to action, was an equal match for a monarch, who ruled over such
extensive territories, and was at the head of such a martial people; but that a
confederacy might accomplish what the separate members of it durst not attempt.
To this expedient, the only one that remained to deliver or to preserve them
from the yoke, they had recourse. While Charles inconsiderately wasted his time
at Naples, in festivals and triumphs on account of his past successes, or was
fondly dreaming of future conquests in the East, to the empire of which he now
aspired, they formed against him a powerful combination of almost all the
Italian states, supported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ferdinand King of
Aragon. The union of so many powers, who suspended or forgot all their
particular animosities, that they might act with concert against an enemy who
had become formidable to them all, awakened Charles from his thoughtless
security. He saw now no prospect of safety but in returning to France. An army
of thirty thousand men, assembled by the allies, was ready to obstruct his
march; and though the French, with a daring courage, which more than
counterbalanced their inferiority in number, broke through that great body, and
gained a victory, which opened to their monarch a safe passage into his own
territories, he was stripped of all his conquests in Italy in as short a time
as it had cost him to acquire them; and the political system in that country
resumed the same appearance as before his invasion.

This becomes the great object of policy, first in Italy, and then in Europe.
THE sudden and decisive effect of this confederacy seems to have instructed the
Princes and statesmen of Italy as much, as the irruption of the French had
disconcerted and alarmed them. They had now extended to the affairs of Europe,
the maxims of that political science which had hitherto been applied only to
regulate the operations of the petty states in their own country. They had
discovered the method of preventing any monarch from rising to such a degree of
power, as was inconsistent with the general liberty; and had manifested the
importance of attending to that great secret in modern policy, the preservation
of a proper distribution of power among all the members of the system into
which the states of Europe are formed. During all the wars of which Italy now
became the theater, and amidst the hostile operations which the imprudence of
Louis XII. and the ambition of Ferdinand of Aragon, carried on in that country,
with little interruption, from the close of the fifteenth century, to that
period at which the subsequent history commences, the maintaining a proper
balance of power between the contending parties became the great object of
attention to the statesmen of Italy. Nor was the idea confined to them.
Self-preservation taught other powers to adopt it. It grew to be fashionable
and universal. From this era we can trace the progress of that intercourse
between nations, which has linked the powers of Europe so closely together; and
can discern the operations of that provident policy, which during peace, guards
against remote and contingent dangers; which, in war, has prevented rapid and
destructive conquests.

THIS was not the only effect of the operations which the great powers of
Europe carried on in Italy. The wars in Italy render standing armies general.
They contributed to render such a change, as the French had begun to make in
the state of their troops, general; and obliged all the Princes, who appeared
on this new theater of action, to establish the military force of their
kingdoms on the same footing with that of France. When the seat of war came to
be remote from the countries which maintained the contest, the service of the
feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and the necessity of employing troops
regularly trained to arms, and kept in constant pay, came at once to be
evident. When Charles marched into Italy, his cavalry was entirely composed of
those companies of Gendarmes, embodied by C^^rles VII. and continued by Louis
XI. his infantry consisted partly of Swiss, hired of the cantons, and partly of
Gascons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss model. To these Louis XII. added
a body of Germans, well known in the wars of Italy by the Black Bands. But
neither of these monarchs made any account of the feudal militia, or ever had
recourse to that military force which they might have commanded, in virtue of
the ancient institutions in their kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as soon as
they began to act in Italy, employed the same instruments, and trusted the
execution of their plans entirely to mercenary troops.

Teach the Europeans the superior importance of infantry in war.
THIS innovation in the military system was quickly followed by another, which
the custom of employing Swiss in the Italian wars, was the occasion of
introducing. The arms and discipline of the Swiss were different from those of
other European nations. During their long and violent struggles in defense of
their liberties against the house of Austria, whose armies like those of other
considerable Princes, consisted chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, the Swiss found
that their poverty, and the small number of gentlemen residing in their
country, at that time barren and uncultivated, put it out of their power to
bring into the field any body of horse capable of facing the enemy. Necessity
compelled them to place all their confidence in infantry; and in order to
render it capable of withstanding the shock of cavalry, they gave the soldiers
breast-plates and helmets as defensive armor; together with long spears,
halberts, and heavy swords as weapons of offense. They formed them into large
battalions, ranged in deep and close array, so as to present on every side a
formidable front to the enemy Machiavel Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 451.
. The men at arms could make no impression on the solid strength of such a
body. It repulsed the Austrians in all their attempts to conquer Swisserland.
It broke the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarce inferior to that of
France, either in number or reputation: And when first called to act in Italy,
it bore down by its irresistible force every enemy that attempt (...) oppose
it. These repeated proofs of the decisive effect of infantry, exhibited on such
conspicuous occasions, restored that service to reputation, and gradually
re-established the opinion, which had been long exploded, of its superior
importance in the operations of war. But the glory which the Swiss had
acquired, having inspired them with such high ideas of their own prowess and
consequence, as rendered them mutinous and insolent, the Princes who employed
them became weary of depending on the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and began
to turn their attention toward the improvement of their national infantry.

THE German powers having the command of men, National infantry established in
Germany.
whom nature has endowed with that steady courage, and persevering strength,
which forms them to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops in such a manner,
that they vied with the Swiss both in discipline and valor.

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, and with greater difficulty,
accustomed the impetuous spirit of their people to subordination and
discipline; and were at such pains to render their national infantry
respectable, that as early as the reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
rank had so far abandoned their ancient ideas, as to condescend to enter into
that service Brantome, tom. x. p. 18. Mem. de Fleuranges, 143.
.

THE Spaniards, In Spain.
whose situation made it difficult to employ any other than their own national
troops, in the southern parts of Italy, which was the chief scene of their
operations in that country, not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but improved
upon it, by mingling a proper number of soldiers armed with heavy muskets in
their battalions; and thus formed that famous body of infantry, which, during a
century and a half, was the admiration and terror of all Europe. The Italian
states gradually diminished the number of their cavalry, and, in imitation of
their more powerful neighbors, brought the strength of their armies to consist
in foot soldiers. From this period the nations of Europe have carried on war
with forces (...) adapted to every species of service, more capable of acting
in every country, and better fitted both for making conquests, and for
preferving them.

The Italian wars occasion an increase of the public revenues in Europe.
AS their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe to these improvements in the
art of war, they gave them likewise the first idea of the expense which
accompanies great and continued operations, and accustomed them to the burden
of those impositions, which are necessary for supporting them. While feudal
policy subsisted in full vigor, while armies were composed of military vassals
called forth to attack some neighboring power, and to perform in a short
campaign, the services which they owed to their sovereign, the expense of war
was extremely moderate. A small subsidy enabled a Prince to begin and to finish
his greatest operations. But when Italy became the theater on which the powers
of Europe contended for superiority, the preparations requisite for such a
distant expedition, the pay of armies kept constantly on foot, their
subsistence in a foreign country, the sieges to be undertaken, and the towns to
be defended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and by creating demands
unknown in less active times, multiplied taxes in every kingdom. The progress
of ambition, however, was so rapid; and Princes extended their operations so
fast, that it was impossible at first to establish funds proportional to the
increase of expense which these occasioned. When Charles VIII. invaded Naples,
the sums requisite for carrying on that enterprise so far exceeded those which
France had been accustomed to contribute, that before he reached the frontiers
of Italy, his treasury was exhausted, and the domestic resources, of which his
extensive prerogative give him the command, were at an end. As he durst not
venture to lay any new imposition on his people, oppressed already with the
weight of unusual burdens; the only expedient that remained was, to borrow of
the Genoese as much money as would enable him to continue his march. But he
could not obtain the sum that was requisite, without consenting to pay annually
the exorbitant interest of forty-two livres for every hundred that he received
Mem de Comines, lib. vii. c. 5. p. 440.
. We may ^^serve the same disproportion between the efforts and revenues of
other Princes, his contemporaries. From this period, taxes went on increasing^
and during the reign of Charles V. such sums were levied in every state, as
would have appeared prodigious at the close of the fifteenth century, and
gradually prepared the way for the more exorbitant exactions of modern times.

THE last transaction, The league of Cambray another important occurrence.
previous to the reign of Charles V. that merits attention on account of its
influence upon the state of Europe, is the league of Cambray. To humble the
republic of Venice, and to divide its territories, was the object of all the
powers who united in this confederacy. The civil constitution of Venice,
established on a firm basis, had suffered no considerable alteration for
several centuries; during which, the state conducted its affairs by maxims of
policy no less prudent than vigorous, and adhered to these, with an uniform
consistent spirit, which gave that commonwealth great advantage over other
states, whose views and measures changed as often as the form of their
government, or the persons who administered it. By these unintermitted
exertions of wisdom and valor, the Venetians enlarged the dominions of their
commonwealth, until it became the most considerable power in Italy. While
their extensive commerce, the useful and curious manufactures which they
carried on, together with their monopoly of the precious commodities of the
East, rendered Venice the most opulent state in Europe.

THEIR power was the object of terror to their Italian neighbors. The motives
of it.
Their wealth was viewed with envy by the greatest monarchs who could not vie
with their private citizens in the magnificence of their buildings, in the
richness of their dress and furniture, or in splendor and elegance of living
He^iani oration apud Goldastum in polit Imperial. p ^80.
. Julius II. whose ambition was superior, and his ablilities equal, to those of
any Pontiff who ever sat on the Papal throne, formed the idea of this league
^st the Venetians, and endeavored, by applying to these passions which I have
mentioned, to persuade other Princes to join in it. By working upon the fears
of the Italian powers, and upon the avarice of the monarchs beyond the Alps, he
induced them, in concurrence with other causes, which it is not my province to
explain, to form against these haughty republicans one of the most extensive
confederacies Europe had ever beheld.

The rapid progress of the Confederates.
THE Emperor, the King of France, the King of Aragon, the Pope were principals
in the league of Cambray, to which almost all the Princes of Italy acceded, the
least considerable of them hoping for some share in the spoils of a state,
which they already deemed to be devoted to destruction. The Venetians might
have diverted this storm, or have broken its force; but with a presumptuous
rashness, to which their is nothing similar in the course of their history,
they waited its approach. The impetuous valor of the French rendered
ineffectual all their precautions for the safety of the republic; and the fatal
battle of Ghiarradadda entirely ruined the army, on which they relied for
defense. Julius seized all the towns which they held in the ecclesiastical
territories. Ferdinand re-annexed the towns of which they had got possession on
the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions. Maximilian, at the head of
a powerful army, advanced toward Venice on the one side. The French pushed
their conquests on the other. The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies, and
left without one ally, sunk from the height of presumption to the depths of
despair; abandoned all their territories on the continent; and shut themselves
up in their capital, as their last refuge, and the only place which they hoped
to preserve.

Division arises among them.
THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the confederacy. The members of
it, united while engaged in seizing their prey, began to feel their ancient
jealousy and animosities revive, as soon as they had a prospect of dividing it.
When the Venetians observed these symptoms of alienation and distrust, a ray of
hope broke in upon ^m; the spirit natural to their councils returned; they
resumed such wisdom and firmness, as made some atonement for their former
imprudence and dejection; they recovered part of the territory which they had
lost; they appeased the pope and Ferdinand by well-timed concessions in their
favor; and at length dissolved the confederacy, which had brought their
commonwealth to the brink of ruin.

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a league which he himself had
planned, New objects of their policy and ambition.
and imagining nothing was too arduous for him to undertake, conceived the idea
of expelling every foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force of his
mind toward executing a scheme so well suited to his vast and enterprizing
genius. He directed his first attack against the French, who, on many accounts,
were more odius to the Italians, than any of the foreigners who had acquired
dominion in their country. By his activity and address he prevailed on most of
the powers, who had joined in the league of Cambray, to turn their arms against
the King of France, their former ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had lately
ascended the throne of England, to favor their operations by invading France.
Louis XII. resisted all the efforts of this formidable and unexpected
confederacy, with undaunted fortitude. Hostilities were carried on, during
several campaigns, in Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy, with
alternate success. Exhausted, at length, by the variety as well as extent of
his operations; unable to withstand a confederacy which brought against him
superior force, conducted with wisdom, and acting with perseverance; he found
it necessary to conclude separate treaties of peace with his enemies; and the
war terminated with the loss of every thing which the French had acquired in
Italy, except the castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable towns in that
duchy.

By this the intercourse among the European nations increases.
THE various negociations carried on during this busy period, and the different
combinations formed among powers hitherto little connected with each other,
greatly increased that intercourse between the nations of Europe, which I have
mentioned as one effect of the events in the fifteenth century. While the
greatness of the object at which they aimed, the distant expeditions which they
undertook, as well as the length and obstinacy of the contests in which they
engaged, obliged them to exert themselves with a vigor and perseverance
unknown in the preceding ages.

They are prepared for the transactions of the sixteenth century.
THOSE active scenes which the following History will exhibit, and the variety
and importance of those transactions which distinguish the period to which it
extends, are not to be ascribed solely to the ambition, to the abilities, or to
the rivalship of Charles V. and of Francis I. The kingdoms of Europe had
arrived at such a degree of improvement in the internal administration of
government, and Princes had acquired such command of the national force which
was to be exerted in foreign wars, that they were in a condition to enlarge the
sphere of their operarians, and to increase the vigor of their efforts. Their
contests in Italy, which led them first to try the extent of the power that
they had acquired, gave rise to so many opposite claims and pretensions,
excited such a spirit of discord and rivalship between nations, and laid the
foundation of so many quarrels, as could not fail of producing extraordinary
convulsions in Europe; and the sixteenth century opened with the certain
prospect of its abounding in great and interesting events.

A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE. FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY. SECTION III. View of the
political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement
of the sixteenth Century.
HAVING thus enumerated the principal causes and events, A considerable variety
in the constitution of the different nations of Europe.
the influence of which extended to all the States in Europe, and contributed
either to improve their internal government and police, or to enlarge the
sphere of their activity, and to augment their national force; nothing remains,
in order to prepare my readers for entering with full information upon perusing
the history of the reign of Charles V. but to give some view of the particular
constitution and form of civil government, in each of the nations which acted
any considerable part during that period. While these institutions and
occurrences, which I have mentioned, formed the people of Europe to resemble
each other, and conducted them from barbarism to refinement, in the same path,
and with almost equal steps, there were other circumstances which occasioned a
difference in their political establishments, and gave rise to those peculiar
modes of government, which have produced such variety in the character and
genius of nations.

Necessary to explain the state of each, when Charles V. began his reign.
IT is no less necessary to become acquainted with the latter, than to have
contemplated the former. The view which I have exhibited of the causes and
events, whose influence was universal, will enable my readers to account for
the surprising resemblance among the nations of Europe in their interior
police, and foreign operations. But, without a distinct knowledge of the
peculiar form and genius of their civil government, a great part of their
transactions must appear altogether mysterious and inexplicable. The historians
of particular states, as they seldom extended their views farther than to the
amusement or instruction of their fellow-citizens, by whom they might presume
that all domestic customs and institutions were perfectly understood, have
often neglected to descend into such details with respect to these, as are
sufficient to convey to foreigners full light and information concerning the
occurrences which they relate. But a history, which comprehends the
transactions of so many different countries, would be extremely imperfect,
without a previous survey of their constitution and political state. It is from
his knowledge of these, that the reader must draw those principles, which will
enable him to judge with discernment, and to decide with certainty concerning
the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar forms and regulations in every
country, would lead to deductions of immeasurable length. To sketch out the
great lines which distinguish and characterize each government, is all that the
nature of my present work will admit of, and all that is necessary to
illustrate the events which it records.

The State of Italy.
AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the political face of Italy was
extremely different from that of any other part of Europe. Instead of those
extensive monarchies, which occupied the rest of the continent, that delightful
country was parcelled out among many small states, each of which possessed
sovereign and independent jurisdiction. The only monarch in Italy was that of
Naples. The dominion of the Popes was of a peculiar species, to which there is
nothing similar either in ancient or modern times. In Venice and Florence, a
republican form of government was established. Milan was subject to sovereigns,
who had assumed no higher title than that of Dukes.

THE Pope was the first of these powers in dignity, The papal dignity the
highest in Europe.
and not the least considerable by the extent of his territories. In the
primitive church, the jurisdiction of Bishops was equal and coordinate. They
derived, perhaps, some degree of consideration from the dignity of the Sea in
which they presided. They possessed, however, no real authority or pre
eminence, but what they acquired by superior abilities, or superior sanctity.
As Rome had so long been the seat of empire, and capital of the world, its
bishops were upon that account entitled to respect; they received it; but
during several ages they claimed and received nothing more. From these humble
beginnings, they advanced with such an adventurous and well-directed ambition,
that they established a spiritual dominion over the minds and sentiments of
men, to which all Europe submitted with implicit obedience. Their claim of
universal jurisdiction, Origin and progress of the Papal power.
as heads of the church, and their pretentions to infallibility in their
decisions, as successors of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant
to the genius of the Christian religion. But on these foundations, the
superstition and credulity of mankind enabled them to erect an amazing
superstructure. In all ecclesiastical controversies, their decisions were
received as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor was the plenitude of their
power confined to these alone; they dethroned monarchs; disposed of crowns;
absolved subjects from the obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid kingdoms
under interdicts. There was not a state in Europe which had not been disquieted
by their ambition. There was not a throne which they had not shaken; nor a
Prince, who did not tremble at their power.

NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire absolute, and to establish it on the
ruins of all civil authority, but that the Popes should have possessed such a
degree of temporal power, as was sufficient to second and enforce their
spiritual decrees. The territories of the Popes inadequate to support their
spiritual jurisdiction.
Happily for mankind, while their spiritual jurisdiction was most extensive,
and at its greatest height, their temporal property was extremely limited. They
were powerful Pontiffs, sormidable at a distance; but they were petty Princes,
without any considerable domestic force. They had early endeavored, indeed, to
acquire territory by arts, similar to those which they had employed in
extending their jurisdiction. Under pretense of a donation from Constantine,
and of another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin, they attempted to take
possession of some towns adjacent to Rome. But these donations were fictitious,
and availed them little. The benefactions, for which they were indebted to the
credulity of the Norman adventurers, who conquered Naples, and to the
superstition of the countess Matilda, were real, and added ample domains to the
Holy See.

Their authority in their own territories extremely limited.
BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in proportion to the extent of
territory which they had acquired. In the dominions annexed to the Holy See, as
well as in those subject to other Princes in Italy, the sovereign of a State
was far from having the command of the force which it contained. During the
turbulence and confusion of the middle ages, the powerful nobility or leaders
of popular factions in Italy, had seized the government of different towns; and
after strengthening their fortifications, and taking a body of mercenaries into
pay, they set up for independance. The territory which the church had gained,
was filled with such petty tyrants, who left the Pope hardly the shadow of
dominion.

It was circumscribed by the ambition of the Roman barons.
AS these usurpations almost annihilated the Papal power in the greater part of
the towns subject to the church, the Roman barons frequently disputed the
authority of the Popes, even in Rome itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion
began to be propagated, "That as the function of ecclesiastics was purely
spiritual, they ought to possess no property, and to (...) no temporal
jurisdiction; but, according to the (...) example of their prodec^^^rs in the
primitive church, should subsist wholly upon their tithes, or upon the
voluntary oblations of the people Otto Frisingensi de Gestis Frider. Imp. lib.
ii, cap. 20.
. This doctrine being addressed to men, who had beheld the scandalous manner in
which the avarice and ambition of the clergy had prompted them to contend for
wealth, and to exercise power, they listened to it with fond attention. The
Roman barons, who had felt most sensibly the rigor of ecclesiastical
oppression, adopted these sentiments with such ardor, that they set themselves
instantly to shake off the yoke. They endeavored to restore some image of
their ancient liberty, by reviving the institution of the Roman senate, A. D.
1143.
in which they vested supreme authority; committing the executive power
sometimes to one chief senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to a magistrate
dignified with the name of The Patrician. The Popes exerted themselves with
vigor, in order to check this fatal encroachment on their jurisdiction. One of
them, finding all his endeavors ineffectual, was so much mortified, that
extreme grief cut short his days. Another, having ventured to attack the
senators at the head of some armed men, was mortally wounded in the fray Otto
Frising. (...) lib. vii cap 2^^ 31. Id. de Gest. Frid. lib. i, c. 27. Muratori
(...) vol. ix, ^98, 4^4.
: During a considerable period, the power of the Popes, before which the
greatest monarchs in Europe trembled, was circumscribed within such narrow
limits in their own capital, that they durst scarce exert any act of authority
without the permission and concurrence of the senate.

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal authority, not only by the usurpations
of the Roman nobility, and by the turbalence of the Roman people, from A. D.
1308. to A. D. 1377.
but by the mutinous spirit of the people. During seventy years of the
fourteenth century, the Popes fixed their residence in Avignon. The inhabitants
of Rome, accustomed to consider themselves as the descendants of the people who
had conquered the world, and had given laws to it, were too high-spirited to
submit with patience to the delegated authority of those persons, to whom the
Popes committed the government of the city. On many occasions they opposed the
execution of the Papal mandates, and on the slightest appearance of innovation
or oppression, they were ready to take arms in defense of their own immunities.
Toward the middle of the fourteenth century, being instigated by Nicolas
Rienzo, a man of low birth and seditious spirit, but of popular eloquence, and
an enterprizing ambition, they drove all the nobility out of the city,
established a democratical form of government, elected Rienzo Tribune of the
people, and invested him with extensive authority. But though the frantic
proceedings of the tribune soon overturned this new system; though the
government of Rome was reinstated in its ancient form; yet every fresh attack
contributed to weaken the papal jurisdiction; and the turbulence of the people
concurred with the spirit of independance among the nobility, to circumscribe
it within very narrow bounds History Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii, c.
89, 104, ap. Murat. Script. Rerum Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Rienze, ap
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 399, etc. Hist. de Nic. Rienzy, par M. de
Boisperaux, p. 91, etc.
. Gregory VII. and other domineering Pontiffs, accomplished those great things
which rendered them so formidable to the Emperors, with whom they contended,
not by the force of their arms, or by the extent of their power, but by the
dread of their spiritual censures, and by the effect of their intrigues, which
excited rivals, and called forth enemies against every prince whom they wished
to depress or to destroy.

MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not only to humble these usurpers,
Alexander VI. and Julius II. render the Popes considerable Princes.
who lorded it over the cities in the ecclesiastical state, but to break the
turbulent spirit of the Roman people. These were long unsuccessful. At last
Alexander VI. with a policy no less artful than flagitious, subdued and
extirpated most of them, and rendered the Popes masters of their own dominions.
The enterprizing ambition of Julius II. added conquests of no inconsiderable
value to the patrimony of St. Peter. Thus the Popes, by degrees, became
powerful temporal princes. Their territories, in the age of Charles V. were of
greater extent than at present; their country was better cultivated, and more
populous; and as they drew large contributions from every part of Europe, their
revenues far exceeded those of the neighboring powers, and rendered them
capable of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

THE genius of the Papal government, however, was better adapted to the
exercise of spiritual dominion, Defects in the nature of ecclesiastical
dominion.
than of temporal power. With respect to the former, all its maxims were steady
and invariable. Every new Pontiff adopted the plan of his predecessor. By
education and habit ecclesiastics were so formed, that the character of the
individual was sunk in that of the profession; and the passions of the man were
sacrificed to the interest and honor of the order. The hands which held the
reins of administration might change; but the spirit which conducted them was
always the same. While the measures of other governments fluctuated, and the
objects at which they aimed varied, the church kept one end in view; and to
this unrelaxing constancy of pursuit, it was indebted for its success in the
boldest attempts ever made by human ambition.

BUT in their civil administration, the Popes followed no such uniform or
consistent plan. There* as in other governments, the character, the passions,
and the interests of the person who had the supreme direction of affairs,
occasioned a variation both in objects and measures. As few prelates reached
the summit of ecclesiastical dignity, until they were far advanced in life, a
change of masters was more frequent in the Papal dominions than in other
states; and the political system was, of course, less stable and permanent.
Every Pope was eager to make the most of the short period, during which he had
the prospect of enjoying power, in order to aggrandize his family, and to
attain his private ends; and it was often the first business of his successor
to undo all that he had done, and to overturn what he had established.

AS ecclesiastics were trained to pacific arts, and early initiated in the
mysteries of that policy, by which the court of Rome extended or supported its
spiritual dominion, the Popes were apt to conduct their temporal affairs with
the same spirit; and in all their measures were more ready to employ the
refinements of intrigue, than the force of arms. It was in the Papal court that
address and subtilty in negotiation first became a science; and, during the
sixteenth century, Rome was considered as the school in which it could be best
acquired.

AS the decorum of their ecclesiastical character prevented the Popes from
placing themselves at the head of their armies, or taking the command, in
person, of the military force in their dominions, they were afraid to arm their
subjects; and in all their operations, whether offensive or defensive, they
trusted entirely to mercenary troops.

AS their power and dominions could not descend to their posterity, the Popes
were less solicitous than other princes to form or to encourage schemes of
public utility and improvement. Their tenure was only for a short life; present
advantage was all that they attended to; to squeeze and to amass, not to
meliorate, was their object. They erected, perhaps, some work of ostentation,
to remain as a monument of their pontificate; they found it necessary, at some
times, to establish useful institutions, in order to sooth and silence the
turbulent populace of Rome; but plans of general benefit to their subjects, and
framed with a view to futurity, were rarely objects of attention in the papal
policy. The patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed than any part of Europe;
and though a generous Pontiff might suspend for a little, or counter-act the
effects of those vices which are peculiar to the administration of
ecclesiastics; the disease not only remained incurable, but has even gone on
increasing from age to age; and the decline of the state has kept pace with its
progress.

ONE circumstance farther, concerning the Papal government, is so singular, as
to merit attention. The Popes derive some advantages from the union of their
spiritual and temporal authority.
As the spiritual supremacy and temporal power were united in one person, and
uniformly aided each other in their operations, they became so blended
together, that it was difficult to separate them, even in imagination. The
potentates, who found it necessary to oppose the measures which the Popes
pursued as temporal princes, could not divest themselves of the reverence which
they imagined to be due to them as heads of the church, and vicars of Jesus
Christ. It was with reluctance that they could be brought to a rupture with
them; they were averse to push their operations against them to extremity; they
listened eagerly to the first overtures of accommodation^ and were willing to
procure it almost upon any terms. Their consciousness of this encouraged the
enterprizing pontiffs, who filled the Papal throne about the beginning of the
sixteenth century, to engage in schemes seemingly the most extravagant. They
trusted, that if their temporal power was not sufficient to carry them through
with success, the respect paid to their spiritual dignity would enable them to
extricate themselves with facility and with honor The manner in which Louis
XII of France undertook and carried on war against Julius II. remarkably
illustrates this observation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergy of France,
whether it was lawful to take arms against a Pope, who had wantonly kindled war
in Europe, and whom neither the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favors
received, nor the decorum of his character, could restrain from the most
violent actions, to which the lust of power prompts ambitious princes. Though
his clergy authorized the war, yet Anne of Bretagne, his queen, entertained
scruples with regard to the lawfulness of it. The king himself, from some
superstition of the same kind carried it on faintly; and, upon every fresh
advantage, renewed his propositions of peace. Mezeray, Hist. de France, fol.
edit. 16^5, tom. i. 852. I shall produce another proof of this reverence for
the Papal character still more striking. Guicciardini, the most sagacious,
perhaps, of all modern historians, and the boldest in (...) the vices and
ambition of the Popes, represents the death (...), a Spanish officer, who was
killed, during the siege of (...), as a punishment inflicted on him by heaven,
on account (...) having opposed the setting of Clement Vol. at liberty. G^ic.
Historia d'Italia, Genev. 1645, vol. ii. lib. 18, p. 407.
. But when popes came to take part more frequently in the contests among
princes, and to engage as principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
Europe, this veneration for their sacred character began to abate; and striking
instances will occur in the following history, of its being almost totally
extinct.

OF all the Italian powers, the republic of Venice, next to the Pope, was most
connected with the rest of Europe. The rise of that commonwealth, during the
inroads of the Huns, in the fifth century; the singular situation of its
capital in the small isles of the Adriatic gulf; Constitution of the republic
of Venice, with its rise and progress.
and the more singular form of its civil constitution are generally known. If
we view the Venetian government as calculated for the order of nobles alone,
its institutions are so excellent, the deliberative, legislative and executive
powers are so admirably distributed and adjusted, that it must be regarded as a
perfect model of political wisdom. But if we consider it as formed for a
numerous body of people subject to its jurisdiction, it will appear a rigid and
partial aristocracy, which lodges all power in the hands of a few members of
the community, while it degrades and oppresses the rest.

THE spirit of government, in a commonwealth of this species, was, of course,
timid and jealous. Defects in its government, particularly with respect to its
military operations.
The Venetian nobles distrusted their own subjects, and were afraid of allowing
them the use of arms. They encouraged among them the arts of industry and
commerce; they employed them in manufactures and in navigation; but never
admitted them into the troops which the state kept in its pay. The military
force of the republic consisted entirely of foreign mercenaries. The command of
these was never trusted to noble Venetians, lest they should acquire such
influence over the army, as might endanger the public liberty; or become
accustomed to the exercise of such power, as would make them unwilling to
return to the condition of private citizens. A soldier of fortune was placed at
the head of the armies of the commonwealth; and to obtain that honor, was the
great object of the Italian Condottieri, or leaders of bands, who, in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, made a trade of war, and raised and hired
out soldiers to different states. But the same suspicious policy, which induced
them to employ these adventurers, prevented their placing entire confidence in
them. Two noblemen, appointed by the senate, accompanied their army when it
took the field, with the appellation of Proveditori, and, like the
field-deputies of the Dutch republic in later times, observed all the motions
of the general, and checked and controuled him in a^l his operations.

A REPUBLIC, with such civil and military institutions, was not formed to make
conquests While its subjects were disarmed, and its nobles excluded from
military command, it carried on its warlike enterprises with great
disadvantage. This ^ght to have taught the Venetians to make self-pre^ion, and
the enjoyment of domestic security, the ^bjects of their policy. But republics
are apt to be seduced by the spirit of ambition, as well as princes. When the
Venetians so far forgot the interior defects in their government, as to aim at
extensive conquests, the fata^ blow, which they received in the war excited by
the league of Cambray, convinced them of the imprudence and danger of making
violent efforts, in opposition to the genius and tendency of their constitution

IT is not, however, by its military, but by its naval and commercial power,
Excellence of its naval institutions.
that the importance of the Venetian commonwealth must be estimated. In the
latter, the real force and nerves of the state consisted. The jealousy of
government did not extend to this department. Nothing was apprehended from this
quarter that could prove formidable to liberty. The senate encouraged the
nobles to trade, and to serve on b^ard the fleet. They became merchants and
admirals. They increased the wealth of their country by their industry. They
added to its dominions, by the valor with which they conducted its naval
armaments.

THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible source of opulence. All the nations
in Europe depended upon them, The extent of its commerce.
not only for the commodities of the East, but for various manufactures
fabricated by them alone, or finished with a dexterity and elegance unknown in
other countries. From this extensive commerce, the state derived such immense
supplies, as concealed these vices in its constitution, which I have mentioned;
and enabled it to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an overmatch for
the force which any of its neighbors could bring into the field, but were
sufficient to contend, for some time, with the powerful monarchs beyond the
Alps. During its struggles with the princes united against it by the league of
Cambray, the republic levied sums which, even in the present age, would be
deemed considerable; and while the king of France paid the exorbitant interest,
which I have mentioned, for the money advanced to him, and the Emperor eager to
borrow, but destitute of credit, was known by the name of Maximilian the Money
less, the Venetians raised whatever sums they pleased, at the moderate premium
of five in the hundred Hist. de la ligue fait a Cambray, par M. l Abbe le Bos,
lib. v. Sandi. Sto^ia Civil. Vene^iana, lib. viii. c. 16, p. 891, etc.
.

THE constitution of Florence was perfectly the reverse of that of Venice. The
constitution of Florence.
It partook as much of the democratical turbulence and licentiousness, as the
other of aristocratical rigor. Florence, however, was a commercial, not a
military democracy. The nature of its institutions were favorable to commerce,
and the genius of the people was turned toward it. The vast wealth which the
family of Medici had acquired by trade; added to the magnificence, the
generosity, and the virtue of the first Cosmo, gave him such an ascendant over
the affections, as well as the councils of his countrymen, that though the
forms of popular government were preserved, though the various departments of
administration were filled by magistrates distinguished by the ancient names,
and elected in the usual manner, he was in reality the head of the
commonwealth, and in the station of a private citizen he possessed supreme
authority. Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of this power to his
descendants; and during the greater part of the fifteenth century, the
political state of Florence was extremely singular. The appearance of
republican government subsisted, the people were passionately attached to it,
and on some occasions contended warmly for their privileges, and yet they
permitted a single family to assume a direction of their affairs, almost as
absolute as if it had been formally invested with sovereign power. The jealousy
of the Medici concurred with the commercial spirit of the Florentines, in
putting the military force of the republic upon the same footing with that of
the other Italian states. The troops, which the Florentines employed in their
wars, consisted almost entirely of mercenary soldiers, furnished by the
Condottieri, or leaders of bands, whom they took into their pay.

IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the sovereignty of the island of Sicily was
annexed, The constitution of the kingdom of Naples.
the feudal government was established in the same form, and with the same
defects, as in the other nations of Europe. The frequent and violent
revolutions which happened in that monarchy, had considerably increased these
defects, and rendered them more intolerable. The succession to the crown of
Naples had been so often interrupted or altered, and so many princes of foreign
blood had taken possession of the throne, that the Neapolitan nobility had
lost, in a great measure, that attachment to the family of their sovereigns, as
well as that reverence for their persons, which, in other feudal kingdoms,
contributed to set some bounds to the encroachments of the barons upon the
royal prerogative and power. At the same time, the different pretenders to the
crown, being obliged to court the barons who adhered to them, and on whose
support they depended for the success of their claims, they augmented their
privileges by liberal concessions, and connived at their boldest usurpations.
Even when seated on the throne, it was dangerous for a prince, who held his
scepter by a disputed title, to venture on any step toward extending his own
power, or circumscribing that of the nobles.

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples was the most turbulent of any in
Europe, and the authority of its monarchs the least extensive. Though Ferdinand
I. who began his reign in the year one thousand four hundred and sixty-eight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy; though his son Alfonso, that
he might crush it at once by cutting off the leaders of greatest reputation and
influence among the Neapolitan barons, ventured to commit one of the most
perfidious and cruel actions recorded in history; the order of nobles was,
nevertheless, more exasperated than humbled by the blow Giannone, book xxviii.
chap. 2, vol. ii. p. 410, etc.
. The resentment which these outrages excited was so violent, A.D. 1487.
and the power of the malcontent nobles was still so formidable, that to
these may be ascribed, in a great degree, the ease and rapidity with which
Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom of Naples Ibid. p. 414. Giannone* book
xviii. chap. 5.
.

THE event that gave rise to the violent contests concerning the succession to
the crown of Naples and Sicily, State of the dispute concerning the right of
succession to the the crown. A.D. 1254.
which brought so many calamities upon these kingdoms, happened in the
thirteenth century. Upon the death of the Emperor Frederick II. Manfred, his
natural son, aspiring to the Neapolitan throne, murdered if we may believe
contemporary historians) his brother the Emperor Conrad, and by that crime
obtained possession of it Struv. corp. hist. Germ. i. 481.
. The Popes, from their implacable enmity to the house of Swabia, not only
refused to recognize Manfred's title, but endeavored to excite against him
some rival capable of wresting the scepter out of his hand. Charles Count of
Anjou, the brother of St. Louis King of France, undertook this; and he received
from the Popes, the investiture of the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, as a fief
held of the Holy See. The Count of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success;
Manfred fell in battle; and he took possession of the vacant throne. But soon
after, Charles sullied the glory which he had acquired, by the injustice and
cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands of the executioner, Conradin,
the last prince of the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the Neapolitan
crown. That gallant young prince asserted his title, to the last, with a
courage worthy of a better fate. On the scaffold he declared Peter, at that
time Prince, and soon after King of Aragon, who had married Manfred's only
daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove among the people, he entreated that
it might be carried to Peter, as the symbol by which he conveyed all his rights
to him Giannone, Book xix. chapter 4. Sect. 2.
. The desire of avenging the insult offered to royalty by the death of
Conradin, concurred with ambition, in prompting Peter to take arms in support
of the title, which he had acquired. From that period, during almost two
centuries, the houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the crown of Naples.
Amidst a succession of revolutions more rapid, as well as of crimes more
atrocious, than what occur in the history of almost any other kingdom,
monarchs, sometimes of the Aragonese line, and sometimes of the Angevin, were
seated on the throne. A.D. 1434.
At length the princes of the house of Aragon obtained such firm possession of
this long-disputed inheritance, that they transmitted it quietly to a bastard
branch of their family Giannone, Book xxvi. chapter 2.
.

THE race of the Angevin kings, however, Pretentions of the French and Spanish
monarchs.
was not extinct; nor had they relinquished their title to the Neapolitan
crown. The Count of Maine and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed all
his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to his successors. A.D. 1494.
Charles VIII. as I have already related, crossed the Alps, at the head of a
powerful army, in order to prosecute his claim with a degree of vigor far
superior to that, which the princes from whom he derived it, had been capable
of exerting. The rapid progress of his arms in Italy, as well as the short time
during which he enjoyed the fruits of his success, are well known* Frederick,
the heir of the illegitimate branch of the Aragonese family, soon recovered the
throne of which Charles had dispossessed him. Louis XII. and Ferdinand of
Aragon united against this Prince, whom both, though for different reasons,
considered as an usurper, and agreed to divide his dominions between them. A.
D. 1501.
Frederick, unable to resist the combined Monarchs, each of whom was far his
superior in power, resigned his scepter. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had
concurred in making the conquest, differed about the division of it; and from
allies became enemies. But Gonsalvo de Cordova, partly by the exertion of such
military talents as gave him a just title to the appellation of the Great
Captain, which the Spanish historians have bestowed upon him; and partly by
such shameless and frequent violations of the most solemn engagements, as leave
an indelible stain on his memory; stripped the French of all that they
possessed in the Neapolitan dominions, and secured the peaceable possession of
them to his master. These, together with his other kingdoms, Ferdinand
transmitted to his grandson Charles V. whose right to possess them, if not
altogether uncontrovertible, seems, at least, to be as well founded as that,
which the Kings of France set in opposition to it Droicts des Rois de France au
Royaume de Sicile. Mem. de Comin. edit. de Fresnoy, tom. iv. part. ii. p. 5.
.

State of the duchy of Milan, and the right of succession to it.
THERE is nothing in the political constitution, or interior government of the
duchy of Milan so remarkable, as to require a particular explanation. But as
the right of succession to that fertile province was the cause or the pretext
of almost all the wars carried on in Italy during the reign of Charles V. it is
necessary to trace these disputes to the source, and to inquire into the
pretensions of the various competitors.

DURING the long and fierce contests excited in Italy by the violence of the
Guelf and Ghibeline factions, the family of Visconti rose to great eminence
among their fellow-citizens of Milan. Rise and progress of the disputes
concerning this.
As the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibeline or imperial interest,
they, by way of recompense, received, from one Emperor, the dig-of perpetual
vicars of the Empire in Italy Petrarch epist ap. Struv. corp. i. 625.
They were created by another, A. D. 1354.
Dukes of Milan, and together with that title, A. D. 1395.
the possession of the city and its territories, was bestowed upon them as an
hereditary fief Leibnit. cod. jur. gent. diploni. vol. i. 237.
. John King of France, among other expedients for raising money, which the
calamities of his reign obliged him to employ, condescended to give one of his
daughters in marriage to John Galeazzo Visconti the first Duke of Milan, from
whom he had received considerable sums. Valentine Visconti one of the children
of this marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke of Orleans, the only brother of
Charles VI. In their marriage-contract which the Pope confirmed, it was
stipulated that, upon failure of heirs-male in the family of Visconti, the
duchy of Milan should descend to the posterity of Valentine and the Duke of
Orleans. That event took place. In the year one thousand four hundred and
forty-seven, Philip Maria the last Prince of the ducal family of Visconti died.
Various competitors pretend to the succession. Charles Duke of Orleans pleaded
his right to it, founded on the marriage-contract of his mother Valentine
Visconti. Alfonso King of Naples claimed it in consequenee of a will made by
Philip Maria in his favor. The Emperor contended that upon the extinction of
male issue in the family of Visconti the fief returned to the superior Lord,
and ought to be re-annexed to the Empire. The people of Milan smitten with that
love of liberty which prevailed among the Italian States, declared against the
dominion of any master, and established a republican form of government.

BUT during the struggle among so many competitors, the prize for which they
contended was seized by one from whom none of them apprehended any danger.
Francis Sforza, the natural son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant to be one of the most eminent
and powerful of the Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his father in the
command of the adventurers who followed his standard, had married a natural
daughter of the last Duke of Milan. Upon this shadow of a title Francis founded
his pretensions to the duchy, which he supported with such talents and valor
as placed him at last on the ducal throne. The virtues as well as abilities
with which he governed, inducing his subjects to forget the defects in his
title, he transmitted his dominions quietly to his son; from whom they
descended to his grandson. He was murdered by his grand uncle Ludovico,
surnamed the Moor, who took possession of the duchy; and his right to it was
confirmed by the investiture of the Emperor Maximilian in the year one thousand
four hundred and ninety-four Ripalm hist. Mediol. lib. vi. 654 ap. Struv. corp.
i. 930. Du Mont Corpse Diplom. tom. iii. p. ii. 333. ibid.
.

LOUIS XI. who took pleasure in depressing the Princes of the blood, and who
admired the political abilities of Francis Sforza, would not permit the Duke of
Orleans to take any step in prosecution of his right to the duchy of Milan.
Ludovico the Moor kept up such a close connection with Charles VIII. that
during the greater part of his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans
continued to lie dormant. But when the crown of France devolved to Louis XII.
Duke of Orleans, he instantly asserted the rights of his family with the ardour
which it was natural to expect. Ludovico Sforza, incapable of contending with
such a rival, was stripped of all his dominions in the space of a few days. The
King, clad in the ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph; and soon after,
Ludovico having been betrayed by the Swiss in his pay, was sent a prisoner into
France, and shut up in the castle of Loches, where he lay unpitied during the
remainder of his days. In consequence of one of the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the history of the Milanese, his son Maximilian Sforza
was placed on the ducal throne, of which he kept possession during the reign of
Louis XII. A. D. 1512.
His successor Francis I. was too high-spirited and enterprizing tamely to
relinquish his title. As soon as he was seated upon the throne, he prepared to
invade the Milanese; and his right of succession to it, appears from this
detail, to have been not only more natural but more just than that of any other
competitor.

IT is unnecessary to enter into any detail with respect to the form of
government in Genoa, Parma, Modena, and the other inferior States of Italy.
Their names, indeed, will often occur in the following history. But the power
of these States themselves was so inconsiderable, that their fate depended
little upon their own efforts; and the frequent revolutions which they
underwent, were brought about by the operations of the Princes who attacked or
defended them, rather than by any thing peculiar in their internal constitution.

OF the great kingdoms on this side of the Alps, Spain is one of the most
considerable; and as it was the hereditary domain of Charles V, The
constitution and vernment of Spain.
as well as the chief source of his power and wealth, a distinct knowledge of
its political constitution is of capital importance toward understanding the
transactions of his reign.

THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the Roman power in Spain, established a
form of government in that country, Conquered by the Vandals.
and brought in customs and laws, perfectly similar to those which were
introduced into the rest of Europe, by the other victorious tribes which
acquired settlements there. For some time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the same steps, and seemed to hold the same course, as
in other European nations. To this progress, A. D. 712. and by the Moors.
a sudden stop was put by the invasions of the Saracens or Moors. The Goths
could not withstand the efforts of their enthusiastic valor, which subdued
Spain, with the same impetuous rapidity that distinguishes all the operations
of their arms. The conquerors introduced into the country in which they settled
the Mohammedan religion, the Arabic language, the manners of the East, together
with that taste for the arts, and that love of elegance and splendor, which
the Caliphs had begun to cultivate among their subjects.

SUCH Gothic nobles, as disdained to submit to the moorish yoke, fled for
refuge to the inaccessible mountains of Asturias, The Christians gradually
recover dominion in Spain.
and comforted themselves with enjoying there the exercise of the Christian
religion, and with maintaining the authority of their ancient laws. Being
joined by many of the boldest and most warlike among their countrymen, they
sallied out upon the adjacent settlements of the Moors, in small parties; and
making short excursions, were satisfied with plunder and revenge, without
thinking of conquest. By degrees, their strength increased, their views
enlarged, a regular government was established among them, and they began to
aim at extending their territories. While they pushed on their attacks with the
unremitting ardour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire of vengeance,
and by the hope of rescuing their country from oppression; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men who had no other occupation
but war, and who were strangers to all the arts which corrupt or enfeeble the
mind, the Moors gradually lost many of the advantages, to which they had been
indebted for their first success. They threw off all dependence on the Caliphs
(...). Sim. Assemanus Histor. Ital. Scriptores. Vol. iii. p. 135.
; they neglected to preserve a close connection with their countrymen in
Africa; their Empire in Spain was split into many small kingdoms; together with
the arts which they cultivated, the luxury to which these gave rise, relaxed,
in some measure, the force of their military institutions, and abated the
vigor of their warlike spirit. The Moors, however, continued still to be a
gallant people, and possessed great resources. According to the magnificent
style of the Spanish historians, eight centuries of almost uninterrupted war
elapsed, 1492.
and three thousand seven hundred battles, were fought before the last of the
Moorish kingdoms in Spain submitted to the Christians arms.

AS the Christians made their conquests upon the Mahometans at various periods,
and under different leaders, The union of its various kingdoms.
each formed the territory which he had wrested from the common enemy, into an
independent State. Spain was divided into as many separate kingdoms, as it
contained provinces, and in each city of note, a petty monarch established his
throne, and assumed all the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years, however,
by the usual events of intermarriages, or legal succession, or conquest, all
these inferior principalities were annexed to the more powerful kingdoms of
Castile and of Aragon, and at length by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand and
Isabella, the former the hereditary Monarch of Aragon, and the latter raised to
the throne of Castile by the affection of her subjects, 1481.
all the Spanish crowns were united, and descended in the same line.

FROM this period, the political constitution of Spain began to assume a
regular and uniform appearance; Their ancient customs and laws reserved amidst
all their revolutions;
the genius of government may be delineated, and the progress of its laws and
manners may be traced with certainty. Notwithstanding the singular revolution
which had happened in Spain, and the peculiarity of its fate, its being so long
subjected to the Mohammedan yoke, the customs introduced by the Vandals and
Goths had taken such deep root, and were so thoroughly incorporated with the
frame of its government, that in every province which the Christians recovered
from the Moors, we find the condition of individuals, as well as the political
constitution, nearly the same as in other nations of Europe. which renders
their state in some degree similar to that of other nations of Europe.
Lands were held by the same tenure; justice was dispensed in the same form;
the same privileges were claimed by the Nobility; and the same power exercised
by the Cortes, or general assembly of the kingdom. Several circumstances
contributed to secure this permanence of the feudal institutions in Spain,
notwithstanding the conquest of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned
them. Such of the Spaniards, as preserved their independance, adhered to their
ancient customs not only from attachment to them, but out of antipathy to the
Moors, to whose ideas concerning property and government these customs were so
totally repugnant. Even among the Christians, who submitted to the Moorish
conquerors, and consented to become their subjects, ancient customs were not
entirely abolished. They were permitted to retain their religion; their laws
concerning private property; their forms of administering justice; and their
mode of levying taxes. The followers of Mahomet are the only enthusiasts, who
have united the spirit of toleration with zeal for making proselytes, and who,
at the same time that they took arms to propagate the doctrine of their
prophet, permitted such as would not embrace it to adhere to their own tenets,
and to practice their own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of the
Mohammedan religion, as well as to the desire of the Moors to reconcile the
Christians to their yoke, it was owing that the ancient manners and laws in
Spain survived the violent shock of a conquest, and continued to subsist,
notwithstanding the introduction of a new religion and a new form of government
into that country. It is obvious from all these particulars, that the
Christians must have found it extremely easy to reestablish manners and
government on their ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain, which
they wrested successively from the Moors. A considerable part of the people
retained such a fondness for the customs, and such a reverence for the laws of
their ancestors, that they wished to see them restored with full authority, and
were not only willing but eager to observe the former, and to recognize the
authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, with all the institutions that
characterize it, Certain peculiarities in their constitution and laws.
was thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as well as in all the
kingdoms which depended on these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political constitutions which distinguish them from those of any other
country in Europe. The regal prerogative, extremely limited in every feudal
kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, The prerogative more limited, and the
immunities of the people more extensive.
within such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of the Sovereign almost to
nothing. The privileges of the Nobility were vast in proportion, and extended
so far as to border on absolute independance. The immunities of the cities were
great, they possessed considerable influence in the Cortes or supreme
assemblies of the nations, and they aspired at obtaining more. Such a state of
Society, in which the political machine was so ill adjusted, and the several
members of the legislature so improperly balanced, produced interior disorders
in the kingdoms of Spain, which rose beyond the pitch of turbulence and
anarchy, usual under the feudal government. The whole tenor of the Spanish
history confirms the truth of this observation; and when the mutinous spirit,
to which the genius of their policy gave birth and vigor, was not restrained
and overawed by the immediate dread of the Moorish arms, it broke out into more
frequent insurrections against the government of their Princes, as well as more
outrageous insults on their dignity, than occur in the annals of any other
country. These were accompanied at some times with more liberal sentiments
concerning the rights of the people, at other times with more elevated notions
concerning the privileges of the nobles, than were common in other nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which was annexed to the kingdom of Aragon,
Instances of this.
the impatience of the people to obtain the redress of their grievances having
prompted them to take arms against their sovereign John II, they, A. D. 1462.
by a solemn deed, recalled the oath of allegiance which they had sworn to him,
declared him and his posterity to be unworthy of the throne Zurita Anales de
Arag. tom. iv. 113, 115, etc.
, and endeavored to establish a republican form of government, in order to
secure the perpetual enjoyment of that liberty, after which they aspired
Ferreras hist. d'espagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans revol. d'Espagne, tom.
iii. p. 155. L. Marinaeus Siculus de reb. Hispan. apud Schotti script. Hispan.
vol. 429.
. Nearly about the same period, the indignation of the Castilian nobility
against the weak and flagitious administration of Henry IV. having led them to
combine against him, they arrogated as one of the privileges belonging to their
order, the right of trying and of passing sentence on their Sovereign. That the
exercise of this power might be as public and solemn, as the pretension to it
was bold, they summoned all the nobility of their party to meet at Avila, A. D.
1465.
a spacious theater was erected in a plain without the walls of the town, an
image representing the King, was seated on a throne clad in royal robes, with a
crown on its head, a scepter in its hand, and the sword of justice by its side.
The accusation against the King was read, and the sentence of deposition was
pronounced, in presence of a numerous assembly. At the close of the first
article of the charge, the archbishop of Toledo advanced, and tore the crown
from the head of the image; at the close of the second, the Conde de Placentia
snatched the sword of justice from its side; at the close of the third, the
Conde de Benevente wrested the scepter from its hand; at the close of the last,
Don Diego Lopez de Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the throne. At the same
instant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother was proclaimed King of Castile and Leon
in his stead Marian. hist. lib. xxiii. c. 9.
.

THE most daring leaders of faction would not have ventured on these measures,
nor have conducted them with such public ceremony, if the sentiments of the
people concerning the royal dignity, had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in Castile and Aragon, as prepared
them to approve of such extraordinary proceedings, or to acquiesce in them.

IN Aragon, the form of government was monarchical, The constitution and
government of Aragon.
but the genius and maxims of it were purely republican. The Kings, who were
long elective, retained only the shadow of power; the real exercise of it was
in the Cortes or parliament of the kingdom. This supreme assembly was composed
of four different arms or members. The nobility of the first rank. The
Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class. The representatives of the
cities and towns, whose right to a place in the Cortes, if we may give credit
to the historians of Aragon, was coeval with the constitution. The
ecclesiastical order, composed of the dignitaries of the church, together with
the representatives of the inferior clergy Forma de celebrar Cortes en Aragon.
por Geron. Martel.
. No law could pass in this assembly without the assent of every single member
who had a right to vote Martel. ibid. p. 2.
. Without the permission of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed; no war could
be declared; no peace concluded; no money could be coined; nor any alteration
be made in the current specie Hier. Blanca comment. rer. Aragon. ap Schot.
script. Hispan. vol. iii. p. 750.
. The power of reviewing the proceedings of all inferior courts, the privilege
of inspecting every department of administration, and the right of redressing
all grievances belonged to the Cortes. Nor did those who conceived themselves
to be aggrieved address the Cortes in the humble tone of supplicants, and
petition for redress; they demanded it as the birthright of freemen, and
required the guardians of their liberty to decide with respect to the points
which they laid before them Martel. Forma de celebr. p. 2.
. This sovereign court was held, during several centuries, every year; but, in
consequence of a regulation introduced about the beginning of the fourteenth
century, it was convened from that period only once in two years. After it was
assembled, the King had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without its own
consent; and the session continued forty days Hier. Blanca comment. 763.
.

NOT satisfied with having erected these barriers against the encroachments of
the royal prerogative, Office and jurisdiction of the Justiza.
nor willing to rely for the preservation of their liberties on the vigilance
and authority of an assembly, similar to the diets, states general, and
parliaments, in which the other feudal nations placed so much confidence, the
Aragonese had recourse to an institution peculiar to themselves, and elected a
Justiza or supreme judge. This magistrate, whose office bore some resemblance
to that of the Ephori in ancient Sparta, acted as the guardian of the people,
and the comptroller of the Prince. The person of the Justiza was sacred, and
his power and jurisdiction almost unbounded. He was the supreme interpreter of
the laws. Not only inferior judges, but the Kings themselves were bound to
consult him in every doubtful case, and to receive his responses with implicit
deference Blanca has preserved two responses of the Justiza to James II. who
reigned toward the close of the thirteenth century, Blanca 748.
. An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as well as from those appointed
by the barons within their respective territories. Even when no appeal was made
to him, he could interpose by his own authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to
proceed, take immediate cognizance of the cause himself, and remove the party
accused to the Manifestation or prison of the state, to which no person had
access but by his permission. His power was exerted with no less vigor and
effect in superintending the administration of government, than in regulating
the course of justice. It was the prerogative of the Justiza to inspect the
conduct of the King. He had a title to review all the royal proclamations and
patents, and to declare whether or not they were agreeable to law, and ought to
be carried into execution. He, by his sole authority, could exclude any of the
King's ministers from the conduct of affairs, and call them to answer for their
mal-administration. He himself was accountable to the Cortes alone, for the
manner in which he discharged the duties of this high office, and performed
functions of the greatest importance that could be committed to a subject NOTE
XXX.
Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747 -- 755.
.

IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the privileges of the Aragonese
Cortes, The regal power circumscribed within narrow limits.
as well as of the rights belonging to the Justiza, that a very small portion
of power remained in the hands of the King. The Aragonese seem to have been
sollicitous that their Monarchs should know and feel this state of impotence to
which they were reduced. Even in swearing allegiance to their sovereign, an act
which ought, naturally, to be accompanied with professions of submission and
respect, they devised an oath, in such a form, as to remind him of his
dependence on his subjects. "We," said the Justiza to the King in name of his
high-spirited barons, "who are each of us as good, and who are altogether more
powerful than you, promise obedience to your government, if you maintain our
rights and liberties* but if not, not." Conformably to this oath, they
established it as a fundamental article in their constitution, that if the King
should violate their rights and privileges, it was lawful for the people to
disclaim him as their sovereign, and to elect another in his place Hier. Blanca
Comment. 720.
. The attachment of the Aragonese to this singular constitution of government,
was extreme, and their respect for it approached to superstitious veneration
NOTE XXXI.
. In the preamble to one of their laws, they declare that such was the
barrenness of their country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that if it
were not on account of the liberties by which they were distinguished from
other nations, the people would abandon it, and go in quest of a settlement to
some more fruitful region Hier. Blanca Com p. 751.
.

IN Castile, there were not such peculiarities in the form of government, as to
establish any remarkable distinction between it, Constitution and government of
Castile.
and that of the other European nations. The executive part of government was
committed to the King, but with a prerogative extremely limited. The
legislative authority resided in the Cortes, which was composed of the
nobility, the dignified ecclesiastics, and the representatives of the cities.
The assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very ancient, and seems to have been
coeval with the constitution. The members of the three different orders, who
had a right of suffrage, met in one place, and deliberated as one collective
body; the decisions of which were regulated by the sentiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enacting laws, and of redressing grievances
belonged to this assembly; and in order to secure the assent of the King to
such statutes and regulations, as were deemed salutary or beneficial to the
kingdom, it was usual in the Cortes, to take no step toward granting money,
until all business relative to the public welfare was concluded. The
representatives of cities seem to have obtained a seat very early in the Cortes
of Castile, and soon acquired such influence and credit, as were very uncommon,
at a period when the splendor and pre-eminence of the nobility had eclipsed or
annihilated all other orders of men. The number of members from cities bore
such a proportion to that of the whole collective body, as rendered them
extremely respectable in the Cortes NOTE XXXII.
. The degree of consideration, which they possessed in the state, may be
estimated by one event. A. D. 1390.
Upon the death of John I, a council of regency was appointed to govern the
kingdom during the minority of his son. It was composed of an equal number of
noblemen, and of deputies chosen by the cities; the latter were admitted to the
same rank, and invested with the same powers, as prelates and grandees of the
first order Marian. hist lib. 18. c. 15.
. But though the members of communities in Castile were elevated above the
condition wherein they were placed in other kingdoms of Europe; though they had
attained to such political importance, that even the proud and jealous spirit
of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude them from some share of government;
yet the nobles, notwithstanding these acquisitions of the commons, continued to
assert the privileges of their order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone
extremely high. There was not any body of nobility in Europe more distinguished
for independance of spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and bold pretensions,
than that of Castile. The history of that monarchy affords the most striking
examples of the vigilance with which they observed, and of the vigor with
which they opposed every scheme of their Kings, that tended to encroach on
their jurisdiction, to diminish their dignity, or to abridge their power. Even
in their ordinary intercourse with their Monarchs, they preserved such a
consciousness of their rank, that the nobles of the first order claimed it as a
privilege to be covered in the royal presence, and approached their sovereigns
rather as equals than as subjects.

THE constitution of the subordinate monarchies, which depended on the crowns
of Castile and Aragon, nearly resembled that of the kingdom to which they were
annexed. In all of them, the dignity and independance of the nobles were great;
the immunities and power of the cities were considerable.

AN attentive observation of the singular situation of Spain, Various causes of
the limited authority of the Spanish Monarchs.
as well as of the various events which occurred there, from the invasion of
the Moors to the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand and Isabella, will
discover those causes, to which all the peculiarites in its political
constitution, that I have pointed out, ought to be ascribed.

AS the provinces of Spain were wrested from the Mahometans gradually and with
difficulty, the nobles, who followed the standard of any eminent leader in
these wars, conquered not for him alone, but for themselves. They claimed a
share in the lands which their valor had torn from the enemy, and their
prosperity and power increased, in proportion as the territory of the Prince
extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors, the Monarchs of Spain depended so
much on their nobles, that it became necessary to conciliate their good will by
successive grants of new honors and privileges. By the time that any Prince
could establish his dominion in a conquered province, the greater part of the
property was parcelled out by him among his barons, with such jurisdiction and
immunities as raised them almost to sovereign power.

AT the same time, the kingdoms erected in so many different corners of Spain
were extremely inconsiderable. The petty Monarch was but litttle elevated above
his nobles. They, feeling themselves to be almost his equals, acted as such.
The Kings of such limited domains could neither command much respect, nor
possess great power; and noblemen, so nearly on the same level, could not look
up to them with that reverence, with which the sovereigns of the great
monarchies in Europe were viewed by their subjects NOTE XXXIII.
.

THESE circumstances concurred in exalting the nobility, and in depressing the
royal authority; there were others, which raised the cities in Spain to
consideration and power.

AS the open country, during the wars with the Moors, was perpetually exposed
to the excursions of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce was so permanent as
to prove any lasting security, self-preservation obliged persons of all ranks
to fix their residence in places of strength. The castles of the barons, which,
in other countries, afforded a commodious retreat from the depradations of
banditti, or from the transient violence of any interior commotion, were unable
to resist an enemy whose operations were conducted with regular and persevering
vigor. Cities, in which great numbers united for their mutual defense, were
the only places to which people could retire with any prospect of safety. To
this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in Spain of which the
Christians recovered possession. All who fled from the Moorish yoke resorted to
them, as to an asylum; and there, the greater part of those, who took the field
against the Mahometans, established their families.

EACH of these cities, during a longer or shorter course of years, was the
capital of a little state, and enjoyed all the advantages, which accelerate the
increase of inhabitants in every place that is the seat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the beginning of the fifteenth century, was
considerable, and they were peopled far beyond the proportion which was common
in other parts of Europe, except in Italy and the Low Countries. The Moors had
introduced manufactures into these cities, while under their dominion. The
Christians, who, by intermixture with them, had learned their arts, continued
to cultivate these. The trade of several of the Spanish towns appears to have been considerable; and the spirit of commerce continued to preserve the number
of their inhabitants, as the sense of danger had first induced them to crowd
together.

AS the Spanish cities were populous, many of the inhabitants were of a rank
superior to those who resided in towns in other countries of Europe. That cause
which contributed chiefly to their population, affected equally persons of
every condition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in order to find shelter,
or in hopes of making a stand there against the enemy, with greater advantage
than in any other station. The persons elected as their representatives in the
Cortes by the cities, or promoted to offices of trust and dignity in the
government of the community, were often, as will appear from transactions which
I shall hereafter relate, of such considerable rank in the kingdom, as
reflected luster on their constituents, and on the stations wherein they were
placed.

AS it was impossible to carry on a continual war against the Moors, without
some other military force, than that which the barons were obliged to bring
into the field, in consequence of the feudal tenures, it bebecame necessary to
have some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry, in constant pay. It was
one of the privileges of the nobles, that their lands were exempt from the
burden of taxes. The charge of supporting the troops requisite for the public
safety, fell wholly upon the cities; and their Kings, being obliged frequently
to apply to them for aid, found it necessary to gain their favor by
concessions, which extended their immunities, and added to their wealth and
power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumstances, peculiar to Spain, is added to
the general and common causes which contributed to aggrandize cities in other
countries of Europe, this will fully account for the extensive privileges which
they acquired, as well as the extraordinary consideration to which they
attained, in all the Spanish kingdoms NOTE XXXIV.
.

BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility, and this unusual power of the
cities in Spain, Measures of different Princes in order to extend their power,
particularly of Ferdinand and Isabella.
the royal prerogative was hemmed in on every hand, and reduced within very
narrow bounds. Sensible of this, and impatient of such restraint, different
Monarchs endeavored, at various junctures, to enlarge their own jurisdiction,
and to circumscribe that of their subjects. Their power, however, or their
abilities were so unequal to the undertaking, that their efforts were attended
with little success. But when Ferdinand and Isabella found themselves at the
head of all the united kingdoms of Spain, and delivered from the danger and
interruption of domestic wars, they were not only in a condition to resume,
but were able to prosecute with advantage, the schemes of extending the
prerogative, which their ancestors had attempted in vain. Ferdinand's profound
sagacity in concerting his measures, his persevering industry in conducting
them, and his uncommon address in carrying them into execution, fitted him
admirably for an undertaking which required all these talents.

AS the overgrown power, and high pretensions of the nobility were what the
Monarchs of Spain felt most sensibly, Ferdinand's different schemes for
abridging the privileges and power of the nobility.
and bore with the greatest impatience, the great object of Ferdinand's policy
was to reduce these within more moderate bounds. Under various pretexts,
sometimes by violence, more frequently in consequence of decrees obtained in
the courts of law, he wrested from the barons a great part of the lands, which
had been granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of former Monarchs,
particularly during the feeble and profuse reign of his predecessor Henry IV.
He did not give the entire conduct of affairs to persons of noble birth, who
were accustomed to occupy every department of importance in peace or in war, as
if it had been a privilege peculiar to their order, to be employed as the sole
counselors and ministers of the crown. He often transacted business of great
consequence without their intervention, and committed many offices of power and
trust to new men, devoted to his interest Zurita anales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 22.
. He introduced a degree of state dignity into his court, which being unknown
in Spain, while it remained split into many small kingdoms, taught the nobles
to approach their sovereign with more ceremony, and gradually rendered him the
object of greater deference and respect.

THE annexing the masterships of the three military orders of St. Jago,
Calatrava, and Alcantara, to the crown, Particularly by annexing the
grand-masterships of the three orders to the crown;
was another expedient, by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the revenue and
power of the Kings of Spain. These orders were instituted in imitation of those
of the Knights Templars and of St. John of Jerusalem, on purpose to wage
perpetual war with the Mahometans, and to protect the pilgrims who visited
Compostella, or other places of eminent sanctity in Spain. The zeal and
superstition of the ages, in which they were founded, prompted persons of every
rank to bestow such liberal donations on these holy warriors, that, in a short
time, they engrossed a considerable share in the property and wealth of the
kingdom. The masterships of these orders came to be stations of the greatest
power and opulence to which a Spanish nobleman could be advanced. These high
dignities were in the disposal of the Knights of the Order, and placed the
persons on whom they conferred them almost on a level with their sovereign NOTE
XXXV.
. Ferdinand, unwilling that the nobility, whom he considered as already too
formidable, should derive such additional credit and influence from possessing
the government of these wealthy fraternities, was solicitous to wrest it out of
their hands, and to vest it in the crown. His measures for accomplishing this,
were wisely planned, A. D. 1476. and 1493.
and executed with vigor Marian. hist. lib. xxv. c. 5.
By address, by promises, and by threats, he prevailed on the Knights of each
Order to place Isabella and him at the head of it. Innocent VIII. and Alexander
VI. gave this election the sanction of papal authority Zurita anales tom. v p.
22. Aelii. Anton. Nebrissensis rerum a Ferdinand and Elizabe gestarum decades.
ii. apud Schot. script. Hispan i 860.
; and subsequent Pontiffs rendered the annexation of these masterships to the
crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished the power and influence of the
nobility, and added new luster or authority to the crown, And by circumscribing
the jurisdiction of the nobility.
he was taking other important steps, with a view to the same object. The
sovereign jurisdiction which the feudal barons exercised within their own
territories, was the pride and distinction of their order. To have invaded
openly a privilege which they prized so highly, and in defense of which they
would have run so eagerly to arms, was a measure too daring for a Prince of
Ferdinand's cautious temper. He took advantage, however, of an opportunity
which the state of his kingdoms and the spirit of his people presented him, in
order to undermine what he durst not assault. The incessant depredations of the
Moors, the want of discipline among the troops which were employed to oppose
them, the frequent civil wars between the crown and the nobility, as well as
the undiscerning rage with which the barons carried on their private wars with
each other, filled all the provinces of Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage,
and murder, became so common, as not only to interrupt commerce, but in a great
measure to suspend all intercourse between one place and another. That security
and protection which men expect from entering into civil society ceased almost
totally. Interior order and police, while the feudal institutions remained in
vigor, were so little objects of attention, and the administration of justice
was so extremely feeble, that it would have been in vain to have expected
relief from the established laws or the ordinary judges. But the evil became so
intolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were the chief sufferers, grew
so impatient of this anarchy, that self preservation forced them to have
recourse to an extraordinary remedy. 1260.
About the middle of the thirteenth century, the cities in the kingdom of
Aragon, and after their example those in Castile, formed themselves into an
association, distinguished by the name of the Holy Brotherhood. They exacted a
certain contribution from each of the associated towns; they levied a
considerable body of troops, in order to protect travelers, and to pursue
criminals; they appointed judges, who opened their courts in various parts of
the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery, or of any act that violated
the public peace, and was seized by the troops of the Brotherhood, was carried
before their own judges, who, without paying any regard to the exclusive and
sovereign jurisdiction which the lord of the place might claim, tried and
condemned the criminals. By means of this, the prompt and impartial
administration of justice was restored; and together with it, internal
tranquillity and order began to return. The nobles alone murmured at this
salutary institution. They complained of it as an encroachment on one of their
most valuable privileges. They remonstrated against it in an high tone; and, on
some occasions, refused to grant any aid to the crown, unless it were
abolished. Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the good effects of the
Holy Brotherhood with respect to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate the territorial jurisdiction
of the nobility. He countenanced the institution on every occasion. He
supported it with the whole force of royal authority; and besides the
expedients employed by him in common with the other monarchs of Europe, be
availed himself of this institution, which was peculiar to his kingdom, in
order to limit and abolish that independent jurisdiction of the nobility, which
was no less inconsistent with the authority of the Prince, than with the order
of society NOTE XXXVI.
.

BUT though Ferdinand by these measures considerably enlarged the boundaries of
prerogative, Notwithstanding all these, the government of Spain still extremely
free.
and acquired a degree of influence and power far beyond what any of his
predecessors had enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority, and the
barriers against its encroachments, continued to be many and strong. The spirit
of liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain; the spirit of independance
was high among the nobility; and though the love of glory, peculiar to the
Spaniards in every period of their history, prompted them to support Ferdinand
with zeal in his foreign operations, and to afford him such aid as enabled him
not only to undertake but to execute great enterprises; he reigned over his
subjects with a jurisdiction less extensive than that of any of the great
monarchs in Europe. It will appear from many passages in the following history,
that, during a considerable part of the reign of his successor Charles V. the
prerogative of the Spanish crown was equally circumscribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France so nearly resembled those of the
other feudal kingdoms, Constitution and government of France.
that such a detail with respect to them as was necessary, in order to convey
some idea of the nature and effects of the peculiar institutions which took
place in Spain, would be superfluous. In the view which I have exhibited of the
means by which the French monarchs acquired such full command of the national
force of their kingdom, as enabled them to engage in extensive schemes of
foreign operation. I have already pointed out the great steps by which they
advanced toward a more ample possession of political power, and a more
uncontrouled exercise of their royal prerogative. All that now remains is to
take notice of such particulars in the constitution of France, as serve either
to distinguish it from that of other countries, or tend to throw any light on
the transactions of that period to which the following history extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the first race; the royal prerogative was very
inconsiderable. The General Assemblies of the nation, Power of the General
Assemblies under the first race of Kings.
which met annually at stated seasons, extended their authority to every
department of government. The power of electing Kings, of enacting laws, of
redressing grievances, of passing judgment in the last resort, with respect to
every person and to every cause, and of conferring donations on the Prince,
resided in this great convention of the nation. Under the second.
Under the second race of Kings, notwithstanding the power and splendour which
the conquests of Charlemagne added to the crown, the general assemblies of the
nations continued to possess extensive authority. The right of determining
which of the royal family should be placed on the throne was vested in them.
The monarchs elected by their suffrage were accustomed regularly to call and to
consult them with respect to every affair of importance to the state, and
without their consent no (...) was passed, and no new tax was levied.

BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father of the third race of Kings, took
possession of the throne of France, Under the third.
such changes had happened in the political state of the kingdom, as
considerably affected the power and jurisdiction of the general assembly of the
nation. The royal authority in the hands of the degenerate posterity of
Charlemagne, had dwindled into insignificance and contempt. Every considerable
proprietor of land had formed his territory into a barony, almost independent
of the sovereign. The dukes or governors of provinces, the counts or governors
of towns and small districts, and the great officers of the crown, had rendered
these dignities, originally granted only during pleasure or for life,
hereditary in their families. Each of these had usurped all the rights which
hitherto had been deemed the distinctions of royalty, particularly the
privileges of dispensing justice within their own domains, of coining money,
and of waging war. Every district was governed by local customs, acknowledged a
distinct lord, and pursued a separate interest. The formality of doing homage
to their sovereign, was almost the only act of subjection which haughty barons
would perform, and that bound them no farther than they were willing to
acknowledge its obligation NOTE XXXVII.
.

IN a kingdom broken into so many independent baronies, hardly any common
principle of union remained; The power of the General Assembly less
considerable and extensive.
and the general assembly in its deliberations could scarce consider the nation
as forming one body, or establish common regulations to be of equal force in
every part. Within the immediate domains of the crown the king might publish
laws, and they were obeyed, because there he was acknowledged as the only lord.
But if he had aimed at rendering these general, that would have alarmed the
barons as an encroachment upon the independance of their jurisdiction. The
barons, with no less care, avoided the enacting of general laws, because the
execution of them must have been vested in the King, and would have enlarged
that paramount power which was the object of their jealousy. Thus, under the
descendants of Hugh Capet, the States General (for that was the name by which
the supreme assembly of the French nation came then to be distinguished) lost
their legislative authority, or at least entirely relinquished the exercise of
it. From that period, the jurisdiction of the States General extended no
farther than to the imposition of new taxes, the determination of questions
with respect to the right of succession to the crown, the settling of the
regency when the preceding monarch had not fixed it by his will, and the
presenting remonstrances enumerating the grievances of which the nation wished
to obtain redress.

AS, during several centuries, the monarchs of Europe seldom demanded
extraordinary subsidies of their subjects, and the other events which required
the interposition of the States, rarely occurred, their meetings in France were
not frequent. They were summoned occasionally by their Kings, when compelled by
their wants or by their fears to have recourse to their aid; but they did not,
like the Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the Parliament in England,
form an essential member of the constitution, the regular exertion of whose
powers was requisite to give vigor and order to government.

WHEN the states of France ceased to exercise legislative authority, The crown
begins to acquire legislative authority,
the Kings began to assume it. They ventured at first on acts of legislation
with great reserve; and after taking every precaution that could prevent their
subjects from being alarmed at the exercise of a new power. They did not at
once issue their ordinances in a tone of authority and command. They treated
with their subjects; they pointed out what was best; and allured them to comply
with it. By degrees, however, as the prerogative of the crown extended, and as
the supreme jurisdiction of the royal courts came to be established, the Kings
of France assumed more openly the style and authority of lawgivers, and before
the beginning of the fifteenth century, the complete legislative power was
vested in them NOTE XXXVIII.
.

HAVING secured this important acquisition, the steps that led to the right of
imposing taxes were rendered few and easy. and the power of levying taxes.
The people, accustomed to see their sovereigns, by their sole authority, issue
ordonances which regulated points of the greatest consequence with respect to
the property of their subjects, were not alarmed when they were required, by
the royal edicts, to contribute certain sums toward supplying the exigencies
of government, and carrying forward the measures of the nation. When Charles
VII. and Louis XI. first ventured to exercise this new power, in the manner
which I have already described, the gradual increase of the royal authority had
so imperceptibly prepared the minds of the people of France for this
innovation, that it excited no commotion in the kingdom, and seems scarce to
have given rise to any murmur or complaint.

WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrossed every power which can be exerted
in government; Government of France becomes purely monarchical.
when the right of making laws, of levying money, of keeping an army of
mercenaries in constant pay, of declaring war and of concluding peace centered
in the crown, the constitution of the kingdom, which, under the first race of
Kings, was nearly democratical, which, under the second race, became an
aristocracy, terminated, under the third race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing
that tended to preserve the appearance, or revive the memory of the ancient
mixed government, seems from that period to have been industriously avoided.
During the long and active reign of Francis I. the variety as well as extent of
whose operations obliged him to lay many heavy impositions on his subjects, the
States General of France were not once assembled, nor were the people once
allowed to exert the power of taxing themselves, which, according to the
original ideas of feudal government, was a right essential to every freeman.

TWO things, however, remained, which moderated the exercise of the regal
prerogative, The exercise of prerogative restrained by the privileges of the
nobility.
and restrained it within such bounds as preserved the constitution of France
from degenerating into mere despotism. The rights and privileges claimed by the
nobility must be considered as one barrier against the absolute dominion of the
crown. Though the nobles of France had lost that political power which was
vested in their order as a body, they still retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank. They preserved a consciousness
of elevation above other classes of citizens; an exemption from burdens to
which they were subject; a contempt of the occupations in which they were
engaged; the privilege of assuming ensigns that indicated their dignity; a
title to be treated with a certain degree of deference during peace; and a
claim to various distinctions when in the field. Many of these pretensions were
not founded on the words of statutes, or derived from positive laws; they were
defined and ascertained by the maxims of honor, a title more delicate, but no
less sacred. These rights, established and protected by a principle equally
vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in defending them, are to the Sovereign
himself objects of respect and veneration Wherever they stand in its way, the
royal prerogative is bounded. The violence of a Despot may exterminate such an
order of men; but as long as it subsists, and its ideas of personal distinction
remain entire, the power of the Prince has limits Des Esprits des Loix, live.
ii. c. 4. Dr. Ferguson's Essay on the Hist. of Civil Society, part. i. sec. 10.
.

AS in France, the body of nobility was very numerous and retained an high
sense of their own pre-eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a great measure,
the mode of exercising the royal prerogative which peculiarly distinguishes the
government of that kingdom. An intermediate order was placed between the
Monarch and his other subjects, and in every act of authority it became
necessary to attend to its privileges, and not only to guard against any real
violation of these, but to avoid any suspicion of its being possible that they
might be violated. Thus a species of government was established in France,
unknown in the ancient world, that of a monarchy, in which the power of the
sovereign, though unconfined by any legal or constitutional restraint, has
certain bounds set to it by the ideas which one class of his subjects entertain
concerning their own dignity.

THE jurisdiction of the Parliaments of France, particularly that of Paris, And
by the jurisdiction of the parliaments, particularly that of Paris.
was the other barrier which served to confine the exercise of the royal
prerogative within certain limits. The parliament of Paris was originally the
court of the Kings of France, to which they committed the supreme
administration of justice within their own domains, as well as the power of
deciding with respect to all cases brought before it by appeals from the courts
of the barons. When the time and place of its meeting were fixed, when not only
the form of its procedure, but the principles on which it decided, were
rendered regular and consistent, when every cause of importance was finally
determined there, and when the people became accustomed to resort thither as to
the supreme temple of justice, the parliament of Paris rose to high estimation
in the kingdom, its members acquired dignity, and its decrees were submitted
to, with deference. The Kings of France, when they first began to assume the
legislative power, in order to reconcile the minds of their people to this new
exertion of prerogative, produced their edicts and ordonances in the parliament
of Paris, that they might be approved of and registered there, before they were
published and declared to be of authority in the kingdom. During the intervals
between the meetings of the States General of the kingdom, or under those
reigns when the States General were not assembled, the Monarchs of France were
accustomed to consult the parliament of Paris with respect to the most arduous
affairs of government, and frequently regulated their conduct by its advice, in
declaring war, in concluding peace, and in other transactions of public
concern. Thus there was erected in the kingdom a tribunal which became the
great depository of the laws, and by the uniform tenor of its decrees it
established principles of justice and forms of proceeding which were considered
as so sacred, that even the sovereign power of the Monarch durst not venture to
disregard or to violate them. The members of this illustrious body, though they
neither possess legislative authority, nor can be considered as the
representatives of the people, have availed themselves of the reputation and
influence which they had acquired among their countrymen, in order to make a
stand to the utmost of their ability against every unprecedented and exorbitant
exertion of the prerogative. In every period of the French history, they have
merited the praise of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of the rights and
privileges of the nation NOTE XXXIX.
.

THE kingdom extends to the confines of the German Empire from which Charles V.
derived his title of highest dignity. Constitution and government of the German
Empire.
In explaining the political constitution of this vast and complex body at the
beginning of the sixteenth century, I shall avoid entering into such a detail
as would involve my readers in that inextricable labyrinth, which is formed by
the multiplicity of its tribunals, the number of its members, their interfering
rights, and by the endless discussions or refinements of the public lawyers of
Germany with respect to all these.

THE Empire of Charlemagne was a structure erected in so short a time that it
could not be permanent. Its state under Charlemagne and his descendants.
Under his immediate successor it began to totter: and it soon fell to pieces.
The crown of Germany was separated for ever from that of France, and the
descendans of Charlemagne established two great monarchies so situated as to
give rise to a perpetual rivalship and enmity between them. But the Princes of
the race of Charlemagne, who were placed on the Imperial throne, were not
altogether so degenerate, as those of the same family who reigned in France. In
the hands of the former the royal authority retained some vigor, and the
nobles of Germany, though possessed of extensive privileges as well as ample
territories, did not so early attain independance. The great offices of the
crown continued to be at the disposal of the sovereign, and during a long
period, fiefs remained in their original state, without becoming hereditary and
perpetual in the families to which they had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the family of Charlemagne became extinct, Other
families are raised to the Imperial dignity.
and his feeble descendants who reigned in France had sunk into such contempt,
that the Germans, without looking toward them, exercised the right inherent in
a free people; and in a general assembly of the nation elected Conrad Count of
Franconia Emperor. A. D. 911.
After him Henry of Saxony and his descendants the three Othos, were placed, in
succession, on the Imperial throne, by the suffrages of their countrymen. The
extensive territories of the Saxon Emperors, their eminent abilities and
enterprizing genius not only added new vigor to the imperial dignity, but
raised it to higher power and pre-eminence. Otho the Great marched at the head
of a numerous army into Italy, A. D. 952.
and after the example of Charlemagne, gave law to that country. Every power
there recognized his authority. He created Popes and deposed them by his
sovereign mandate. He annexed the kingdom of Italy to the German Empire. Elated
with his success, he assumed the title of Caesar Augustus Annalista Saxo, etc.
ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.
; and a Prince born in the heart of Germany pretended to be the successor of
the Emperors of ancient Rome, and claimed a right to the same power and
prerogative.

BUT while the Emperors, by means of these new titles, and new dominions,
gradually acquired additional power and splendor, The German nobility acquire
independent and sovereign authority.
the nobility of Germany went on at the same time extending their privileges
and jurisdiction. The situation of affairs was favorable to their attempts.
The vigor which Charlemagne had given to government quickly relaxed. The
inability of some of his successors was such, as would have encouraged vassals
less enterprizing than the nobles of that age, to have claimed new rights and
to have assumed new powers. The civil wars in which other Emperors were
engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court to their subjects, on whose
support they depended, and not only to connive at their usurpations, but to
permit and even to authorize them. Fiefs became gradually hereditary, They were
transmitted not only in the direct, but in the collateral line. The investiture
of them was demanded not only by male but by female heirs. Every baron began to
exercise sovereign jurisdiction within his own domains; and the Dukes and
Counts of Germany took wide steps toward rendering their territories distinct
and independent States Pseffel. abrege, p. 120, Lib. Feudor, tit. i.
. The Saxon Emperors observed their progress, and were aware of its tendency.
The German ecclesiastics raised to the same power.
But as they could not hope to humble vassals already grown too potent, unless
they had turned their whole force as well as attention to that enterprise, and
as they were extremely intent on their expeditions into Italy, which they could
not undertake without the concurrence of their nobles, they were sollicitous
not to alarm them by any direct attack on their privileges and jurisdictions.
They aimed, however, at undermining their power, and inconsiderately bestowed
additional territories, and accumulated new honors on the clergy, in hopes
that this order might serve as a counterpoise to that of the nobility in any
future struggle Pseffel. abrege, p. 154.
.

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in policy were quickly felt. The fatal
effects of aggrandizing the clergy. A. D. 1024.
Under the Emperors of the Franconian and Swabian lines, whom the Germans by
their voluntary election placed on the imperial throne, a new face of things
appeared, and a scene was exhibited in Germany, which astonished all
Christendom at that time, and which in the present age appears almost
incredible. The Popes, hitherto dependant on the Emperors, and indebted for
their power as well as dignity to their beneficence and protection, began to
claim a superior jurisdiction; and in virtue of authority which they pretended
to derive from heaven, tried, condemned, excommunicated and deposed their
former masters. Nor is this to be considered merely as a frantic sally of
passion in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas concerning the extent of
priestly domination, and the plenitude of papal power Gregory VII. was able as
well as daring. His presumption and violence were accompanied with political
discernment and sagacity. He had observed that the Princes and Nobles of
Germany, had acquired such considerable territories and such extensive
jurisdiction as rendered them not only formidable to the Emperors, but disposed
them to favor any attempt to circumscribe their Power. He foresaw that the
ecclesiastics of Germany, raised almost to a level with its Princes, were
ready to support any person who would stand forth as the protector of their
privileges and independance. With both of these Gregory negociated, and had
secured many devoted adherents among them, before he ventured to enter the
lists against the head of the Empire.

HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a pretext that was popular and
plausible. The contests between the Popes and Emperors, and the consequences of
these.
He complained of the venality and corruption with which the Emperor had
granted the investiture of benefices to ecclesiastics. He contended that this
right belonged to him as head of the church; he required Henry to confine
himself within the bounds of his civil jurisdiction, and to abstain for the
future from such sacrilegious encroachment on his spiritual dominion. All the
censures of the church were denounced against Henry, because he refused to
relinquish those powers which his predecessors had uniformly exercised. The
most considerable of the German Princes and ecclesiastics were excited to take
arms against him. His mother, his wife, his sons were wrought upon to disregard
all the ties of blood as well as of duty, and to join the party of his enemies
Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 325.
. Such were the successful arts with which the court of Rome inflamed the
superstitious zeal, and conducted the factious spirit of the Germans and
Italians, that an Emperor, distinguished not only for many virtues, but
possessed of considerable talents, was at length obliged to appear as a
supplicant at the gate of the castle in which the Pope resided, and to stand
there, three days, barefooted, in the depth of winter, imploring a pardon,
which at length he obtained with difficulty NOTE XL.
. A. D. 1077.


THIS act of humiliation degraded the Imperial dignity. Nor was the depression
only momentary. The contest between Gregory and Henry gave rise to the two
great factions of the Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which supporting
the pretensions of the Popes, and the latter defending the rights of the
Emperor, kept Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation during three centuries.
A regular system for humbling the Emperors and circumscribing their power was
formed, and adhered to uniformly throughout that period. The Popes, The
Imperial authority gradually declines.
the free States in Italy, the nobility and ecclesiastics of Germany, were all
interested in its success; and notwithstanding the return of some short
intervals of vigor, under the administration of a few able Emperors, the
Imperial authority continued to decline. During the anarchy of the long
interregnum subsequent to the death of William of Holland, A. D. 1256.
it dwindled down to nothing. A. D. 1273.
Rodulph of Hapsburgh, the founder of the house of Austria, and who first
opened the way to its future grandeur was at length elected Emperor, not that
he might re-establish and extend the Imperial authority, but because his
territories and influence were so inconsiderable as not to excite the jealousy
of the German Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms of a
constitution, the power and vigor of which they had destroyed. Several of his
successors were placed on the Imperial throne from the same motive; and almost
every remaining prerogative was wrested out of the hands of feeble Princes,
unable to exercise or to defend them.

DURING this period of turbulence and confusion the constitution of the
Germanick body underwent a total change. A total change in the political
constitution of the Empire.
The ancient names of courts and magistrates, together with the original forms
and appearance of policy were preserved; but such new privileges and
jurisdiction were assumed, and so many various rights established, that the
same species of government no longer subsisted. The Princes, the great
nobility, the dignified ecclesiastics, the free cities had taken advantage of
the interregnum, which I have mentioned, to establish or to extend their
usurpations. They claimed and exercised the right of governing their respective
territories with full sovereignty. They acknowledged no superior with respect
to any point, relative to the interior administration and police of their
domains. They enacted laws, imposed taxes, coined money, declared war,
concluded peace, and exerted every prerogative peculiar to independent States.
The ideas of order and political union which had formed the various provinces
of Germany into one body were entirely lost; and the society must have
dissolved, if the forms of feudal subordination had not preserved such an
appearance of connection or dependence among the various members of the
community, as preserved it from falling to pieces.

THIS bond of union, however, was extremely feeble; and no principle remained
in the German constitution of sufficient force to maintain public order,
Expedients for putting an end to this state of anarchy.
and hardly to ascertain personal security. From the accession of Rodulph of
Hapsburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the immediate predecessor of Charles V.
the Empire felt every calamity which a state must endure when the authority of
government is so much relaxed as to have lost all vigor. The causes of
dissension among that vast number of members which composed the Germanick body,
were infinite and unavoidable. These gave rise to perpetual private wars,
carried on with all the violence of resentment when unrestrained by superior
authority, Rapine, outrage and exactions, became universal. Commerce was
interrupted; industry suspended; and every part of Germany resembled a country
which an enemy had plundered and laid desolate See above page 4^ and note xxi.
Datt. de pace publica Imper. p. 25, no. 53. p. 28, no. 26. p. ^^, no. 11.
. The variety of expedients employed with a view to restore order and
tranquillity, prove that the grievances occasioned by this state of anarchy had
grown intolerable. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the differences among
the several states. The cities united in a league, the object of which was to
check the rapine and extortions of the nobility. The nobility formed
confederacies, on purpose to maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several Circles, in each of which a provincial and
partial jurisdiction was established, to supply the place of a public and
common tribunal ^att. passim. Struv. Corp. Hist. i. 510, etc.
.

BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that they served only to demonstrate
the the violence of that anarchy which prevailed, Particularlarly by the
Institution of the Imperial Chamber.
and the inefficacy of the means employed to correct it. At length Maximilian,
by instituting the Imperial chamber, a tribunal composed of judges named partly
by the Emperor, A. D. 1495.
partly by the several States, and vested with authority to decide finally
concerning all differences among the members of the Germanick body,
re-established public order in the Empire, A. D. 1512.
A few years after, by giving a new form to the Aulick council, which takes
cognizance of all feudal causes, and such as belong to the Emperor's immediate
jurisdiction, he restored some degree of vigor to the Imperial authority.

BUT notwithstanding the salutary effects of these regulations and
improvements, At the beginning of the sixteenth century, the Empire an
association of sovereign states.
the political constitution of the German Empire, at the commencement of the
period of which I propose to write the history, was of a species so peculiar as
not to resemble perfectly any form of government known either in the ancient or
modern world. It was a complex body, formed by the association of several
States, each of which possessed sovereign and independent jurisdiction within
its own territories. Of all the members which composed this united body, the
Emperor was the head. In his name, all decrees and regulations with respect to
points of common concern, were issued; and to him the power of carrying them
into execution was committed. But this appearance of monarchical power in the
Emperor was more than counterbalanced by the influence and authority of the
Princes and States of the Empire in every act of administration. No law
extending to the whole body could pass, no resolution that affected the general
interest could be taken, without the approbation of the Diet of the Empire. In
this assembly, every sovereign Prince and State of the Germanick body had a
right to be present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees or Recesses of the
Diet were the laws of the Empire, which the Emperor was bound to ratify and
enforce.

UNDER this aspect the constitution of the Empire appears a regular
confederacy, Peculiarities in the nature of this association.
similar to the Achaean league in ancient Greece, or to that of the United
Provinces and of the Swiss cantons in modern times. But if viewed in another
light, striking peculiarities in its political state present themselves. The
Germanick body was not formed by the union of members altogether distinct and
independent. All the Princes and States joined in this association, were
originally subject to the Emperors, and acknowledged them as sovereigns.
Besides this, they originally held their lands as Imperial fiefs, and in
consequence of this tenure owed the Emperors all those services which feudal
vassals are bound to perform to their liege lord. But though this political
subjection was entirely at an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminished, the ancient forms and institutions introduced when the
Emperors governed Germany with authority, not inferior to that which the other
monarchs of Europe possessed, still remained. Thus an opposition was
established between the genius of the government, and the forms of
administration in the German Empire. The former considered the Emperor only as
the head of a confederacy, the members of which, by their voluntary choice,
have raised him to that dignity; the latter seemed to imply, that he is really
invested with sovereign power. By this circumstance, The defects in the
constitution of the Empire.
such principles of hostility and discord were interwoven in the frame of the
Germanick body, as affected each of its members, rendering their interior union
incomplete, and their external efforts feeble and irregular. The effects of
this vice or disorder inherent in the constitution of the Empire are so
considerable, that, without attending to them it is impossible to comprehend
many transactions in the reign of Charles V. or to form just ideas concerning
the genius of the German government.

THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, Arising
from the limited power of the Emperors.
were distinguished by the most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of dignity
as intimated their authority to be superior to that of all other monarchs. The
greatest Princes of the Empire attended and served them on some occasions, as
the officers of their household. They exercised prerogatives which no other
sovereign ever claimed. They retained pretensions to all the extensive powers
which their predecessors had enjoyed in any former age. But at the same time,
instead of possessing that ample domain which had belonged to the ancient
Emperors of Germany, and which stretched from Basil to Cologne, along both
banks of the Rhine Pfeffel. Abrege, etc. p. 241.
, they were stripped of all teritorial property, and had not a single city, a
single castle, foot of land, that pertained to them as heads of the Empire. As
their domain was alienated, their stated revenues were reduced almost to
nothing; and the extraordinary aids which on a few occasions they obtained,
were granted sparingly, and paid with reluctance. The Princes and States of the
Empire, though they seemed to recognize the Imperial authority, were subjects
only in name each of them possessing a complete municipal jurisdiction within
the precincts of his own territories.

FROM this ill-compacted frame of government, effects that were unavoidable
resulted. From the nature of their title and pretensions.
The Emperors, dazzled with the splendor of their titles, and the exterior
signs of vast authority, were apt to imagine themselves to be the real
sovereigns of Germany, and were led to aim continually at recovering the
exercise of those powers and prerogatives which the forms of the constitution
seemed to vest in them, and which their predecessors Charlemagne and the Otho's
had actually enjoyed. The Princes and States, aware of the nature as well as
extent of their pretensions, were perpetually on their guard, in order to watch
all the motions of the Imperial court, and to circumscribe its power within
limits still more narrow. The Emperors, in support of their claims, appealed to
ancient forms and institutions, which the States held to be obsolete. The
States founded their rights on recent practice and modern privileges, which the
Emperors considered as usurpations.

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, together with the opposition between
it and the rights of the States, From the manner in which they were elected.
increased considerably from the time that the Emperors were elected, not by
the collective body of German nobles, but by a few Princes of chief dignity.
During a long period, all the members of the Germanick body assembled, and made
choice of the person whom they appointed to be their head. But amidst the
violence and anarchy which prevailed for several centuries in the Empire, seven
Princes who possessed the most extensive territories, and who had obtained a
hereditary title to the great offices of the State, acquired the exclusive
privilege of nominating the Emperor. This right was confirmed to them by the
Golden Bull; the mode of exercising it was ascertained, and they were dignified
with the appellation of Electors. The nobility and free cities being thus
stripped of a privilege which they had once enjoyed, were less connected with a
Prince, toward whose elevation they had not contributed by their suffrages,
and came to be more apprehensive of his authority. The Electors, by their
extensive power, and the distinguishing privileges which they possessed, became
formidable to the Emperors, with whom they were placed almost on a level in
several acts of jurisdiction. Thus the introduction of the Electoral college
into the Empire, and the authority which it acquired, instead of diminishing,
contributed to strengthen the principles of hostility and discord in the
Germanick constitution.

THESE were further augmented by the various and repugnant forms of civil
policy in the several States which composed the Germanick body. From the
different forms of government established in the states which composed the
Germanick body.
It is no easy matter to render the union of independent States perfect and
entire, even when the genius and forms of their respective governments happen
to be altogether similar. But in the German Empire, which was a confederacy of
Princes, of Ecclesiastics, and of free cities, it was impossible that they
could incorporate thoroughly. The free-cities were small republics, in which
the maxims and spirit peculiar to that species of government prevailed. The
Princes and nobles to whom supreme jurisdiction belonged, possessed a sort of
monarchical power within their own territories, and the forms of their interior
administration nearly resembled those of the great feudal kingdoms. The
interests, the ideas, the objects of States so differently constituted, cannot
be the same. Nor could their common deliberations be carried on with the same
spirit, while the love of liberty and attention to commerce were the reigning
principles in the cities; and ardour for military glory, together with the
desire of power, were the governing passions of the Princes and nobility.

THE secular and ecclesiastical members of the Empire were as little fitted for
union as the free cities and the nobility. From the opposition between the
secular and ecclesiastical members.
Vast territories were annexed to several of the German bishoprics and abbeys,
and the dignified ecclesiastics held some of the highest offices in the Empire
by hereditary right. The younger sons of noblemen of the second order, who had
devoted themselves to the church, were commonly promoted to these stations of
eminence and power; and it was no small mortification to the Princes and great
nobility to see persons raised from an inferior rank to the same level with
themselves, or even exalted to superior dignity. The education of these
churchmen, the genius of their profession, and their connection with the court
of Rome, rendered their character as well as interest different from those of
the other members of the Germanick body, with whom they were called to act in
concert. Thus another source of jealousy and variance was opened, which ought
not to be overlooked when we are searching into the nature of the German
constitution.

TO all these causes of dissension may be added one more, From the unequal
distribution of wealth and power among the members.
arising from the unequal distribution of power and wealth among the States of
the Empire. The electors, and other nobles of the highest rank, not only
possessed sovereign jurisdiction, but governed such extensive, populous, and
rich countries, as rendered them great Princes. Many of the other members,
though they enjoyed all the rights of sovereignty, ruled over such petty
domains, that their real power bore no proportion to this high prerogative. A
well-compacted and vigorous confederacy could not be formed of such dissimilar
states. The weaker were jealous, timid, and unable, either to assert or to
defend their just privileges. The more powerful were apt to assume and to
become oppressive. The Electors and Emperors endeavored by turns to extend
their own authority, by encroaching on the rights of these feeble members of
the Germanick body; and they, overawed or corrupted, tamely gave up their
privileges, or meanly favored the designs formed against them NOTE XLI.
.

AFTER contemplating all these principles of disunion and opposition in the
constitution of the German Empire, All these render the Germanick body
incapable of acting with union and vigor.
it will be easy to account for the want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous
in its councils and proceedings. That slow, dilatory, distrustful and
irresolute spirit, which characterizes all its deliberations, will appear
natural in a body, the junction of whose members was so incomplete, the
different parts of which were held together by such feeble ties, and set at
variance by such powerful motives. But the Empire of Germany, nevertheless,
comprehended countries of such vast extent, and was inhabited by such a martial
and hardy race of men, that when the abilities of an Emperor, or zeal for any
common cause, could rouse this unwieldy body to put forth its strength, it
acted with irresistible force. In the following history we shall find, that as
the measures on which Charles V. was most intent, were often thwarted or
rendered abortive by the spirit of jealousy and division peculiar to the
Germanick constitution; so it was by the influence which he acquired over the
Princes of the Empire, and by engaging them to cooperate with him, that he was
enabled to make some of the greatest efforts which distinguish his reign.

THE Turkish history is so blended, during the reign of Charles V. with that of
the great nations in Europe, View of the Turkish government.
and the Ottoman Port interposed so often, and with such decisive influence,
in the wars and negociations of the Christian Princes, that some previous
account of the state of government in that great empire, is no less necessary
for the information of my readers, than these views of the constitution of
other kingdoms which I have already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the more southern and fertile parts of Asia, Its
origin.
at different periods, to be conquered by that warlike and hardy race of men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the ancients by the name of Scythia, and
among the moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these people, called Turks
or Turcomans, extended its conquests, under various leaders, and during several
centuries, from the shore of the Caspian to the straits of the Dardanelles.
Toward the middle of the fifteenth century, these formidable conquerors took
Constantinople by storm, and established the seat of their government in that
Imperial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and the other provinces of the
ancient kingdoms of Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of Hungary, were
subjected to their power.

BUT though the seat of the Turkish government was fixed in Europe, Its
despotic genius.
and the Sultans obtained possession of such extensive dominions in that
quarter of the globe, the genius of their policy was purely Asiatick; and may
be properly termed a despotism, in contradistinction to these monarchical and
republican forms of government which we have been hitherto contemplating. The
supreme power was vested in Sultans of the Ottoman race, that blood being
deemed so sacred, that no other was thought worthy of the throne. From this
elevation, these sovereigns could look down, and behold all their subjects
reduced to the same level before them. The maxims of Turkish policy admit not
any of those institutions, which, in other countries, limit the exercise, or
moderate the rigor of monarchical power. No great court with constitutional
and permanent jurisdiction to interpose both in the enactment and execution of
laws. No body of hereditary nobles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence,
whose consciousness of what is due to their rank and character, whose jealousy
of their privileges circumscribe the authority of the Prince, and serve not
only as a barrier against the excesses of his caprice, but stand as an
intermediate order between him and the people. Under the Turkish government,
the political condition of every subject is equal. To be employed in the
service of the Sultan, is the only circumstance that confers distinction. Even
this distinction is annexed so closely to the stations in which persons serve,
that it is scarce communicated to those who are placed in them. The highest
dignity in the Empire does not give any rank or pre-eminence to the family of
him who enjoys it. As every man, before he is raised to any station of
authority, must go through the preparatory discipline of a long and servile
obedience State of the Turkish Empire by Rycaut, p 25.
, the moment he is deprived of power, he and his posterity return to the same
condition with other subjects, and sink back into obscurity. It is the
distinguishing and odious characteristick of the Eastern despotism, that
annihilates all other ranks of men, in order to exalt the monarch; that it
leaves nothing to the former, while it gives every thing to the latter; that it
endeavors to fix in the minds of those who are subject to it, the idea of no
relation between men, but that of a master and of a slave, the former destined
to command and to punish, the latter formed to tremble and to obey NOTE XLII.
.

BUT as there are circumstances which frequently obstruct or defeat the
salutary effects of the best regulated governments, Power of the Sultan limited
by religion;
there are others which contribute to mitigate the evils of the most vicious
forms of policy. There can indeed, be no constitutional restraints on the will
of a Prince in a despotic government; but there may be such as are accidental.
Absolute as the Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves circumscribed both by
religion, the principle on which their authority is founded Rycaut, p. 8.
, and by the army, the instrument which they must employ in order to maintain
it. Wherever religion interposes, the will of the Sovereign must submit to its
decrees. When the Koran has prescribed any religious rite; has enjoined any
moral duty; or has confirmed by its sanction, any political maxim, the command
of the Sultan cannot overturn that which an higher authority has established.
The chief restriction, however, on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by the
military power. and by the military.
An armed force must surround the throne of every Despot, to maintain his
authority, and to execute his commands. As the Turks extended their empire over
nations, which they did not exterminate, but reduce to subjection, they found
it necessary to render their military establishment numerous and formidable.
Amurath, their third Sultan, Origin of the Janissaries. A. D. 1362.
in order to form a body of devoted troops, that might serve as the immediate
guards of his person and dignity, appointed his officers to seize annually, as
the Imperial property, the fifth part of the youth taken in war. These, after
being instructed in the Mohammedan religion, inured to obedience by severe
discipline, and trained to warlike exercises, were formed into a body
distinguished by the name of Janissaries, or new soldiers. Every sentiment which
enthusiasm can inspire, every mark of distinction that the favor of the Prince
could confer, were employed in order to animate this body with martial ardour,
and with a consciousness of its own pre-eminence Prince Cantemir's History of
the Othman Empire, p. 87.
. The Janissaries soon became the chief strength and pride of the Ottoman
armies; and by their number as well as reputation, were distinguished above all
the troops, whose duty it was to attend on the person of the Sultans NOTE XLIII.
.

THUS, as the supreme power in every society is possessed by those who have
arms in their hands, this formidable body of soldiers, Their vast influence in
the Turkish government.
destined to be the instruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority, acquired,
at the same time, the means of controuling it. The Janissaries in
Constantinople, like the Praetorian bands in ancient Rome, quickly perceived
all the advantages which they derived from being stationed in the capital; from
their union under one standard; and from being masters of the person of the
Prince. The Sultans became no less sensible of their influence and importance.
The Capiculy, or soldiery of the Port, was the only power in the Empire that a
Sultan or his Vizier had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity and
attachment of the Janissaries, was the great art of government, and the
principal object of attention in the policy of the Ottoman court. Under a
monarch, whose abilities and vigor of mind fit him for command, they are
obsequious instruments; execute whatever he enjoins; and render his power
irresistible. Under feeble Princes, or such as are unfortunate, they become
turbulent and mutinous; assume the tone of Masters; degrade and exalt Sultans
at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on whose nod, at other times, life or
death depend.

FROM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, to Solomon, Progress of the Turks
toward dominion.
who began his reign a few months after Charles V. was placed on the Imperial
throne, a succession of illustrious Princes ruled over the Turkish Empire. By
their great abilities, they kept their subjects of every order, military as
well as civil, submissive to government; and had the absolute command of
whatever force their vast Empire was able to exert. Solomon, in particular, who
is known to the Christians chiefly as a conqueror, but is celebrated in the
Turkish annals as the great law giver who established order and police in their
Empire, governed during his long reign with no less authority than wisdom. He
divided his dominions into several districts; he appointed the number of
soldiers which each should furnish; he appropriated a certain proportion of the
lands in every province for their maintenance; he regulated, with a minute
accuracy, every thing relative to their discipline, their arms, and the nature
of their service. He put the finances of the Empire into an orderly train of
administration; and though the taxes in the Turkish dominions, as well as in
the other despotic monarchies of the East, are far from being considerable, he
supplied that defect by an attentive and severe economy.

Advantages which they possessed over the Christian powers in the sixteenth
century.
NOR was it only under such Sultans as Solomon, whose talents were no less
adapted to preserve interior order, than to conduct the operations of war, that
the Turkish Empire engaged with advantage in its contests with the Christian
states. The long succession of able Princes, which I have mentioned, had given
such vigor and firmness to the Ottoman government, that it seems to have
attained, during the sixteenth century, the highest degree of perfection of
which its constitution was capable. Whereas the great monarchies in Christendom
were still far from that state, which could enable them to act with a full
exertion of their force. Besides this, the Turkish troops in that age possessed
every advantage which arises from superiority in military discipline. At the
time when Solomon began his reign, the Janissaries had been embodied near a
century and a half, and during that long period the severity of their military
discipline had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers drawn from the provinces of
the Empire had been kept almost continually under arms, in the various wars
which the Sultans had carried on with hardly any interval of peace. Against
troops thus trained and accustomed to service, the forces of the Christian
powers took the field with great disadvantage. The most intelligent as well as
impartial authors of the sixteenth century, acknowledge and lament the superior
seize of the Turks in the military art. NOTE XLIV.
The success which uniformly attended their arms in all their wars,
demonstrates the justness of this observation. The Christian armies did not
acquire that superiority over (...) Turks, which they now possess, until the
long establishment of standing forces had improved military discipline among
the former; and until various causes and events, which it is not my province to
explain, had corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike institutions among
the latter.

HISTORICAL PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS: CONCERNING THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN
EUROPE.

HISTORICAL PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS, CONCERNING The Progress of Society in
Europe.
NOTE I. [A]. SECT. I.
THE consternation of the Britons, when invaded by the Picts and Caledonians
after the Roman legions were called out of the island, may give some idea of
the degree of debasement to which the human mind was reduced by long servitude
under the Romans. In their supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call the
groans of Britain, "We know not (say they) which way to turn us. The barbarians
drive us to the sea; and the sea forces us back on the barbarians; between
which we have only the choice of two deaths, either to be swallowed up by the
waves, or to be butchered by the sword." Histor. Gildae, ap. Gale. Hist.
Britan. Script. p. 6. -- One can scarce believe this dastardly race, to be the
descendants of that gallant people, who repulsed Caesar, and defended their
liberty so long against the Roman arms.

NOTE II. [B]. SECT. I.
THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but regarded literature with
contempt. They found the inhabitants of all the provinces of the Empire sunk in
effeminacy, and averse to war. Such a character was the object of scorn to an
high-spirited and gallant race of men. "When we would brand an enemy," says
Liutprandus, "with disgraceful and contumelious appellations, we call him a
Roman; hoc solo, id est Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid
timiditatis, quicquid avaritiae, quicquid luxuriae, quicquid mendacii, immo
quicquid vitiorum est comprehendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Murat.
Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars. 1. p. 481. This degeneracy of manners,
illiterate barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even after they
settled in the countries which they had conquered, they would not permit their
children to be instructed in any science; "for, (said they,) instruction in the
sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and depress the mind; and he who has been
accustomed to tremble under the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a sword
or spear with an undaunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i. p. 4. ap
Script. Byz. vol. i. A considerable number of years elapsed, before nations so
rude, and so unwilling to learn, could produce historians capable of recording
their transactions, or of describing their manners and institutions. By that
time, all memory of their ancient condition was lost, and no monument remained
to guide their first writers to any certain knowledge of it. If one expects to
receive any satisfactory account of the manners and laws of the Goths,
Lombards, or Franks, during their residence in those countries where they were
originally seated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory of Tours the
earliest and most authentic historians of these people, he will be miserably
disappointed. Whatever imperfect view has been conveyed to us of their ancient
state, we owe not to their own writers, but to the Greek and Roman historians.

NOTE III. [C]. SECT. I.
A CIRCUMSTANCE related by Priscus in his history of the embassy to Attila,
King of the Huns, gives a striking view of the enthusiastic passion for war,
which prevailed among the barbarous nations. When the entertainment to which
that fierce conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors was ended, two Scythians
advanced toward Attila, and recited a poem in which they celebrated his
victories, and military virtues. All the Huns fixed their eyes with attention
on the bards, some seemed to be delighted with the verses; others, remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with joy; while those who were become
feeble through age, burst out into tears, bewailing the decay of their vigor,
and the state of inactivity in which they were now obliged to remain. Excerpta
ex historia Prisci Rhetoris ap. Byzant. Histor. Script. edit. Venet. v. i. p.
45.

NOTE IV. [D]. SECT. I.
A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts of this reasoning occurs in the
history of England. The Saxons carried on the conquest of that country with the
same destructive spirit, which distinguished the other barbarous nations. The
ancient inhabitants of Britain were either exterminated; or forced to take
shelter among the mountains of Wales; or reduced into servitude. The Saxon
government, laws, manners and language were of consequence introduced into
Britain? and were so perfectly established, that all memory of the institutions
previous to their conquest was abolished. The very reverse of this happened in
a subsequent revolution. A single victory placed William the Norman on the
throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants though oppressed, were not
exterminated. William employed the utmost efforts of his power and policy to
make his new subjects conform in every thing to the Norman standard; but
without success. The Saxons, though vanquished, were far more numerous than
their conquerors; when they began to incorporate, their laws and manners
gradually gained ground. The Norman institutions were unpopular and odious;
many of them fell into disuse; and in the English constitution and language, at
this day, many essential parts are manifestly of Saxon, not of Norman extract.

NOTE V. [E]. SECT. I.
PROCOPIUS, the historian, declines, from a principle of benevolence, to give
any particular detail of the cruelties of the Goths; "Lest, says he, I should
transmit a monument and example of inhumanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de
bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. 10. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 126. But as the change,
which I have pointed out as a consequence of the settlement of the barbarous
nations in the countries formerly subject to the Roman Empire, could not have
taken place, if the greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not been
extirpated, an event of such importance and influence merits a more particular
illustration. This will justify me for exhibiting some part of that melancholy
spectacle, over which humanity prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I shall not,
however, disgust my readers by a long detail; but rest satisfied with
collecting some instances of the devastations made by two of the many nations,
which settled in the Empire. The Vandals were the first of the barbarians who
invaded Spain. It was one of the richest and most populous of the Roman
Provinces; the inhabitants had been distinguished for courage, and had defended
their liberty against the arms of Rome, with greater obstinacy, and during a
longer course of years, than any nation in Europe. But so entirely were they
enervated by their subjection to the Romans, that the Vandals who entered the
kingdom A. D. 409. completed the conquest of it with such rapidity, that in
the year 411, these barbarians divided it among them by casting lots. The
desolation occasioned by their invasion is thus described by Idatius an eye
witness. "The barbarians wasted every thing with hostile cruelty. The
pestilence was no less destructive. A dreadful famine raged, to such a degree,
that the living were constrained to feed on the dead bodies of their fellow
citizens; and all these terrible plagues desolated at once the unhappy
kingdoms." Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. 1233. edit. Lugd.
1677 The Goths having attacked the Vandals in their new settlements, a fierce
war ensued; the country was plundered by both parties; the cities which at
first escaped were laid in ashes, and the inhabitants exposed to suffer every
thing that the wanton cruelty of barbarians could inflict. Idatius describes
these, ibid. p. 1235. b. 1236. c. f. A similar account of their devastations is
given by Isidorus Hispalensis, and the contemporary writers. Isid. Chron. ap.
Grot. hist. Goth. 732. From Spain the Vandals passed over to Africa, A. D, 428.
Africa was, next to Egypt, the most fertile of the Roman provinces. It was one
of the granaries of the Empire, and is called by an ancient writer, the soul of
the commonwealth. Though the army with which they invaded it, did not exceed
30,000 fighting men they became absolute masters of the province in less than
two years. A contemporary author gives a dreadful account of the havoc which
they made: "They found a province well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the
beauty of the whole earth. They carried their destructive arms into every
corner of it; they dispeopled it by their devastations; exterminating every
thing with fire and sword. They did not even spare the vines, and fruit trees,
that those to whom caves and inaccessible mountains had afforded a retreat,
might find no nourishment of any kind. Their hostile rage could not be
satiated, and there was no place exempted from the effects of it. They tortured
their prisoners with the most exquisite cruelty, that they might force from
them a discovery of their hidden treasures. The more they discovered, the more
they expected, and the more implacable they became. Neither the infirmities of
age nor of sex; neither the dignity of nobility, nor the sanctity of the
sacerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but the more illustrious their
prisoners were, the more barbarously they insulted them. The public buildings
which resisted the violence of the flames, they levelled with the ground. They
left many cities without an inhabitant. When they approached any fortified
place, which their undisciplined army could not reduce, they gathered together
a multitude of prisoners, and putting them to the sword, left their bodies
unburied, that the stench of the carcasses might oblige the garrison to abandon
it." Victor Vitensis de persecutione Africana. ap. Bibl. Patrum. vol. viii. p.
666. St. Augustine an African, and a contemporary author gives a similar
description of their cruelties, opera v. x. p. 372. edit. 1616. -- About an
hundred years after the settlement of the Vandals in Africa, Belisarius
attacked and dispossessed them. Procopius, a contemporary historian, describes
the devastation which that war occasioned. "Africa, says he, was so entirely
dispeopled, that one might travel several days in it without meeting one man;
and it is no exaggeration to say, that in the course of the war five millions
of persons perished." Proc. hist. Arcana cap. 18. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 315.
I have dwelt longer upon the calamities of this province, because they are
described not only by contemporary authors, but by eyewitnesses. The present
state of Africa confirms their testimony. Many of the most flourishing and
populous cities with which it was filled, were so entirely ruined, that no
vestiges remain to point out where they were situated. That fertile territory
which sustained the Roman Empire lies in a great measure uncultivated; and that
province, which Victor in his barbarous Latin called Speciositas totius terrae
florentis, is now the retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHILE the Vandals laid waste one part of the Empire, the Huns desolated the
rest of it. Of all the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and most
formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus a contemporary author, and one of the best of
the later historians, gives an account of their policy and manners. They nearly
resemble those of the Scythians described by the ancients, and of the Tartars
known to the moderns. In some parts of their character, and in several of their
customs, they resemble the savages in North America. Their passion for war and
action was extreme. "As in polished societies (says Ammianus) ease and
tranquillity are courted, they delight in war and dangers. He who falls in
battle is reckoned happy. They who die of old age or of disease are deemed
infamous. They boast, with the utmost exultation, of the number of enemies whom
they have slain, and as the most glorious of all ornaments, they fasten the
scalps of those who have fallen by their hand to the trappings of their
horses." Ammian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd. 1693. -- Their
incursions into the Empire began in the fourth century; and the Romans, though
no strangers, by that time, to the effects of barbarous rage, were astonished
at the cruelty of their devastations. Thrace, Pannonia, and Illyricum were the
countries which they first laid desolate. As they had no thoughts of settling
in Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Procopius computes that in each of
these, at a medium, two hundred thousand persons perished or were carried off
as slaves. Procop. hist. Arcan. ap. Byz. script. vol. i. 316. Thrace the best
cultivated province in that quarter of the Empire, was converted into a desert,
and when Priscus accompanied the ambassadors sent to Attila, there were no
inhabitants in some of the cities, but a few miserable people who had taken
shelter among the ruins of the churches; and the fields were covered with the
bones of those who had fallen by the sword. Priscus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i.
34. Attila became King of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is one of the greatest and
most enterprizing conquerors mentioned in history. He extended his Empire over
all the vast countries, comprehended under the general names of Scythia and
Germany in the ancient division of the world. While he was carrying on his wars
against the barbarous nations, he kept the Roman Empire under perpetual
apprehensions, and extorted vast subsidies from the timid and effeminate
monarchs who governed it. In the year 451, he entered Gaul, at the head of an
army composed of all the various nations which he had subdued. It was more
numerous than any with which the barbarians had hitherto invaded the Empire.
The devastations which he committed were horrible; not only the open country,
but the most flourishing cities were desolated. The extent and cruelty of his
devastations are described by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei. edit. Baluz. Par.
1669. p. 139, etc. and by Idatius ubi supra p. 1235. Aetius put a stop to his
progress in that country by the famous battle of Chalons, in which (if we may
believe the historians of that age) three hundred thousand persons perished.
Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Geticis ap. Grot. hist. Gotnor. p. 671. Amst.
1665. But next year he resolved to attack the center of the Empire, and
marching into Italy, wasted it with rage, inflamed by the sense of his late
disgrace. What Italy suffered by the Huns exceeded all the calamities which the
preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought upon it. Conringius has
collected several passages from the ancient historians, which prove that the
devastations committed by the Vandals and Huns in the countries situated on the
banks of the Rhine, were no less cruel and fatal to the human race. Exercitatio
de urbibus Germaniae. Opera, vol. i. 489. But it is endless, it is shocking to
follow these destroyers of mankind through so many scenes of horror, and to
contemplate the havoc which they made of the human species.

BUT the state in which Italy appears to have been, during several ages, after
the barbarous nations settled in it, is the most decisive proof of the cruelty
as well as extent of their devastations. Whenever any country is thinly
inhabited, trees and shrubs spring up in the uncultivated fields, and spreading
by degrees form large forests; by the overflowing of rivers, and the stagnating
of waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes and marshes. Ancient
Italy, the seat of the Roman elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the highest
pitch. But so effectually did the devastations of the barbarians destroy all
the effects of their industry and cultivation, that in the eight century Italy
appears to have been covered with forests and marshes of vast extent. Muratori
enters into a long detail concerning the situation and limits of these; and
proves by the most authentic evidence, that great tracts of territory, in all
the different provinces of Italy, were either overrun with, wood, or laid under
water. Nor did these occupy parts of the country naturally barren or of little
value, but were spread over districts, which ancient writers represent as
extremely fertile, and which at present are highly cultivated. Muratori
antiquitates Italicae medii aevi dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, 153, etc. A
strong proof of this occurs in a description of the city of Modena, by an
author of the tenth century. Murat. script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars. ii. p.
691. The state of desolation in other countries of Europe seems to have been
the same. In many of the most early charters now extant, the lands granted to
monasteries or to private persons, are distinguished into such as are
cultivated or inhabited, and such as were eremi, desolate. In many instances,
lands are granted to persons because they had taken them from the desert, ab
eremo, and had cultivated and planted them with inhabitants. This appears from
a charter of Charlemagne, published by Eckhart de rebus Franciae Orientalis.
vol. ii. p. 864, and from many charters of his successors quoted by Du Cange
voc, Eremus.

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and ninth centuries, Italy was greatly
infested by wolves and other wild beasts; another mark of its being destitute
of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq. vol. ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the
ancient world for its fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the state of a
country newly peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that some of the descriptions of the devastations
which I have quoted, may be exaggerated, but that the barbarous tribes
proceeded in different manners, in making their new settlements. Some of them
seemed to be bent on exterminating the ancient inhabitants; others were more
disposed to incorporate with them. It is not my province either to enquire into
the causes which occasioned this variety in the conduct of the conquerors, or
to describe the state of those countries where the ancient inhabitants were
treated most mildly. The facts which I have produced are sufficient to prove
that the destruction of the human species, occasioned by their hostile
invasions of the nothern nations, and their subsequent settlements, was much
greater than the generality of writers seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. [F]. SECT. 1.
I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only certain information concerning the
ancient state of the barbarous nations must be derived from the Greek and Roman
writers. Happily an account of the institutions and customs of one people, to
which those of all the rest seem to have been in a great measure similar has
been transmitted to us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps, that ever
wrote, of observing them with profound discernment, and of describing them with
propriety and force. The reader must perceive that I have Caesar and Tacitus in
my eye. The former gives a short account of the ancient Germans in a few
chapters of the sixth book of his commentaries: The latter wrote a treatise
expressly on that subject. These are the most precious and instructive
monuments of antiquity to the present inhabitants of Europe. From them we learn,

1. THAT the state of Society among the ancient Germans, was of the rudest and
most simple form. They subsisted entirely by hunting or by pasturage. Caes.
lib. vi. c. 21. They neglected agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese,
and flesh. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees with him in most of these points; de
morib. Germ. c. 14, 15, 23. The Goths were equally negligent of agriculture.
Pris. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 31. B. Society was in the same state
among the Huns, who disdained to cultivate the earth, or to touch a plough,
Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The same manners took place among the Alans;
ibid. p. 477. While society remains in this simple state, men by uniting
together scarce relinquish any portion of their natural independance,
Accordinly we are informed, 2. That the authority of civil government was
extremely limited among the Germans. During times of peace they had no common
or fixed magistrate, but the chief men of every district dispensed justice, and
accommodated differences. Caes. ibid. c. 23. Their kings had not absolute or
unbounded power; their authority consisted rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of small consequence were determined
by the chief men; affairs of importance by the whole community. Tacit. c. 7.,
11. The Huns, in like manner, deliberated in common concerning every business
of moment to the society; and were not subject to the rigor of regal
authority. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual among the
ancient Germans was left at liberty to choose whether he would take part in any
military enterprise which was proposed; there s^ems to have been no obligation
to engage in it imposed on him by public authority. "When any of the chief men
proposes any expedition, such as approve of the cause and of the leader rise
up, and declare their intention of following him; and those who do not fulfill
this engagement, are considered as deserters and traitors, and are looked upon
as infamous." Caes. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly points at the same custom,
though in terms more obscure. Tacit. c. 11. 4. As every individual was so
independent, and master in so great a degree of his own actions, it became, of
consequence, the great object of every person among the Germans who aimed at
being a leader, to gain adherents, and attach them to his person and interest.
These adherents Caesar calls Ambacti and Clientes, i. e. retainers or clients;
Tacitus, Comites, or companions. The chief distinction and power of the
leaders, consisted in being attended by a numerous band of chosen youth. This
was their pride as well as ornament during peace, and their defense in war. The
favor of these retainers the leaders gained or preserved by presents of
armor, and of horses; or by the profuse, though inelegant hospitality, with
which they entertained them. Tacit. c. 14, 15. 5. Another consequence of the
personal liberty and independance which the Germans retained, even after they
united in society, was their circumscribing the criminal jurisdiction of the
magistrate within very narrow limits, and their not only claiming but
exercising almost all the rights of private resentment and revenge. Their
magistrates had not the power either of imprisoning, or of inflicting any
corporal punishment on a free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was obliged to
avenge the wrongs which his parents or friends had sustained. Their enmities
were hereditary, but not irreconcilable. Even murder was compensated by paying
a certain number of cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of the fine went to the King, or
state, a part to the person who had been injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c.
12.

THESE particulars concerning the institutions and manners of the Germans,
though well known to every person conversant in ancient literature I have
thought, proper to arrange in this order, and to lay before such of my readers
as may be less acquainted with these facts, both because they confirm the
account which I have given of the state of the barbarous nations, and and to
illustrate all the observations that I shall have occasion to make concerning
the various changes in their government and customs. The laws and customs
introduced by the barbarous nations into their new settlements, are the best
commentary on the writings of Caesar and Tacitus; and their observations are
the best key to a perfect knowledge of these laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with respect to the testimonies of Caesar and Tacitus
concerning the Germans, merits attention. Caesar wrote his brief account of
their manners more than an hundred years before Tacitus composed his treatise
de moribus Germanorum. An hundred years make a considerable period in the
progress of national manners, especially if, during that time, those people who
are rude and unpolished have had much communication with more civilized states.
This was the case with the Germans. Their intercourse with the Romans began
when Caesar crossed the Rhine, and increased prodigiously during the interval
between that event and the time when Tacitus flourished. Besides this, there
was a considerable difference between the state of society among the different
tribes of Germans. The Suiones were so much improved, that they began to be
corrupted. Tac. cap. 44. The Fenni were so barbarous, that it is wonderful how
they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever undertakes to describe the
manners of the Germans, or to found any political theory upon the state of
society among them, ought carefully to attend to both these circumstances.

BEFORE I quit this subject, it may not be improper to observe, that though
successive alterations in their institutions, together with the gradual
progress of refinement, have made an entire change in the manners of the
various people, who conquered the Roman Empire, there is still one race of men
nearly in the same political situation with that in which they were when they
first settled in their new conquests: I mean the various tribes and nations of
Savages in North America. It cannot then be considered either as a digression,
or as an improper indulgence of curiosity to enquire, whether this similarity
in their political state has occasioned any resemblance between their character
and manners. If the likeness turns out to be striking, it is a stronger proof,
that a just account has been given of the ancient inhabitants of Europe, than
the testimony even of Caesar or of Tacitus.

1. The Americans subsist chiefly by hunting and fishing. Some tribes neglect
agriculture entirely. Among those who cultivate some small spot near their
huts, that, together with all works of labor, is performed by the women. P.
Charlevoix Journal Historique d'un Voyage de L'Amerique 49. Par. 1744. p. 334.
In such a state of society, the common wants of men being few, and their mutual
dependence upon each other small, their union is extremely imperfect and
feeble, and they continue to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired. It
is the first idea of an American, that every man is born free and independent,
and that no power on earth has any right to diminish or circumscribe his
natural liberty. There is scarce any appearance of subordination either in
civil or domestic government. Every one does what he pleases. A father and
mother with their children, live like persons whom chance has brought together,
and whom no common bond unites, Their manner of educating their children is
suitable to this principle. They never chastise or punish them, even during
their infancy. As they advance in years, they allow them to be entirely masters
of their own actions, and responsable to no body. Id. p. 272, 273 -- 2. The
power of their civil magistrates is extremely limited. Among most of their
tribes, the Sachem or chief is elective. A council of old men is chosen to
assist him, without whose advice he determines no affair of importance. The
Sachems neither possess nor claim any great degree of authority. They propose
and entreat rather than command, The obedience of their people is altogether
voluntary. Id. p. 266, 268 -- 3. They engage in any military enterprises, not
from constraint, but choice. When war is resolved a chief arises, and offers
himself to be the leader. They who are willing (for they compel no person)
stand up one after another, and sing their war song. But if after this, any of
these should refuse to follow the leader, to whom they have engaged, his life
would be in danger, and he would be considered as the most infamous of all men.
Id. p. 217, 218. -- 4. Such as engage to follow any leader, expect to be
treated by him with great attention and respect; and he is obliged to make them
presents of considerable value. Id. p. 218. -- 5. Among the Americans, the
magistrate has scarce any criminal jurisdiction. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any
injury, the person or family offended may inflict what punishment they please
on the person who was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment and desire
of vengeance are excessive and implacable. Time can neither extinguish or abate
it. It is the chief inheritance parents leave to their children; it is
transmitted from generation to generation, until an occasion be found of
satisfying it. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the offended party is appeased,
A compensation is paid for a murder that has been committed. The relations of
the deceased receive it; and it consists most commonly of a captive taken in
war, who being substituted in the place of the person who was murdered, assumes
his name and is adopted into his family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have pointed out the
similarity of those great features which distinguish and characterize both
people. Bochart, and other philologists of the last century, who, with more
erudition than science, endeavored to trace the migrations of various nations,
and who were apt, upon the slightest appearance of resemblance, to find an
affinity between nations far removed from each other, and to conclude that they
were descended from the same ancestors, would hardly have failed, on viewing
such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with confidence "That the Germans and
the Americans must be the, same people" But a philosoper will satisfy himself
with observing, "That the characters of nations depends on the state of society
in which they live, and on the political institutions established among them;
and that the human mind, whenever it is placed in the same situation, will, in
ages the most distant, and in countries the most remote, assume the same form,
and be distinguished by the same manners.

I HAVE pushed the comparison between the Germans and Americans no farther than
was necessary for the i^^stration of my subject. I do not pretend that the
state of society in the two countries was perfectly similar. Many of the German
tribes were more civilized than the Americans. Some of them were not
unacquainted with agriculture; almost all of them had flocks of tame cattle,
and depended for the chief part of their subsistence upon these. Most of the
American tribes subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and more simple state
than the ancient Germans. The resemblance, however, between their condition is
greater perhaps than any that we know between two races of men, and this has
produced a surprising similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. [G.] SECT. I.
THE booty gained by an army belonged to an army. The King himself had no part
of it but what he acquired by lot. A remarkable instance of this occurs in the
history of the Franks, the army of Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy,
having plundered a church, carried off, among other sacred utensils, a vase of
extraordinary size and beauty. The bishop sent deputies to Clovis, beseeching
him to restore the vase, that it might be again employed in the sacred services
to which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired the deputies to follow him to
Soissons, as their booty was to be divided in that place, and promised that if
the lot should give him the disposal of the vase, he would grant what the
bishop desired. When he came to Soissons, and all the booty was placed in one
great heap in the middle of the army, Clovis entreated, that before making the
division, they would give him that vase over and above his share. All appeared
willing to gratify the King, and to comply with his request, when a fierce and
haughty soldier lifted up his battle-axe, and striking the vase with the utmost
violence, cried out with a loud voice, "You shall receive nothing here but that
to which the lot gives you a right." Gregor. Turon. Histor. Francorum. lib. ii.
c. 27. p. 70. Par. 1610.

NOTE VIII. [H]. SECT. I.
THE history of the establishment and progress of the feudal system, is an
interesting object to all the nations of Europe. In some countries their
jurisprudence and laws are still in a great measure feudal. In others, many
forms and practices established by custom, or founded on statutes, took their
rise from the feudal law, and cannot be understood without attending to the
ideas peculiar to it. Several authors of the highest reputation for genius and
erudition, have endeavored to illustrate this subject, but they have left many
parts of it obscure. I shall endeavor to trace, with precision, the progress
and variation of ideas concerning property in land among the barbarous nations;
and shall attempt to point out the causes which introduced these changes, as
well as the effects which followed upon them. Property in land seems to have
gone through four successive changes among the people who settled in the
various provinces of the Roman Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in their original countries, they had
no fixed property in land, and no certain limits to their possessions. After
feeding their flocks in one district, they removed with them, their wives and
families, to another; and abandoned that likewise in a short time. They were
not, in consequence of this imperfect species of property, brought under any
positive or formal obligation to serve the community; all their services were
purely voluntary. Every individual was at liberty to choose how far he would
contribute toward carrying on any military enterprise. If he followed a leader
in any expedition, it was from attachment, not from a sense of obligation. The
clearest proof of this has been produced in note VI. While property continued
in this state, we can discover nothing that bears any resemblance to a feudal
tenure, or to the subordination and military service which the feudal system
introduced.

II. UPON settling in the countries which they subdued, the victorious army
divided the conquered lands. That portion which fell to every soldier, he
seized as a recompense due to his valor, as a settlement acquired by his own
sword. He took possession of it as a freeman in full property. He enjoyed it
during his own life, and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it as an
inheritance to his children. Thus property in land became fixed. It was at the
same time allodial, i. e. the possessor had the entire right of property and
dominion; he held of no sovereign or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
homage, and perform service* But as these new proprietors were in some danger
(as has been observed in the text) of being disturbed by the remainder of the
ancient inhabitants, and in still greater danger of being attacked by
barbarians as fierce and rapacious as themselves, they saw the necessity of
coming under obligations to defend the community, more explicit than those to
which they had been subject in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new settlements, every freeman became
bound to take arms in defense of the community, and if he refused or neglected
so to do, was liable to a considerable penalty. I do not mean that any contract
of this kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified by any legal
solemnity. It was, like the other compacts which hold society together,
established by tacit consent; and their mutual security and preservation made
it the interest of all to recognize its authority, and to enforce the
observation of it. We can trace back this new obligation on the proprietors of
land to a very early period in the history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began
his reign A. D. 562, exacted a fine, bannos jusset exigi, from certain persons
who had refused to accompany him in an expedition. Gregor. Turon. lib. v. c.
26. p. 211. Childibert, who began his reign A. D. ^76, proceeded in the same
manner against others (...) guilty of a like crime. Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p.
342. Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman who possessed sive mansi, i. e.
sixty acres of land, in property, should march in person against the enemy.
Capitul. A. D. 807. Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 815, granted lands to certain
Spaniards who fled from the Saracens, and allowed them to settle in his
territories, on condition that they should serve in the army like other free
men. Capitul. vol. i. p. 500. By land possessed in property, which is mentioned
in the law of Charlemagne, we are to understand, according to the style of that
age, allodial land; allodes and proprietas, alodum and proprium being words
perfectly synonimous. Du Cange voce Alodis. The clearest proof of the
distinction between allodial and beneficiary possession, is contained in two
charters published by Muratori, by which it appears that a person might possess
one part of his estate as allodial which he could dispose of at pleasure, the
other as a beneficium, of which he had only the usufruct, the property
returning to the superior lord on his demise. Antiq. Ital. medii aevi, vol. i.
p. 559, 505. The same distinction is pointed out in a Capitulare of
Charlemagne, A. D. 812. edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 491. In the curious testament
of count Everard, who married a daughter of Louis le Debonnaire, by which he
disposes of his vast estate among his children, he distinguishes between what
he possessed proprietate, and what he held beneficio, and it appears that the
greater part was allodial. A. D. 837. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplomatica Lovan. 1723.

IN the same manner Liber homo is commonly opposed to Vassus or Vassallus; the
former denotes an allodial proprietor, the latter one who held of a superior.
These free men were under an obligation to serve the state; and this duty was
considered as so sacred, that free men were prohibited from entering into holy
orders unless they had obtained the consent of the sovereign. The reason given
for this in the statute is remarkable, "for we are informed that some do so,
not so much out of devotion, as in order to avoid that military service which
they are bound to perform. Capitul. lib. i.. 114. If upon being summoned into
the field any free man refuses to obey, a full Herebannum, i. e. a fine of
sixty crown, was to be exacted from him according to the law of the Franks."
Capit. Car. magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. 13. p. 539. This
expression, according to the law of the Franks, seems to imply that both the
obligation to serve, and the penalty on those who disregarded it, were coeval
with the laws made by the Franks at their first settlement in Gaul. This fine
was levied with such rigor, "That if any person was insolvent, he was reduced
to servitude, and continued in that state until such time as his labor should
amount to the value of the herebannum." Ibid. The Emperor Lotharius rendered
the penalty still more severe; and if any person possessing such an extent of
property as made it incumbent on him to take the field in person refused to
obey the summons, all his goods were declared to be forfeited, and he himself
might be punished with banishment. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars ii. p. 153.

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become fixed and subject to military
service, another change was introduced, though slowly, and step by step. We
learn from Tacitus that the chief men among the Germans endeavored to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents, whom he calls Comites. These
fought under their standard, and followed them in all their enterprises. The
same custom continued among them in their new settlements, and those attached
or devoted followers were called fideles antrustiones, homines in trust
Domin^^a and leudes. Tacitus informs us, that the rank of a ^omites was deemed
honorable; De morib. Germ. c. 13. The composition, which is the standard by
which we must judge of the rank and condition of persons in the middle ages,
paid for the murder of one in trust Dominica, was triple to that paid for the
murder of a freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44.. 1. and 2. While the Germans
remained in their own country they courted the favor of these Comites by
presents of arms and horses, and by hospitality. See note VI. While they had no
fixed property in land, these were the only gifts that they could bestow, and
the only reward which their followers de^ed. But upon their settling in the
countries which they conquered, and when the value of property came to be
understood among them, instead of these slight presents, the Kings and
chieftains bestowed a more substantial recompense in land on their adherents.
These grants were called beneficia, because they were gratuitous donations; and
honores, because they were regarded as marks of distinction. What were the
services originally exacted in return for these beneficia cannot be determined
with absolute precision; because there are no records so ancient. When allodial
possessions were first rendered feudal, they were not, at once, subjected to
the feudal services. The transition here, as in all other changes of
importance, was gradual. As the great object of a feudal vassal was to obtain
protection, when allodial proprietors first consented to become vassals of any
powerful leader, they continued to retain as much of their ancient independance
as was consistent with that new relation. The homage which they did to the
superior of whom they chose to hold, was called homagium planum, and bound them
to nothing more than fidelity, but without any obligation either of military
service, or attendance in the courts of their superior. Of this homagium planum
some traces, though obscure, may still be discovered. Brussel, tom. i. p. 97.
Among the ancient writs published by D. D. De Vic and Vaisette hist. de
Langued. are a great many which they call homagia. They seem to be an
intermediate step between the homagium planum mentioned by Brussel, and the
engagement to perform complete feudal service. The one party promises
protection, and grants certain castles or lands, the other engages to defend
the person of the granter, and to assist him likewise in defending his property
as often as he shall be summoned to do so. But these engagements are
accompanied with none of the feudal formalities, and no mention is made of any
of the feudal services. They appear rather to be a mutual contract between
equals, than the engagement of a vassal to perform services to a superior Lord.
Preuves de l'hist. de Lang. tom. ii. 173. ^^passim. As soon as men were
accustomed to these, the other feudal services were gradually introduced. M. de
Montesquieu considers these beneficia as fiefs, which originally subjected
those who held them to military service. L'espr. des Loix. l. xxx. c. 3. and
16. M. L'abbe de Mably contends that such as held these were at first subjected
to no other service than what was incumbent on every free man. Observations sur
l'histoi^ de France. But upon comparing their proofs and reasonings and
conjectures, it seems to be evident, that as every free man, in consequence of
his allodial property, was bound to serve the community under a severe penalty,
no good reason can be assigned for conferring these beneficia, if they did not
subject such as received them, to some new obligation. Why should a King have
stripped himself of his domain, if he had not expected, that, by parcelling it
out, he might acquire a right to services to which he had formerly no title? We
may then warrantably conclude, "That as allodial property subjected those who
possessed it to serve the community, so beneficia subjected such as held them,
to personal service and fidelity to him from whom they received these lands.
These beneficia were granted originally only during pleasure. No circumstance
relating to the customs of the middle ages is better ascertained than this; and
innumerable proofs of it might be added to these produced in L'esprit des Loix,
l. xxx. c. 16. and by Du Cange voc. beneficium and feudum.

IV. BUT the possession of benefices did not continue long in this state. A
precarious tenure during pleasure was not sufficient to satisfy and attach
those who held it to their superior Lord, they soon obtained the confirmation
of their benefices during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces several
quotations from ancient charters and chronicles in proof of this; Gloss. voc.
Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain or extort charters rendering
beneficia hereditary, first in the direct line, then in the collateral, and at
last in the female line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc.
Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when each of these changes took
place. M. l'Ab. Mably conjectures with some probability, that Charles Martel
first introduced the practice of granting beneficia for life: Observat. tom. i.
p. 103, 160; and that Louis le Debonnaire was among the first who rendered them
hereditary, is evident from the authorities to which he refers; Id. 429.
Mabillon however has published a placitum of Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 860. by
which it appears that he still continued to grant some beneficia only during
life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the year 889, Odo King of France
granted lands to Ricabodo fideli suo jure beneficiario and fructuario during
his own life; and if he should die, and a son were born to him, that right was
to continue during the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra. p. 556. This was an
intermediate step between fiefs merely during life, and fiefs hereditary to
perpetuity. While beneficia continued under their first form, and were held
only during pleasure, he who granted them not only exercised the Dominium or
prerogative of superior Lord; but he retained the property, giving his vassal
only the usufruct. But under the latter form, when they became hereditary,
although feudal lawyers continued to define a beneficium agreeable to its
original nature, the property was in effect taken out of the hands of the
superior Lord, and lodged in those of the vassal. As soon as the reciprocal
advantages of the feudal mode of tenure came to be understood by superiors as
well as vassals, that species of holding became so agreeable to both, that not
only lands, but casual rents, such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at
ferries, etc. the salaries or perquisites of offices, and even pensions
themselves, were granted and held as fiefs; and military service was promised
and exacted on account of these. Morice Mem. pour servir de preuves a l'hist.
de Bretagne. tom. ii. p. 78, 690. Brussel, tom. i. p. 41. How absurd soever it
may seem to grant or to hold such precarious and casual property as a fief;
there are instances of feudal tenures still more singular. The profits arising
from the masses said at an altar were properly an ecclesiastical revenue,
belonging to the clergy of the church or monastery which performed that duty,
but these were sometimes seized by the powerful barons. In order to ascertain
their right to them, they held them as fiefs of the church, and parcelled them
out in the same manner as other property to their sub-vassals. Bouquet. recueil
des hist. vol. x. p. 238, 480. The same spirit of encroachment which rendered
fiefs hereditary, led the nobles to extort from their sovereigns hereditary
grants of offices. Many of the great offices of the crown became hereditary in
most of the kingdoms in Europe, and so conscious were monarchs of this spirit
of usurpation among the nobility, and so solicitous to guard against it, that,
on some occasions, they obliged the persons whom they promoted to any office of
dignity, to grant an obligation that neither they, nor their heirs, should
claim it as belonging to them by hereditary right. A remarkable instance of
this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another
occurs in the Thesaur. annecdot. published by Martene and Durand, vol. i. p.
873. -- This revolution in property occasioned a change corresponding to it in
political government; the great vassals of the crown, as they acquired such
extensive possessions, usurped a a proportional degree of power, depressed the
jurisdiction of the crown, and trampled on the privileges of the people. It is
on account of this connection, that the tracing the progress of feudal property
becomes an object of attention in history; for upon discovering in what state
property was at any particular period, we may determine with precision what was
the degree of power possessed by the King or by the nobility at that juncture.

ONE circumstance more, with respect to the changes which property underwent,
deserves attention. I have shown that when the various tribes of barbarians
divided their conquests in the fifth and sixth centuries, the property which
they acquired was allodial; but in several parts of Europe property had become
almost entirely feudal by the beginning of tenth century. The former species of
property seems to be so much better and more desirable than the latter, that
such a change appears surprising, especially when we are informed that allodial
property was frequently converted into feudal, by a voluntary deed of the
possessor. The motives which determined them to a choice so repugnant to the
ideas of modern times concerning property, have been investigated and explained
by M. de Montesquieu with his usual discernment and accuracy, lib. xxx. c. 8.
The most considerable is that of which we have an hint in Lambertus Ardensis,
ancient writer quoted by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of anarchy and
disorder which became general in Europe after the death of Charlemagne; when
there was scarce any union among the different members of the community; and
individuals were exposed, single and undefended by government, to rapine and
oppression, it became necessary for every man to have a powerful protector;
under whose banner he might range himself, and obtain security against enemies,
whom he could not singly oppose. For this reason he relinquished his allodial
independance, and subjected himself to the feudal services, that he might find
safety under the patronage of some respectable superior. In some parts of
Europe, this change from allodial to feudal property became so general, that he
who possessed land had no longer any liberty of choice left. He was obliged to
recognize some liege Lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beaumanoir informs us, that
in the counties of Clermont and Beauvois, if the Lord or Count discovered any
lands within his jurisdiction, for which no service was performed, and which
paid to him no tax or custom, he might instantly seize it as his own; for, says
he, according to our custom no man can hold allodial property. Coust. chapter 24.
p. 123. Upon the same principle is founded a maxim, which has at length become
general in the law of France, Nulle terre sans Seigneur. In other provinces of
France allodial property seems to have remained longer unalienated, and to have
been more highly valued. A vast number of charters containing grants, or sales,
or exchanges of allodial lands in the province of Languedoc are published Hist.
gener. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic and Vaisette, tom. ii. During the ninth,
tenth, and greater part of the eleventh century, the property in that province
seems to have been entirely allodial; and scarce any mention of feudal tenures
occurs in the deeds of that country. The state of property, during these
centuries, seems to have been perfectly similar in Catalonia, and the country
of Roussillon, as appears from the original charters published in the appendix
to Petr. de la Marca's treatise de Marca sive limite Hispanico. Allodial
property seems to have continued in the Low Countries, to a period still later.
During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, this species appears to
have been of considerable extent. Mirae opera Diplom. vol. i. p. 34, 74, 75,
83, 296, 817, 842, 847, 578. Some vestiges of allodial property appear there as
late as the fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. The notions of men with respect to
property, vary according to the diversity of their understandings, and the
caprice of their passions. At the same time that some persons were fond of
relinquishing allodial property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure, others
seem to have been solicitous to convert their fiefs into allodial property. An
instance of this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, published by
Eckhard, commentarii de rebus Franciae Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Another
occurs in the year 1299. Reliquiae MSS. omnis aevi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. 209.
and even one as late as the year 1337. ibid. vol. vii. p. 40. The same thing
took place in the Low Countries. Meraei oper. 1. 52.

IN tracing these various revolutions of property, I have hitherto chiefly
confined myself to what happened in France, because the ancient monuments of
that nation have either been more carefully preserved, or have been more
clearly illustrated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the same revolutions happened in property, and succeeded each other
in the same order. There is some ground, however, for conjecturing that
allodial property continued longer in estimation among the Italians, than among
the French. It appears that many of the charters granted by the Emperors in the
ninth century conveyed an allodial right to land. Murat. antiq. med. aevi. v.
i. p. 575, etc. But in the eleventh century, we find some examples of persons
who resigned their allodial property, and received it back as a feudal tenure.
Ib. p. 610, etc. Muratori observes that the word feudum, which came to be
substituted in place of beneficium, does not occur in any authentic charter
previous to the eleventh century. Id. 594. A charter of King Robert of France,
A. D. 1008, is the earliest deed in which I have met with the word feudum.
Bouquet recueil des historiens de Gaul and de la France, tom. x. p. 593. b.
This word occurs indeed in an edict, A. D. 790, published by Brussel, vol. i.
p. 77. But the authenticity of that deed has been called in question, and
perhaps the frequent use of the word feudum in it, is an additional reason for
doing so. The account which I have given of the nature both of allodial and
feudal possessions receives some confirmation from the etymology of the words
themselves. Alode or allodium is compounded of the German particle an and lot,
i. e. land obtained by lot. Wachteri Glossar. Germanicum, voc. Allodium. p. 35.
It appears from the authorities produced by him and by Du Cange, voc. sors,
that the nothern nations divided the lands which they had conquered in this
manner. Feodum is compounded of od possession or estate, and feo wages pay;
intimating that it was stipendary and granted as a recompense for service,
Wachterus ibid. voc. feodum, p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the Germans was perfectly similiar to
that which we have traced in France. But as the Emperors of Germany, especially
after the Imperial crown passed from the descendants of Charlemagne to the
house of Saxony, were far superior to the contemporary Monarchs of France, in
abilities, the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to independance, nor
did they so soon obtain the privilege of possessing their benefices by
hereditary right. Conrad II. on the Salic, was the first Emperor, according to
the compilers of the Libri Feudorum, who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i.
tit. i. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024. Ludovicus Pius, under whose reign,
grants of hereditary fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his father, A. D.
814. Not only was this innovation so much later in being introduced among the
vassals of the German Emperors but even after Conrad had established it, the
law continued favorable to the ancient practice, and unless the charter of the
vassal bore expressly that the fief descended to his heirs, it was presumed to
be granted only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the alteration made by
Conrad, it was not uncommon in Germany to grant fiefs only for life; a charter
of this kind occurs as late as the year 1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur.
feud. p. 361. The transmission of fiefs to collateral and female heirs, took
place very slowly among the Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. 1201.
conveying the right of succession to females, but it is granted as an
extraordinary mark of favor, and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France and Italy, a considerable part
of the lands continued to be allodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was
introduced. It appears from the Codex Diplomaticus Monasterii Buch, that a
great part of the lands in the marquisate of Misnia was still allodial as late
as the thirteenth century. No 31, 36, 37, 46, etc. ap. Scriptores hist. German.
cura Schoetgenii and Kreysigii. Altenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, etc. Allodial
property seems to have been common in another district of the same province
during the same period. Reliquiae Diplomaticae Sanctimonial. Beutiz. No 17, 36,
58. ibid. 374, etc.

NOTE IX. [I]. SECT. I.
AS I shall, in another note, have occasion to represent the condition of that
part of the people who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this to
consider the state of the inhabitants of the country. The persons employed in
cultivating the ground during the ages under review may be divided into three
classes: I. Servi or slaves. This seems to have been the most numerous class,
and consisted either of captives taken in war, or of persons, the property in
whom was acquired in some one of the various methods enumerated by Du Cange,
voc. servus. v. 6. p. 447. The wretched condition of this numerous race of men
will appear from several circumstances. 1. Their masters had absolute dominion
over their persons. They had the power of punishing their slaves capitally,
without the intervention of any judge. This dangerous right they possessed not
only in the more early periods, when their manners were fierce, but it
continued as late as the twelfth century. Joach. Potgiesserus de statu
servorum. Lemgov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. i.. 4, 10, 13, 24. Even after this
jurisdiction of masters came to be restrained, the life of a slave was deemed
to be of so little value, that a very slight compensation attoned for taking it
away. Idem, lib. iii. c. 6. If masters had power over the lives of their
slaves, it is evident that almost no bounds would be set to the rigor of the
punishments which they might inflict upon them. The Codes of ancient laws
prescribed punishments for the crimes of slaves different from those which were
inflicted on free men. The latter paid only a fine or compensation, the former
were subjected to corporal punishments. The cruelty of these was in many
instances excessive. Slaves, on very slight occasions, might be put to the rack
on question. The laws with respect to these points are to be found in
Potgiesserus, lib. iii. cap. 7. ^2. If the dominion of masters over the the
lives and persons of their slaves was thus extensive, it was no less so over
their actions and property. They were not originally permitted to marry. Male
and female slaves were allowed and even encouraged to cohabit together. But
this union was not considered as a marriage, it was called contubernium, not
nuptiae or matrimonium. Potgiess. lib. ii. c. 2.. 1. This notion was so much
established, that during several centuries after the barbarous nations embraced
the Christian religion, slaves who lived as husband and wife, were not joined
together by any religious ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial benediction
from a priest. Ibid.. 10, 11. When this conjunction between slaves came to be
considered as a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to marry without
consent of their master, and such as ventured to do so without obtaining that,
were punished with great severity, and sometimes were put to death. Potgiess.
ibid.. 12, etc. Gregor. Turon. histor. lib. v. c. 3. When the manners of the
European nations became more gentle, and their ideas more liberal, slaves who
married without their master's consent, were subjected only to a fine.
Potgiess. ibid.. 20. Du Cange Gloss. voc. Forismaritagium. 3. All the children
of slaves, were in the same condition with their parents, and became the
property of the master. Du Cange Gloss. voc. servus, vol. 6. p. 450. Murat.
antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 766. 4. Slaves were so entirely the property of their
masters, that they could sell them at pleasure. While domestic slavery
continued, the property in a slave was sold in the manner with that which a
person had in any other moveable. Afterward slaves became adscripti glebae,
and were conveyed by sale together with the farm or estate to which they
belonged. Potgiesserus has collected the laws and charters which illustrate
this well known circumstance in the condition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4. 5.
Slaves had a title to nothing but subsistence and clothes from their master;
all the profits of their labor accrued to him. If a master, from indulgence,
gave his slaves any peculium or fixed allowance for their subsistence, they had
no right of property in what they saved out of that. All that they accumulated
belonged to their master. Potgiess. lib. ii. c. 10. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol.
768. Du Cange, voc. servus, vol. vi. p. 451. Conformable to the same principle,
all the effects of slaves belonged to their master at their death, and they
could not dispose of them by testament. Potgiess lib. ii. c. 11. 6. Slaves were
distinguished from free men by a peculiar dress. Among all the barbarous
nations, long hair was a mark of dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that
reason obliged to shave their heads; and by this distinction, how indifferent
soever it may be in its own nature, they were reminded every moment of the
inferiority of their condition. Potgiess. lib. iii. c. 4. For the same reason
it was enacted in the laws of almost all the nations of Europe that no slave
should be admitted to give evidence against a free man in a court of justice.
Du Cange, voc. servus, vol. vi. p. 451. Potgiess. lib. iii. c. 3.

2. Villani. They were likewise adscripti glebae or villae, from which they
derived their name, and were transferable along with it. Du Cange, voc.
villan^s. But in this they differed from slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to
their master for the land which they cultivated, and after paying that, all the
fruits of their labor and industry belonged to themselves in property. This
distinction is marked by Piere de Fontaine's Conseil. Vie de St. Louis par
Joinville, p. 119. edit. de Du Cange. Several cases decided agreeable to this
principle are mentioned by Murat. Ibid. p. 773.

3. THE last class of persons employed in agriculture were free men. These are
distinguished by various names among the writers of the middle ages, Arimanni,
conditionales, originarii, tributales, etc. These seem to have been persons who
possessed some small allodial property of their own, and besides that,
cultivated some farm belonging to their more wealthy neighbors, for which they
paid a fixed rent; and bound themselves likewise to perform several small
services in prato vel in mess, in aratura vel in vinea, such as ploughing a
certain quantity of their landlord's ground, assisting him in harvest and
vintage work, etc. The clearest proof of this may be found in Muratori, v. i.
p. 712* and in Du Cange under the respective words abovementioned. I have not
been able to discover whether these arimanni, etc. were removeable at pleasure,
or held their farms by lease for a certain number of years. The former, if we
may judge from the genius and maxims of the age, seems to be most probable.
These persons, however, were considered as free men in the most honorable
sense of the word; they enjoyed all the privileges of that condition, and were
even called to serve in war; an honor to which no slave was admitted. Murat.
Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the condition of these
three different classes of persons, will enable the reader to apprehend the
full force of an argument which I shall produce in confirmation of what I have
said in the text concerning the wretched state of the people. Notwithstanding
the immense difference between the first of these classes and the third, such
was the spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great proprietors of land,
and so various their opportunities of oppressing those who were settled on
their estates, and of rendering their condition intolerable, that many freemen,
in despair, renounced their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered themselves as
slaves to their powerful masters. This they did, in order that their masters
might become more immediately interested to afford them protection, together
with the means of subsisting themselves and their families. The forms of such a
surrender, or obnoxiatio, as it was then called, are preserved by Marculfus,
lib. ii. c. 28; and by the anonymous collector of formulae published by Bignon,
c. 16. together with Marculfus. In both, the reason for the obnoxiatio, is the
wretched and indigent condition of the person who gives up his liberty. It was
still more common for freemen to surrender their liberty to bishops or abbots,
that they might partake of the security which the vassals and slaves of
churches and monasteries enjoyed, in consequence of the superstitious
veneration paid to the saint under whose immediate protection they were
supposed to be taken. Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286. That condition
must have been miserable indeed, which could induce a freeman voluntarily to
renounce his liberty, and to give himself up as a slave to the disposal of
another. The number of slaves in all the nations of Europe was prodigious. The
greater part of the inferior class of people in France were reduced to this
state, at the commencement of the third race of Kings. L'espr. des Loix, live.
xxx. c. 11. The same was the case in England. Brady Pref. to Genesis Hist. Many
curious facts with respect to the ancient state of villains or slaves in
England, are published in observations on the statutes, chiefly the more
ancient 2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. [K]. SECT. I.
INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced. Many charters granted by persons
of the highest rank are preserved, from which it appears that they could not
subscribe their names. It was usual for persons who could not write, to make
the sign of the cross in confirmation of a charter. Several of these remain,
where Kings and persons of great eminence affix signum crucis manu propria pro
ignoratione literarum. Du Cange, voc. Crux, vol. iii. p. 1191. From this is
derived the phrase of signing instead of subscribing a paper. In the ninth
century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though supreme judge of the Empire by virtue of
his office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau Traite de Diplomatique par
deux Benedictins, 4to. tom. ii. p. 422. So late as the fourteenth century, Du
Guesclin, constable of France, the greatest man in the state, and one of the
greatest men of his age, could neither read nor write. St. Palaye Memoires sur
l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82. Nor was this ignorance confined to laymen;
the greater part of the clergy was not many degrees superior to them in
science. Many dignified ecclesiastics could not subscribe the canons of those
councils in which they sat as members. Nouv. Traite de diplom. tom. ii. p. 424.
One of the questions appointed by the canons to be put to persons who were
candidates for orders was this, "Whether they could read the gospels and
epistles, and explain the sense of them, at least literally?" Regino Prumiensis
ap. Bruck. Hist. Philos. v. iii. p. 631. Alfred the Great complained, that from
the Humber to the Thames there was not a priest who understood the liturgy in
his mother tongue, or who could translate the easiest piece of Latin; and that
from the Thames to the sea, the ecclesiastics were still more ignorant.
Asserus de rebus gestis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, etc. p. 25. The
ignorance of the clergy is quaintly described by an author of the dark ages.
"Potius dediti gulae quam Glossae; potius colligunt libras quam legunt libros;
libentius intuentur Martham quam Marcum; malunt legere in Salmone quam in
Solomone. Alanus de art. Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21. To the
obvious causes of such universal ignorance arising from the state of government
and manners, from the seventh to the eleventh century, we may add the scarcity
of books, and the difficulty of rendering them more common during that period.
The Romans wrote their books either on parchment or on paper made of the
Egyptian papyrus. The latter being the cheapest, was of course the most
commonly used. But after the Saracens conquered Egypt in the seventh century,
the communication between that country and the people settled in Italy or in
other parts of Europe, was almost entirely broke off, and the papyrus was no
longer in use among them. They were obliged, on that account, to write all
their books upon parchment, and as the price of that was high, books became
extremely rare and of great value. We may judge of the scarcity of the
materials for writing them from one circumstance. There still remains several
manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and following centuries, wrote on parchment,
from which some former writing had been erased, in order to substitute a new
composition in its place. In this manner, it is probable, that several works of
the ancients perished. A book of Livy or of Tacitus might be erased, to make
room for the legendary tale of a saint, or the superstitious prayers of a
missal. Murat. Anti. Ital. v. iii. p. 833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that the
greater part of the munuscripts on parchment which he has seen, those of an
ancient date excepted, are written on parchment from which some former treatise
had been erased. Mem. de L'Acad. des inscript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want of
materials for writing, is one reason why so many of the works of the ancients
have perished, it accounts likewise for the small number of manuscripts of any
kind, previous to the eleventh century, when they began to multiply from a
cause which shall be mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Many
circumstances prove the scarcity of books during these ages. Private persons
seldom possessed any books whatever. Even monasteries of considerable note had
only one missal. Murat. Antiq. v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a
letter to the Pope, A. D. 855, beseeches him to lend him a copy of Cicero de
Oratore and Quintilian's Institutions, "for," says he, "although we have parts
of those books, there is no complete copy of them in all France." Murat. Ant.
v. iii. p. 835. The price of books became so high, that persons of a moderate
fortune could not afford to purchase them. The countess of Anjou paid for a
copy of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Halberstadt, two hundred sheep, five
quarters of wheat, and the same quantity of rye and millet. Histoire Literaire
de France par des Religieux Benedictins, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the
year 1471, when Louis XI. borrowed the works of Rasis, the Arabian physician,
from the faculty of medicine in Paris, he not only deposited as a pledge a
considerable quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure a nobleman to join
with him as surety in a deed, binding himself under a great forfeiture to
restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a l'histoire de Louys XI. par Comines edit. de
Fresnoy, tom. iv. p. 281. Many curious circumstances with respect to the
extravagant price of books in the middle ages, are collected by that
industrious compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as deem this small
branch of literary history an object of curiosity. When any person made a
present of a book to a church or a monastery, in which were the only libraries
during these ages, it was deemed a donative of such value, that he offered it
on the altar pro remedio animae suae, in order to obtain the forgiveness of his
sins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836. Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6. Nouv.
Trait. du Diplomat. par deux Benedictins, 4to. tom. i. p. 481.

In the eleventh century, the art of making paper in the manner now become
universal, was invented; by means of that not only the number of manuscripts
increased, but the study of the sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat.
ib. p. 871. The invention of the art of making paper, and the invention of the
art of printing, are two considerable events in literary history. It is
remarkable that the former preceded the first dawning of letters and
improvement in knowledge toward the close of the eleventh century; the latter
ushered in the light which spread over Europe at the era of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. [L]. SECT. I.
All the religious maxims and practices of the dark ages are a proof of this. I
shall produce one remarkable testimony in confirmation of it, from an author
canonized by the church of Rome, St. Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyne, in the
seventh century. "He is a good christian who comes frequently to church; who
presents the oblation which is offered to God upon the altar; who does not
taste of the fruits of his own industry until he has consecrated a part of them
to God; who, when the holy festivals shall approach, lives chastely even with
his own wife during several days, that with a safe conscience he may draw near
to the altar of God; and who, in the last place, can repeat the Creed and the
Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your souls from destruction while you have the means
in your power; offer presents and tithes to churchmen; come more frequently to
church; humbly implore the patronage of the saints; for if you observe these
things, you may come with security in the day to the tribunal of the eternal
Judge, and say, "Give to us, O Lord, for we have given unto thee." Dacherii
Specilegium Veter. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and judicious translator
of Dr. Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, from one of whose additional notes I
have borrowed this passage, subjoins a very proper reflection; "We see here a
large and ample description of a good Christian, in which there is not the
least mention of the love of God, resignation to his will, obedience to his
laws, or of justice, benevolence, and charity toward men." Mosh. Eccles: Hist.
v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII [M]. SECT. I.
IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church of Rome, whose doctrine of
infallibility renders all such instituitons and ceremonies as have been once
universally received, immutable and everlasting, that she must continue to
observe in enlightened times, those rites which were introduced during the ages
of darkness and credulity. What delighted and edified the latter, must digust
and shock the former. Many of these rites appear manifestly to have been
introduced by a superstition of the lowest and most illiberal species. Many of
them were borrowed, with little variation, from the religious ceremonies
established among the ancient Heathens. Some were so ridiculous, that if every
age did not furnish instances of the fascinating influence of superstition, as
well as of the whimsical forms which it assumes, it must appear incredible that
they should ever be received or tolerated. In several churches of France, they
celebrated a festival in commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt.
It was called the feast of the Ass. A young girl richly dressed, with a child
in her arms, was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned. The ass was led to the
altar in solemn procession. High Mass was said with great pomp. The ass was
taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn no less childish than impious was sung
in his praise: And when the ceremony was ended, the priest, instead of the
usual words with which he dismissed the people, brayed three times like an ass;
and the people instead of their usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three
times in the same manner. Du Cange, voc. Festum. v. iii. p. 424. This
ridiculous ceremony was not, like the festival of fools, and some other
pageants of those ages, a mere farcical entertainment exhibited in a church and
mingled, as was then the custom, with an imitation of some religious rites; it
was an act of devotion, performed by the ministers of religion, and by the
authority of the church. However, as this practice did not prevail universally
in the Catholic church, its absurdity contributed at last to abolish it.

NOTE XIII. [N]. SECT. I.
AS there is no event in the history of mankind more singular than that of the
Crusades, every circumstance that tends to explain or to give any rational
account of this extraordinary frenzy of the human mind is interesting. I have
asserted in the text, that the minds of men were prepared gradually for the
amazing effort which they made in consequence of the exhortations of Peter the
hermit, by several occurrences previous to his time. A more particular detail
of this curious and obscure part of history, may perhaps appear to some of my
readers to be of importance. That the end of the world was expected about the
close of the tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and that this
occasioned a general alarm, is evident from the authors to whom I refer in the
text. This belief was so universal and so strong, that it mingled itself with
their civil transactions. Many charters in the latter part of the tenth century
began in this manner: "Apropinquante mundi termino," etc. As the end of the
world is now at hand, and by various calamities and judgments the signs of its
approach are now manifest. Hist. de Langued. par. D. D. de Vic Vaisette, tom.
ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, 90, 117, 158, etc. One effect of this was, that a great
number of pilgrims resorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution to die there, or to
wait the coming of the Lord; Kings, Earls, Marquisses, Bishops, and even a
great number of women, besides persons of inferior rank, flocked to the Holy
Land. Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez Bouquet Recueil, tom. x. p. 50, 52. Another
historian mentions a vast cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count of
Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year 1026. Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. 162. These
pilgrims filled Europ^ with lamentable accounts accounts of the state of
Christians in the Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr. Hist. ap. Gest. Dei per Franc. vol.
ii. p. 636. Guibert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476. Besides this it was
usual for many of the Christian inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as of the
other cities in the East, to travel as mendicants through Europe; and by
describing the wretched condition of the professors of the Christian faith
under the dominion of Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous
persons to make some attempt in order to deliver them from oppression.
Baldrici. Archiepiscopi Histor. ap. Gesta Dei, etc. vol. i. p. 86. In the year
986, Gerbet, archbishop of Ravenna, afterward Pope Silvester II. addressed a
letter to all Christians in the name of the church of Jerusalem. It is eloquent
and pathetic, and contains a formal exhortation to take arms against the Pagan
oppressors, in order to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Gerberti
Epistolae ap. Bouquet, Recueil, tom* x. p. 426. In conseqence of this spirited
call, some subjects of the republic of Pisa equipped a fleet, and invaded the
territories of the Mahometans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol, iii.
p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East, and an opinion prevailed, A. D. 1010,
that all the forces of Christendom were to unite, in order to drive the
Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron. Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x. p. 152. It is
evident from all these particulars, that the ideas which led the Crusaders to
undertake their wild enterprise were gradually formed; so that the universal
concourse to the standard of the cross when erected by Urban II. will appear
less surprising.

If the various circumstances which I have enumerated in this note, as well as
in the history, are sufficient to account for the ardour with which such vast
numbers engaged in such a dangerous undertaking, the extensive privileges and
immunities granted to those who assumed the cross, serve to account for the
long continuance of this spirit in Europe. 1. They were exempted from
prosecutions on account of debt during the time of their being engaged in this
holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis privilegium, v. ii. p. 1194. -- 2. They
were exempted from paying interest for the money which they had borrowed. Ibid.

They were exempted either entirely, or at least during a certain time, from
the payment of taxes. Ibid* Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 33. 4^
They might alienate their lands without the consent of the superior Lord of
whom they held. Ib. 5. Their persons and effects were taken under the
protection of St. Peter, and the anathemas of the church were denounced against
all who should molest them, or carry on any quarrel or hostility against them,
during their absence, on account of the holy war. Du Cange, Ib. Guibertus Abbas
ap. Bongars. i. p. 480, 482. -- 6. They enjoyed all the privileges of
Ecclesiastics, and were not bound to plead in any civil court, but were
declared subject to the spiritual jurisdiction alone. Du Cange, Ib. Ordon. des
Rois, tom. i. p. 34, 174. -- 7. They obtained a plenary remission of all their
sins, and the gates of heaven were set open to them, without requiring any
proof of their penitence, but their engaging in this expedition, and thus
gratifying their favorite passion, the love of war. Guibert. Abbas, p. 480.
When we behold the civil and ecclesiastical powers vying with each other, and
straining their invention in order to devise expedients for encouraging and
adding strength to the spirit of superstition, can we be surprised that it
should become so general as to render it infamous, and a mark of cowardice to
decline engaging in the holy war? Willierm Tyriensis ap. Bongars. vol. ii. p.
641. The histories of the Crusades written by modern authors, who are apt to
substitute the ideas and maxims of their own age in the place of those which
influenced the persons whose actions they attempt to relate, convey a very
imperfect notion of the spirit at that time predominant in Europe. The original
historians, who were animated themselves with the same passions which possessed
their contemporaries, exhibit to us a more striking picture of the times and
manners which they describe. The enthusiatic rapture with which they account
for the effects of the Pope's discourse in the council of Clermont; the
exultation with which they mention the numbers who devoted themselves to this
holy warfare; the confidence with which they rely on the divine protection; the
extacy of joy with which they describe their taking possession of the holy
city, will enable us to conceive in some degree the extravagance of that zeal
which agitated the minds of men with such violence, and will suggest as many
singular ^^flections to a philosopher, as any occurrence in the history of
mankind. -- It is unnecessary to select the particular passages in the several
historians which confirm this observation. But left these authors may be
suspected of adorning their narrative with any exaggerated description, I shall
appeal to one of the leaders who conducted the enterprise. There is extant a
from Stephen, the Earl of Chartres and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he
gives her an account of the progress of the Crusaders. He describes the
Crusaders as the chosen army of Christ, as the servants and soldiers of God, as
men who marched under the immediate protection of the Almighty, being conducted
by his hand to the victory and conquest. He speaks of the Turks as accursed,
sacrilegious, and devoted by Heaven to destruction; and when he mentions the
soldiers in the Christian army who had died, or were killed, he is confident
that their souls were admitted directly into the joys of Paradise. Dacherii
Specilegium, vol. iv. p. 257.

THE expense of conducting numerous bodies of men from Europe to Asia, must
have been excessive, and the difficulty of raising the necessary sums must have
been proportionally great, during ages when the public revenues in every nation
of Europe were extremely small. Some account is preserved of the expedients
employed by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to levy the money requisite
toward equipping him for the Crusade, A. D. 1346. These I shall mention, as
they tend to show the considerable influence which the Crusades had, both on
the state of property and of civil government. 1. He exposed to sale part of
his domains; and as the price was destined for such a sacred service, he
obtained the consent of the French King, of whom these lands were held,
ratifying the alienation. Hist. de Dauphine tom. i. p. 332. 335. -- 2. He
issued a proclamation, in which he promised to grant new privileges to the
nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities and towns, in his territories,
in consideration of certain sums which they were instantly to pay on that
account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512. Many of the charters of community, which I
shall mention in another note, were obtained in this manner. -- 3. He exacted a
contribution toward defraying the charges of the expedition from all his
subjects, whether ecclesiastics or laymen, who did not accompany him in person
to the East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335. -- 4. He appropriated a considerable part of
his usual revenues for the support of the troops to be employed in this
service; ibid. tom. ii. p. 518. -- 5. He exacted considerable sums not only of
the Jews settled in his dominions, but also of the Lombards and other bankers
who had fixed their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338, tom. ii. 528,
Notwithstanding the variety of these resources, the Dauphin was involved in
such expense by this expedition, that on his return he was obliged to make new
demands on his subjects, and to pillage the Jews by fresh exactions. Ibid. tom.
i. p. 344, 347. When the count de Foix engaged in the first Crusade, he raised
the money necessary for defraying the expenses of that expedition, by
alienating part of his territories. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic and
Vaisette, tom. ii. p. 287. In like manner Baldwin, count of Hainaut, mortgaged
or sold part of his dominions to the bishop of Liege. A. D. 1096. Du Mont Corpse
Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin Count of Namur sold
part of his estate to a monastery, when he intended to assume the cross. A. D.
1239. Miraei oper. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. [O]. SECT. I.
THE usual method of forming an opinion concerning the comparative state of
manners in two different nations, is by attending to the facts which historians
relate concerning each of them. Various passages might be selected from the
Byzantin historians, describing the splendour and magnificence of the Greek
empire. P. de Montfaucon has produced from the writings of St. Chrysostom a
very full account of the elegance and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That
father in his sermons enters into such details concerning the manners and
customs of his contemporaries, as appear strange in discourses from the pulpit.
P. de Montfaucon has collected these descriptions, and ranged them under
different heads. The court of the more early Greek Emperors seems to have
resembled those of Eastern monarchs, both in magnificence and in corruption of
manners. The Emperors in the eleventh century, though inferior in power, did
not yield to them in ostentation and splendour. Memoires de l'Acad. des
Inscript. tom. xx. p. 197. -- But we may decide concerning the comparative
state of manners in the Eastern Empire, and among the nations in the west of
Europe by another method, which if not more certain, is at least more striking.
As Constantinople was the place of rendezvous for all the armies of the
crusaders, this brought together the people, of the east and west as to one
great interview. There are extant several contemporary authors, both among the
Greeks and Latins, who were witnesses of this singular congress of people
formerly strangers, in a great measure, to each other. They describe with
simplicity and candor, the impression which that new spectacle made upon their
own minds. This may be considered as the most lively and just picture of the
real character and manners of each people. When the Greeks speak of the Franks,
they describe them as barbarians, fierce, illiterate, impetuous and savage.
They assume a tone of superiority, as a more polished people, acquainted with
the arts both of government and of elegance, of which the others were ignorant.
It is thus Anna Comnena describes the manners of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224,
231, 237. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always treats them with contempt as a
rude people, the very mention of whose names was sufficient to contaminate the
beauty and elegance of history, p. 229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against them
with still more violence, and gives an account of their ferocity and
devastations, in terms not unlike those which preceding historians had employed
in describing the incursions of the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. iii. p. 302, etc. But, on the other hand, the Latin historians
were struck with astonishment at the magnificence, wealth. and elegance which
they discovered in the Eastern empire. "O what a vast city is Constantinople
(exclaims Fulcherius Carnotensis, when he first beheld it) and how beautiful!
How many monasteries are there in it, and how many palaces built with wonderful
art! How many manufactures are there in the city, amazing to behold! It would
be astonishing to relate how it abounds with all good things, with gold,
silver, and stuffs of various kinds; for every hour ships arrive in its port
laden with all things necessary for the use of man. Fulcher. ap. Bongars, vol.
i. p. 386. Willermus Archbishop of Tire, the most intelligent historian of the
crusades, takes frequent occasion to describe the elegance and splendor of the
court of Constantinople, and adds, that what they observed there exceeded any
idea which they could have formed of it, nostrarum enim rerum modum and
dignitatem excedunt, Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Guntherus, a
French monk who wrote a history of the conquest of Constantinople by the
crusaders in the thirteenth century, speaks of the magnificence of that city in
the same tone of admiration, "Structurum autem Aedificiorum in corpore
civitatis, in ecclesiis videlicit, and turibus, and in domibus magnatorum, vix
ullus vel describere potest, vel credere describenti, nisi qui ea oculata fide
cognoverit." Hist. Constantinop. ap. Canisii Lectiones Antiquas. fol. Antw.
1725. vol. iv. p. 14. Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high rank, and
accustomed to all the magnificence then known in the west, describes, in
similar terms, the astonishment and admiration of such of his fellow soldiers
who beheld Constantinople for the first time: "They could not have believed,
says he, that there was a city so beautiful and rich in the whole world. When
they viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its superb
churches, all appeared so great that they could have formed no conception of
this sovereign city, unless they had seen it with their own eyes." Histoire de
la Conquete de Constant p. 49. From these undisguised representations of their
own feelings, it is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latins appeared to be a
race of rude, unpolished barbarians; whereas the latter, how much soever they
might contemn the unwarlike character of the former, could not help regarding
them as far superior themselves in elegance and arts -- That the state of
government and manners was much more improved in Italy than in the other
countries of Europe is evident not only from the facts recorded in history, but
it appears that the more intelligent leaders of the crusaders were struck with
the difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French historian of the holy war, makes
an elaborate panegyric on the character and manners of the Italians. He views
them as a more polished people, and particularly celebrates them for their love
of liberty and civil wisdom; in consiliis circumspecti, in re sua publica
procuranda diligentes and studiosi; sibi in posterum providentes; aliis subjici
renuentes; ante omnia libertatem sibi defendentes; sub uno quem eligunt
capitaneo, communitate suae jura and instituta dictantes, and similiter
observantes. Histor. Hierosol. ap. Gesta Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p. 1085.

NOTE XV. [P]. SECT. I.
The different steps taken by the cities of Italy in order to extend their
power and dominion are remarkable. As soon as their liberties were established,
and they began to feel their own importance, they endeavored to render
themselves masters of the territory round their walls. Under the Romans, when
cities enjoyed municipal privileges and jurisdiction, the circumjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of the community. But as it was
not the genius of the feudal policy to encourage cities, or to show any regard
for their possessions and immunities, these lands had been seized, and shared
among the conquerors. The barons to whom they were granted, erected their
castles almost at the gates of the city, and exercised their jurisdiction
there. Under pretense of covering their ancient property, many of the cities in
Italy attacked these troublesome neighbors, and dispossessing them, annexed
their territories to the communities, and made thereby a considerable addition
to their power. Several instances of this occur in the eleventh, and beginning
of the twelfth centuries. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 159, etc. Their
ambition increasing together with their power, they afterward attacked several
barons situated at a great distance from them, and obliged these to engage that
they should become members of their community; that they should take the oath
of fidelity to their magistrates; that they should subject their lands to all
burdens and taxes imposed by common consent; that they should defend the
community against all its enemies; and that they should reside within the city
during a certain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid. 163. This subjection
of the nobility to the municipal government established in cities, became
almost universal, and was often extremely grevious to persons accustomed to
consider themselves as independent. Otto Frisingensis thus describes the state
of Italy under Frederick I. "The cities so much affect liberty, and are so
solicitous to avoid the insolence of power, that almost all of them have thrown
off every other authority, and are governed by their own magistrates. Insomuch
that all that country is now filled with free cities, each of which have
compelled their bishops to reside within their walls, and there is scarce any
nobleman, how great soever his power may be, who is not subject to the laws and
government of some city. De Gestis Frider. I. Imp. lib. ii. c. 13. p. 453. In
another place he observes of the Marquis of Montserrat that he was almost the
only Italian baron, who had preserved his independance, and had not become
subject to the laws of any city. See also Muratori Antichita Estensi, vol. i.
p. 411, 412. That state into which some of the nobles were compelled to enter,
others embraced from choice. They observed that high degree of security as well
as of credit and estimation which the growing wealth and dominion of the great
communities procured to all the members of them. They were desirous to partake
of these, and to put themselves under such powerful protection. With this view
they voluntarily became citizens of the towns in which their lands were most
contiguous, and abandoning their ancient castles, took up their residence in
the cities at least during part of the year. Several deeds are still extant, by
which some of the most illustrious families in Italy are associated as citizens
of different cities. Murat. ib. p. 165, etc. A charter by which Atto de
Macerata is admitted as a citizen of Osimo, A. D. 1198. in the Marcha di Ancona
is still extant. In this he stipulates, that he will acknowledge himself to be
a burgess of that community; that he will to the utmost of his power, promote
its honor and welfare; that he will obey his magistrates; that he will enter
into no league with its enemies; that he will reside in the town during two
months in every year, or for a longer time if required by the magistrates. The
community, on the other hand, take him, his family, and friends, under their
protection, and engage to defend him against every enemy. Fr. Ant. Zacharias
Anecdota medii aevi. Aug. Taurm. 1755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so
important, that not only laymen, but ecclesiastics of the highest rank
condescended to be adopted as members of the great communities, in hopes of
enjoying the safety and dignity which that conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before
the institution of communities, persons of noble birth had no other residence
but their castles. They kept their petty courts there; and the cities were
deserted, having hardly any inhabitants, but slaves or persons of low
condition. But in consequence of the practice which I have mentioned, cities
not only became more populous, but were filled with inhabitants of better rank;
and a custom, which still subsists in Italy, was then introduced, that all
families of distinction reside more constantly in the great towns, than is
usual in other parts of Europe. As cities acquired new consideration and
dignity by the accession of such citizens, they became more solicitous to
preserve their liberty and independance. The Emperors, as sovereigns, had
anciently a palace in almost every great city of Italy; when they visited that
country they were accustomed to reside in these, and the troops which
accompanied them were quartered in the houses of the citizens. This the
citizens considered both as ignominious and dangerous. They could not help
considering it as receiving a master and an enemy within their walls. They
labored therefore to get free of this subjection. Some cities prevailed on the
Emperors to engage that they should never enter their gates, but take up their
residence without the walls, Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24. Others obtained
the imperial license to pull down the palace situated within their liberties,
on condition that they built another in the suburbs for the reception of the
Emperor. Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various encroachments of the
Italian cities alarmed the Emperors, and put them on schemes for
re-establishing the imperial jurisdiction over them on its ancient footing.
Frederick Barbarossa engaged in this enterprise with great ardour. The free
cities of Italy joined together in a general league, and stood on their
defense; and after a long contest, carried on with alternate success, a solemn
treaty of peace was concluded at Constance, A. D. 1183, by which all the
privileges and immunities granted by former Emperors to the principal cities in
Italy were confirmed and ratified. Murat. dissert. XLVIII. This treaty of
Constance was considered as such an important article in the jurisprudence of
the middle ages, that it is usually published together with the Libri Feudorum
at the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. The treaty secured privileges of great
importance to the confederate cities, and though it reserved a considerable
degree of authority and jurisdiction to the Empire, yet the cities persevered
with such vigor in their efforts in order to extend their immunities, and the
conjunctures in which they made them were so favorable, that, before the
conclusion of the thirteenth century, most of the great cities in Italy had
shaken off all marks of subjection to the Empire, and were become independent
sovereign republics. It is not requisite that I should trace the various steps
by which they advanced to this high degree of power so fatal to the Empire, and
so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori with his usual
industry has collected many original papers which illustrate this curious and
little known part of history. Murat. Antiq. Ital. Dissert. L. See also Jo.
Bapt. Villanovae hist. Laudis Pompeii sive Lodi in Graev. These: Antiquit. Ital.
vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. [Q]. SECT. I.
LONG before the institution of communities in France, charters of immunity or
Franchise were granted to some towns and villages by the lords on whom they
depended. But these are very different from such as became common in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They did not erect these towns into
corporations; they did not not establish a municipal government; they did not
grant them the privilege of bearing arms. They contained nothing more than a
manumision of the inhabitants from the yoke of servitude; an exemption from
certain services which were oppressive and ignominious; and the establishment
of a fixed tax or rent which they were to pay to their Lord in place of
impositions which he could formerly lay upon them at pleasure. Two charters of
this kind to two villages in the county of Rousillan, one A. D. 974. the other
A. D. 1025, are still extant. Petr. de Marca Marca, sive limes Hispanicus. app.
p. 909. 1038. Such concessions, it is probable, were not unknown in other parts
of Europe, and may be considered as a step toward the more extensive
privileges conferred by Louis the Gross on the towns within his domains. The
communities in France never aspired to the same independance with those in
Italy. They acquired new privileges, and immunities, but the right of
sovereignty remained entire to the King or baron within whose territories the
respective cities were situated, and from whom they received the charter of
their freedom. A great number of these charters granted both by the Kings of
France, and by their great vassals are published by M. D'Achery in his
Specilegium, and many are found in the collection of the Ordinances des Rois de
France. These convey a very striking representation of the wretched condition
of cities previous to the institution of communities, when they were subject to
the judges appointed by (...) superior lords of whom they held, and had scarce
any other law but their will. Each concession in these charters must be
considered as a grant of some new privilege which the people did not formerly
enjoy, and each regulation as a method of redressing some grievance under which
they formerly labored. The charters of communities contain likewise the first
expedients employed for the introduction of equal laws, and regular government.
On both these accounts they merit particular attention, and therefore instead
of referring my readers to the many bulky volumes in which they are scattered,
I shall give them a view of some of the most important articles in these
charters ranged under two general heads. I. Such as respect personal safety.
II. Such as respect the security of property.

I. DURING that state of turbulence and disorder which the corruption of the
feudal government introduced into Europe, personal safety was the chief object
of every individual; and as the great military barons alone were able to give
sufficient protection to their vassals, this was one great source of their
power and authority. But, by the institution of communities, effectual
provision was made for the safety of individuals independent of the nobles.
For, 1. the fundamental article in every charter was, that all the members of
it bound themselves by oath to assist, defend, and stand by each other against
all aggressors, and that they should not suffer any person to injure, distress,
or molest, any of their fellow citizens. D'Acher. Specil. x. 642. xi. 341, etc.
-- 2. Whoever resided in any town which was made free, was obliged under a
severe penalty to accede to the community, and to take part in the mutual
defense of its members. D'Acher. Spec. xi. 344. -- 3. The communities had the
privilege of carrying arms; of making war on their private enemies; and of
executing by military force any sentence which their magistrates pronounced.
D'Ach. Specil. x. 643, 644. xi. 343. -- 4. The practice of making satisfaction
by a pecuniary compensation for murder, assault, or other acts of violence,
most inconsistent with the order of society, and the safety of individuals, was
abolished, and such as committed these crimes were punished capitally, or with
rigor adequate to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Miraei opera Diplomatica, i.
292. -- 5. No member of a community was bound to justify or defend himself by
battle, or combat, but if he was charged with any crime, he could be convicted
only by the evidence of witnesses, and the regular course of legal proceedings.
Miraeus, ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375, 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 265. -- 6. If any man
suspected himself to be in danger from the malice or enmity of another, upon
his making oath to that effect before a magistrate, the person suspected was
bound under a severe penalty to give security for his peaceable behavior.
D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the same species of security which is still known in
Scotland under the name of Lawburrows. In France it was first introduced among
the inhabitants of communities, and having been found to contribute
considerably toward personal safety, it was extended to all the other members
of society. Establissemens de St. Louis, live. i. cap. 28. ap. Du Cange vie de
St. Louis, p. 15.

II. THE provisions in the charters of communities concerning the security of
property are not less considerable than those respecting personal safety. By
the ancient law of France no person could be arrested or confined in prison on
account of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 72, 80. If
any person was arrested upon any pretext, but his having been guilty of a
capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of the hands of the officers who
had seized him. Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from arrest on account of debt seems
likewise to have been enjoyed in other countries. Gudenus Sylloge Diplom. 473.
In society, while it remained in its rudest and most simple form, debt seems to
have been considered as an obligation merely personal. Men had made some
progress toward refinement before creditors acquired a right of seizing the
property of their debtors in order to recover payment. The expedients for this
purpose were all introduced originally in communities, and we can trace the
gradual progress of them. 1. The simplest and most obvious species of security
was, that the person who sold any commodity should receive a pledge from him
who bought it, which he restored upon receiving payment. Of this custom there
are vestiges in several charters of community. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377. -- 2.
When no pledge was given, and the debtor became refractory or insolvent, the
creditor was allowed to seize his effects with a strong hand, and by his
private authority; the citizens of Paris are warranted by the royal mandate,
"ut ubicumque, et quocumque modo potuerunt, tantum capiant, unde pecuniam sibi
debitam integre and plenarie habeant, and inde sibi invicem adjutores
existant." Ordon. etc. tom. i. p. 6. This rude practice, suitable only to the
violence of a state of nature, was tolerated longer than one can conceive to be
possible in any society, where laws and order were at all known. The ordonance
authorizing it was issued, A. D. 1134. and that which corrects the law, and
prohibits creditors from seizing the effects of their debtors, unless by a
warrrnt from a magistrate, and under his inspection, was not published until
the year 1351. Ordon. tom. ii. 438. It is probable, however, that men were
taught, by observing the disorders which the former mode of proceeding
occasioned, to correct it in practice long before a remedy was provided by a
law to that effect. Every discerning reader will apply this observation to many
other customs and practices which I have mentioned. New customs are not always
to be ascribed to the laws which authorize them. These statutes only give a
legal sanction to such things, as the experience of mankind has previously
found to be proper and beneficial. 3. As soon as the interposition of the
magistrate became requisite, regular provision was made for attaching or
distraining the moveable effects of a debtor; and if his moveable were not
sufficient to discharge the debt, his immovable property, or estate in land,
was liable to the same distress, and was sold for the benefit of his creditor.
D'Ach. ix. p. 184, 185. xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded the most
complete security to the creditor, it was considered as so severe, that
humanity pointed out several limitations in the execution of it. Creditors were
prohibited from seizing the wearing apparel of their debtors, their beds, the
door of their house, their instruments of husbandry, etc. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi.
377. Upon the same principles, when the power of distraining effects became
more general, the horse and arms of a gentleman could not be seized. D'Ach. ix.
185. As hunting was the favorite amusement of martial nobles, the Emperor
Ludovicus Pius prohibited the seizing of a hawk, on account of any composition
or debt. Capitul. lib. iv.. 21. But if the debtor had no other movables, even
these privileged articles might be seized. 4. In order to render the security
of property complete within a community, every person who was admitted a member
of it, was obliged to buy or build a house, or to purchase lands, within its
precincts, or at least to bring into town a considerable portion of his
movables per quae justitiari possit, si quid forte in eum querel^ evenerit.
D'Ach. xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367. Libertates S. Georgii. de Esperanchia. Hist. de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 26. -- 5. That security might be as perfect as possible;
in some towns, the members of the community seem to to have been bound for each
other. D'Ach. x. 644. -- 6. All questions with respect to property, were tried
within the community by magistrates and judges, which the citizens elected or
appointed. Their decisions were more equal and fixed, than the sentences which
depended on the capricious and arbitrary will of a baron, who thought himself
superior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644, 646. xi. 344. and passim. Ordon. iii. 204.
7. No member of a community could be burdened by any arbitrary tax; for the
superior lord who granted the charter of community, accepted of a fixed census
or duty in lieu of all demands, Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de Calma. Hist.
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Libert. St. Georgii de Esperanchia, ibid. p. 26.
Nor could the members of a community be distressed by an unequal imposition of
the sum to be levied on the community. Regulations are inserted in the charters
of some communities concerning the method of determining the quota of any tax
to be levied on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis published an
ordonance concerning this matter, which extended to all the communities. Ordon.
t. i. 186. These regulations are extremely favorable to liberty, as they vest
the power of proportioning the taxes in a certain number of citizens chosen out
of each parish, who were bound by solemn oath to decide according to justice.
That the more perfect security of property was one great object of those who
instituted communities, we learn, not only from the nature of the thing, but
from the express words of several charters, of which I shall only mention that
granted by Alienor, Queen of England and Duchess of Guienne, to the community
of Poitiers, "ut sua propria melius defendre possint, and magis integre
custodire." Du Cange voc. Communia, v. ii. p. 863. -- Such are some of the
capital regulations established in communities during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. These may be considered as the first rudiments of law and
order, and contributed greatly to introduce regular government among all the
members of society. As soon as communities were instituted, high sentiments of
liberty began to appear. When Humbert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a charter
of community to the town of Belleville, exacted of the inhabitants an oath of
fidelity to himself and successors, they stipulated, on their part, that he
should swear to maintain their franchises and liberties; and for their greater
security, they obliged him to bring twenty gentlemen to take the same oath, and
to be bound together with him. D'Ach. ix. 183. In the same manner, the lord of
Moirens in Dauphine produced a certain number of persons as his sureties for
the observation of the articles, contained in the charter of community to that
town. These were bound to surrender themselves prisoners to the inhabitants of
Moirens, if their liege lord should violate any of their franchises, and they
promised to remain in custody until he should grant them redress. Hist. de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 17. If the mayor or chief magistrate of a town did any
injury to a citizen, he was obliged to give security for his appearance in
judgment, in the same manner as a private person; and if cast, was liable to
the same penalty. D'Ach. ix. 183. These are ideas of equality uncommon in the
feudal times. Communities were so favorable to freedom, that they were
distinguished by the name of Libertates. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863. They were, at
first extremely odious to the nobles, who foresaw what a check they must prove
to their power and domination Guibert Abbot of Nogent calls them execrable
inventions, by which, contrary to law and justice, slaves withdrew themselves
from that obedience which they owed to their masters. Du Cange, ib. 862. The
zeal with which some of the nobles and powerful ecclesiastics opposed the
establishment of communities, and endeavored to circumscribe their privileges,
was extraordinary. A striking instance of this occurs in the contests between
the archbishop of Reims, and the inhabitants of that community. It was the
chief business of every archbishop, during a considerable time, to abridge the
rights and jurisdiction of the community; and the great object of the citizens,
especially when the sea was vacant, to maintain, to recover, and to extend
their jurisdiction. Histoire civil and politic de la ville de Reims par M.
Anquetil, tom. i. p. 287, etc.

THE observations which I have made concerning the state of cities, and the
condition of their inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable passages in the
historians and laws of the middle ages. It is not improbable, however, that
some cities of the first order were in a better state, and enjoyed a superior
degree of liberty. Under the Roman government, the municipal government
established in cities was extremely favorable to liberty. The jurisdiction of
the senate in each corporation, and the privileges of the citizens, were both
extensive. There is reason to believe, that some of the greater cities which
escaped the destructive rage of the barbarous nations, still retained their
ancient form of government, at least in a great measure. They were governed by
a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom they themselves elected. Very
strong presumptions in favor of this opinion; are produced by M. l' Abbe De
Bos. Hist. Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. 18, etc. tom. ii. p. 524. edit.
1742. It appears from some of the charters of communities to cities, granted in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that they only confirm the privileges
possessed by the inhabitants, previous to the establishment of the community.
D'Acher. er. Specileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed their privileges
as having possessed them without interruption from the times of the Romans.
Hist. Crit. de la. Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But the number of cities which
enjoyed such immunities was so small, as in no degree to diminish the force of
my conclusion in the text.

NOTE XVII. [R]. SECT. I.
HAVING given a full account of the establishment, as well as effects of
communities in Italy and France, it will be necessary to enquire with some
attention, into the progress of cities and of municipal government in Germany.
The ancient Germans had no cities. Even in their hamlets or villages, they did
not build their houses contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ. cap. 16.
They considered it as a badge of servitude, to be obliged to dwell in a city
surrounded with walls. When one of their tribes had shaken off the Roman yoke,
their countrymen required of them, as an evidence of their having recovered
liberty, to demolish the walls of a town which the Romans had built in their
country. Even the fiercest animals, said they, lose their spirit and courage
when they are confined. Tacit. Histor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built several
cities of note on the banks of the Rhine. But in all the vast countries from
that river to the coasts of the Baltic, there was hardly one city previous to
the ninth century of the Christian era. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus
Germaniae Open. vol. i. 25, 27, 31, etc. Heineccius differs from Conringius
with respect to this. But even after allowing to his arguments and authorities
their utmost force, they prove only, that there were a few places in those
extensive regions, on which some historians have bestowed the name of towns
Elem. Jur. German. lib. i. 102. Under Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his
family, as the political state of Germany began to improve, several cities were
founded, and men became accustomed to associate and to live together in one
place. Charlemagne founded two archbishopricks and nine bishoprics in the most
considerable towns of Germany. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. 16.
His successors increased the number of these; and as the bishops fixed their
residence in these cities and performed religious functions there, that induced
many people to settle in them. Conring. ibid. 48. But Henry, surnamed the
Fowler, who began his reign A. D. 920, must be considered as the great founder
of the cities in Germany. The Empire was at that time infested by the
incursions of the hungarians and other barbarous people. In order to oppose
them, Henry encouraged his subjects to settle in cities which he surrounded
with walls and towers. He enjoined or persuaded a certain proportion of the
nobility to fix their residence in the towns, and thus rendered the condition
of citizens more honorable than it had been formerly. Wittikindus Annal. lib.
i. ap. Conring.. 82. From this period the number of cities continued to
increase, and they became more populous and more wealthy. But cities were still
destitute of municipal liberty or jurisdiction. Such of them as were situated
in the Imperial demesnes, were subject to the Emperors, and their Comites,
Missi, and other judges presided in them, and dispensed justice. Towns situated
on the estate of a baron, were part of his fief, and he or his officers
exercised a similiar jurisdiction in them. Conring. ibid.. 73, 74. Heinec.
Elem. Jur. Germ. lib. i.. 104. The Germans borrowed the institution of
communities from the Italians. Knipschildius Tractatus Politico. Hist. Jurid.
de Civitatum Imperialum Juribus, vol. i. lib. i. cap. 5. No. 23. Frederick
Barbarossa was the first Emperor who, from the same political consideration
that influenced Lewis the Gross, multiplied communities in order to abridge the
power of the nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Histoire and du Droit Public
d'Allemagne, 4to. 297. From the reign of Henry the Fowler, to the time when the
German cities acquired full possession of their immunities, various
circumstances contributed to their increase. The establishment of bishoprics
(already mentioned) and the building of cathedrals, naturally induced many
people to settle there. It became the custom to hold councils and courts of
judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well as civil* in cities. In the
eleventh century, many slaves were enfranchised, the greater part of which
settled in cities. Several mines were discovered and wrought in different
provinces, which drew together such a concourse of people, as gave rise to
several cities. Conring.. 105. The cities began in the thirteenth century to
form leagues for their mutual defense, and for repressing the disorders
occasioned by the private wars among the barons, as well as by their exactions.
This rendered the condition of the inhabitants of cities more secure than that
of any order of men, and allured many to become members of their communities.
Conring.. 94. There were inhabitants of three different ranks in the towns of
Germany. The nobles, or familiae, the citizens, or liberi, and the artisans who
were slaves, or homines proprii. Knipschild. lib. ii. cap. 29. No. 13. Henry V.
who began his reign A. D. 1106, infranchised the slaves who were artisans or
inhabitants in several towns, and gave them the rank of citizens, or liberi.
Pfeffel, p. 254. Knipsch. lib. ii. c. 29. No. 113, 119. Though the cities in
Germany did not acquire liberty so early as those in France, they extended
their privileges much farther. All the Imperial and free cities, the number of
which is considerable, acquired the full right of being immediate; by which
term in the German jurisprudence, we are to understand, that they are subject
to the Empire alone, and possess within their own precincts all the rights of
complete and independent sovereignty. The various privileges of the Imperial
cities, the great guardians of the Germanic liberties, are innumerated by
Knipschild, lib. ii. The great articles are generally known, and it would be
improper to enter into any disquisition concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. [S]. SECT. I.
THE Spanish historians are almost entirely silent concerning the origin and
progress of communities in that kingdom; so that I cannot fix with any degree
of certainty the time and manner of their first introduction there. It appears,
however, from Mariana, vol. ii. p. 221, fol. Hagae 1736, that in the year 1350,
eighteen cities had obtained a seat in the Cortes of Castile. From the account
which shall be given of their constitution and pretensions, Sect. III. of this
volume, it is evident that their privileges and form of government were the
same with those of the other feudal corporations; and this, as well as the
pefect similarity of political institutions and transactions in all the feudal
kingdoms, may lead us to conclude, that communities were introduced there in
the same manner, and probably about the same time, as in the other nations of
Europe. In Aragon, as I shall have occasion to observe in a subsequent note,
cities seem early to have acquired extensive immunities, together with a share
in the legislature. In the year 1118, the citizens of Saragossa had not only
attained political liberty, but they were declared to be of equal rank with the
nobles of the second class; and many other immunities, unknown to persons in
their rank of life in other parts of Europe, were conferred upon them. Zurita
Anales de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In England, the establishment of communities
or corporations was posterior to the Conquest. The practice was borrowed from
France, and the privileges granted by the crown were perfectly similar to those
which I have enumerated. But as this part of history is well known to most of
my readers, I shall, without entering into any critical or minute discussion,
refer them to authors who have fully illustrated this interesting point in the
English history. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox Firma Burgi, chap. i.
sect. ix. Hume's History of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not
improbable that some of the towns in England were formed into corporations,
under the Saxon Kings, and that the charters granted by the Kings of the Norman
race were not charters of enfranchisement from a state of slavery, but a
confirmation of privileges which they already enjoyed. See Lord Lyttleton's
History of Henry II. vol. ii. p. 317. The English cities, however, were very
inconsiderable in the twelfth century. A clear proof of this occurs in the
history to which I last referred. Fitzstephen, a contemporary author, gives a
description of the city of London in the reign of Henry II. and the terms in
which he speaks of its trade, its wealth, and the splendor of its inhabitants,
would suggest no inadequate idea of its state at present, when it is the
greatest and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas of grandeur and
magnificence are merely comparative. It appears from a contemporary author,
Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London, who had good opportunity of being
informed, that this city, of which Fitzstephen gives such a pompous account,
contained no more than forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 315, 316. The other
cities were small in proportion, and in no condition to extort any extensive
privileges. That the constitution of the boroughs in Scotland, in many
circumstances, resembled that of the towns in France and England, is manifest
from the Leges Burgorum annexed to the Regiam Majestatem.

NOTE XIX. [T]. SECT. I.
SOON after the introduction of the third estate into the national council, the
spirit of liberty which that excited in France began to produce conspicuous
effects. in several provinces of France, the nobility and communities formed
associations, whereby they bound themselves to defend their rights and
privileges against the formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the King. The
count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of these associations,
dated in the year 1314, twelve years after the admission of the deputies from
towns into the States General. Histoire de L'ancien gouvernement de la France,
tom. ii. p. 94. The vigor with which the people asserted and prepared to
maintain their rights, obliged their sovereigns to respect them. Six years
after this association, Philip the Long issued a writ of summons, to the
Community of Narbonne, in the following terms: "Philip, by the Grace, etc. to
our well-beloved, etc. As we desire with all our heart, and above all other
things, to govern our kingdoms and people in peace and tranquillity, by the
help of God: and to reform our said kingdom in so far as it stands in need
thereof, for the public good, and for the benefit of our subjects, who in times
past have been aggrieved and oppressed in diverse manners by the malice of
sundry persons, as we have learned by common report as well as by the
information of good men worthy of credit, and we having determined in our
council which we have called to meet in our good city, etc. to give redress to
the utmost of our power, by all ways and means possible, according to reason
and justice, and willing that this should be done with solemnity and
deliberation by the advice of the prelates, barons, and good towns of our
realm, and particularly of you, and that it should be transacted agreeable to
the will of God, and for the good of our people, therefore we command," etc.
Mably, observat. ii. App. p. 386. I shall allow these to be only the formal
words of a public and legal style, but the ideas are singular, and much more
liberal and enlarged than one could expect in that age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly address himself to the parliament, in terms more
favorable to public liberty. There occurs in the history of France a striking
instance of the progress which the principles of liberty had made in that
kingdom, and of the influence which the deputies of towns had acquired in the
States General. During the calamities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the States General made abold
effort to extend their own privileges and jurisdiction. The regulations
established by the States held A. D. 1355, concerning the mode of levying
taxes, the administration of which they vested not in the crown, but in
commissioners appointed by the States; concerning the coining of money;
concerning the redress of the grievance of purveyance; concerning the regular
administration of justice; are much more suitable to the genius of a republican
government than that of a feudal monarchy. This curious statute is published,
Ordon. t. iii. p. 19. Such as have not an opportunity to consult that large
collection will find an abridgment of it, Hist. de France par Villaret, tom.
ix. p. 130, or in histoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 213. The French historians
represent the bishop of Laon, and Marcel Provost of the merchants of Paris, who
had the chief direction of this assembly, as seditious tribunes, violent,
interested, ambitious, and aiming at innovations subversive of the constitution
and government of their country. That may have been the case, but these men
possessed the confidence of the people; and the measures which they proposed as
the most popular and acceptable, plainly prove that the spirit of liberty had
spread wonderfully, and that the ideas which then prevailed in France
concerning government were extremely liberal. The States general held at Paris
A. D. 1355, consisted of about eight hundred members, and above one half of
these were deputies from towns. M. Secoursse Pref. a Ordon. tom. iii. p. 48. It
appears that in all the different assemblies of the States, held during the
reign of John, the representatives of towns had great influence, and in every
respect the third State was considered as coordinate and equal to either of
the other two. Ibid. passim. These spirited efforts were made in France long
before the House of Commons in England acquired any considerable influence in
the legislature. As the feudal system was carried to its utmost height in
France sooner than in England, so it began to decline sooner in the former than
in the latter kingdom. In England, almost all attempts to establish or to
extend the liberty of the people have been successful; in France they have
proved unfortunate. What were the accidental events, or political causes which
occasioned this difference, is it not my present business to enquire.

NOTE XX. [U]. SECT. I.
IN a former note, No. VIII. I have enquired into the condition of that part of
the people who were employed in agriculture, and have represented the various
hardships and calamities of their situation. When charters of liberty and
manumission were granted to such persons, they contained four concessions
corresponding to the four capital grievances to which men in a state of
servitude are subject. 1. The right of disposing of their persons by sale or
grant was relinquished. 2. Power was given to them of conveying their property
and effects by will or any other legal deed. Or if they happened to die
intestate, it was provided that their property should go to their lawful heirs
in the same manner as the property of other persons. 3. The services and taxes
which they owed to their superior or liege Lord, which were formerly arbitrary
and imposed at pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are allowed the
privilege of marrying whatever person they chose, as formerly they could
contract no marriage without their Lord's permission, and with no person but
one of his slaves. All these particulars are found united in the charter
granted Habitatoribus Montis-Britonis. A. D. 1376. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
p. 81. Many circumstances concurred with those which I have mentioned in the
text in procuring them deliverance from that wretched state. The gentle spirit
of the Christian religion, together with the doctrines which it teaches,
concerning the original equality of mankind, as well as the impartial eye with
which the Almighty regards men of every condition, and admits them to a
participation of his benefits, are inconsistent with servitude. But in this, as
in many other instances, considerations of interest, and the maxims of false
policy led men to a conduct inconsistent with their principles. They were so
sensible, however, of the inconsistency, that to set their fellow Christians at
liberty from servitude was deemed an act of piety highly meritorious and
acceptable to heaven. The humane spirit of the Christian religion struggled
with the maxims and manners of the world, and contributed more than any other
circumstance to introduce the practice of manumission. When pope Gregory the
Great, who flourished toward the end of the sixth century, granted liberty to
some of his slaves, he gives this reason for it, "Cum redempter noster, totius
conditor naturae, ad hoc propitiatus humanam carnem voluerit assumere, ut
^ivinitaxis suae gratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo, pristinae
nos restituerat libertati; salubriter agitur, si homines, quos ab initio
liberos natura protulit, and jus gentium jugo substituit servitutis, in ea, qua
nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio liberate reddantur. Gregor Magn. ap.
Potgiess. lib. 4. c. 1. 3. Several laws or charters founded on reasons similar
to this, are produced by the same author. Accordingly a great part of the
charters of manumission previous to the reign of Louis X. are granted pro amore
dei, pro remedio animae, and pro merced^ animae. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p.
849, 850. Du Cange, voc. manumissio. The formality of manumission was executed
in a church, as a religious solemnity. The person to be set free was led round
the great altar with a torch in his hand, he took hold of the horns of the
altar, and there the solemn words conferring liberty were pronounced. Du Cange,
Ib. vol. iv. p. 467. I shall transcribe a part of a charter of manumission
granted A. D. 1056; both as it contains a full account of the ceremonies used
in this form of manumission, and as a specimen of the imperfect knowledge of
the Latin tongue in that barbarous age. It is granted by Willa the widow of
Hugo the Duke and Marquis, in favor of Cleriza one of her slaves. Et ideo nos
Domine Will inclite cometisse -- libera et absolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto --
pro timore omnipotentis dei, and remedio luminarie anime bone memory quondam
supra scripto Domini Ugo gloriossissimo, ut quando illum Dominius de hac vita
migrare, jusserit, pars iniqua non abeat potestatum ullam, sed anguelus Domini
nostri Jesu Christi colocare digniturillum inter sanctos dilectos suos; and
beatus Petrus princips apostolorum, qui habed potestatem omnium animarum
ligandi et absolvendi, ut ipsi absolvat animae ejus depeccatis sui, et aperiad
illum janua paradisi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo presbiter,
ut vadat tecum in ecclesia sancti Bartholomaei apostoli; traad te tribus
vicibus circa altar ips^us ecclesiae cum caereo apprehensum in manibus tuis
and manibus suis; deinde exite ambulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie se
deviduntur. Statimque pro remedio luminarie anime bone memory quondam supra
scripto Domini ugo, et ipsi presbiter Benzo fecit omnia, and dixit, Ecce
quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunque partem tibi placuerit, tam si supra
scripta Cleriza, qua nosque tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati, vel
procreati fuerit utriusque sexus, etc." Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other charters
might have been selected, which in point of grammar or style, are in no wise
superior to this. Manumission was frequently granted on deathbed or by latter
will. As the minds of men are at that time awakened to sentiments of humanity
and piety, these deeds proceeded from religious motives, and are granted pro
redemptione animae, in order to obtain acceptance with God. Du Cange ubi supra,
p. 470. and voc. servus vol. vi. p. 451. Another method of obtaining liberty
was by entering into holy orders, or taking the vow in a monastery. This was
permitted for some time; but so many slaves escaped, by this means out of the
hands of their masters, that the practice was afterward restrained, and at
last prohibited by the laws of almost all the nations of Europe. Murat. ib. p.
842. Conformably to the same principles, Princes, on the birth of a son, or
upon any other agreeable event, appointed a certain number of slaves to be
enfranchised, as a testimony of their gratitude to God for that benefit.
Marculfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39. There are several forms of manumission
published by Marculfus, and all of them are founded on religious
considerations, in order to procure the favor of God, or to obtain the
forgiveness of their sins. Lib. ii. c. 23, 33, 34, edit. Baluz. The same
observation holds with respect to the other collections of Formulae annexed to
Marculfus. As sentiments of religion induced some to grant liberty to their
Fellow Christians who groaned under the yoke of servitude; so mistaken ideas
concerning devotion led others to relinquish their liberty. When a person
conceived an extraordinary respect for the saint who was the patron of any
church or monastery in which he was accustomed to attend religious worship, it
was not unusual among men possessed with an excess of superstitious reverence,
to give up themselves and their posterity to be slaves of the saint. Mabillon.
de re Diplomat, lib. vi. 632. The oblati or voluntary slaves of churches or
monasteries were very numerous, and may be divided into three different
classes. The first were such as put themselves and effects under the protection
of a particular church or monastery, binding themselves to defend its
privileges and property against every aggressor. These were prompted to do so,
not merely by devotion, but in order to obtain that security which arose from
the protection of the church. They were rather vassals than slaves, and
sometimes persons of noble birth found it prudent to secure the protection of
the church in this manner. Persons of the second class bound themselves to pay
an annual (...) or quit-rent out of their estates to a church or monastery.
Besides this, they sometimes engaged to perform certain services. They were
called censuales. The last class consisted of such as actually renounced their
liberty, and became slaves in the strict and proper sense of the word. These
were called ministeriales, and enslaved their bodies, as some of the charters
bear, that they might procure the liberty of their souls. Potgiesserus de statu
servorum, lib. i. cap. i.. 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were to encourge the
opinions which led to this practice will appear from a clause in a charter by
which one gives up himself as a slave to a monastery, "Cum sit omni carnali
ingenuitate generosius extremum quodcumque Dei servitum, scilicet quod terrena
nobilitas multos plerumque vitiorum servos facit, servitus vero Christi nobiles
virtutibus reddit, nemo autem sani capitis virtutibus vitia comparaverit,
claret pro certo eum esse generosiorem, qui se Dei servitio praebu erit
proniorem. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens, etc." Another author says, Eligens
magis esse servus Dei quam libertus saeculi, firmiter credens and sciens, quod
servire Deo, regnare est, summaque ingenuitas sit in qua servitus comparabatur
Christi, etc. Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not
appear, that the enfranchisement of slaves was a frequent practice while the
feudal system preserved its vigor. On the contrary, there were laws which set
bounds to this practice as detrimental to society. Potgiess. lib. iv. c. 2. 6.
The inferior order of men owed the recovery of their liberty to the decline of
that aristocratical policy, which lodged the most extensive power in the hands
of a few members of the society, and depressed all the rest. When Louis X.
issued his ordonance, several slaves had been so long accustomed to servitude,
and their minds were so much debased by that unhappy situation, that they
refused to accept of their liberty which was offered them. D'Ach. Spicel. v.
xi. p. 387. Long after the reign of Louis X. several of the French nobility
continued to assert their ancient dominion over their slaves. It appears from
an ordonance of the famous Bertrand de Gusclin Constable of France, that the
custom of enfranchising them was considered as a pernicious innovation. Mor^^^
Mem. pour servir des preuves a l'hist. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 100. In some
instances when the praedial slaves were declared to be freemen, they were still
bound to perform certain services to their ancient masters; and were kept in a
state different from other subjects, being restricted either from purchasing
land, or becoming members of a community within the precincts of the manor to
which they formerly belonged. Martene and Durand. Thesaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p.
914. This, however, seems not to have been common. There is no general law for
the manumission of slaves in the Statute-book of England similar to that which
has been quoted from the ordonances of the Kings of France. Though the genius
of the English constitution seems early to have favored personal liberty,
personal servitude, nevertheless, continued long in England in some particular
places. In the year 1514, we find a charter of Henry VIII. enfranchising two
slaves belonging to one of his manors. Rym. Foeder. vol. xiii. p. 470. As late
as the year 1574, there is a commission from Queen Elizabeth with respect to
the manumission of certain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer. in Observat. on the
statutes, etc. p. 251.

NOTE XXI. [X]. SECT. I.
THERE is no custom in the middle ages more singular than that of private war.
It is a right of so great importance, and prevailed so universally, that the
regulations concerning it make a considerable figure in the system of laws
during the middle ages. M. de Montesquieu, who has unravelled so many intricate
points in feudal jurisprudence, and thrown light on so many customs formerly
obscure and unintelligible, was not led by his subject to consider this. I
shall therefore give a more minute account of the customs and regulations which
directed a practice so contrary to the present ideas of civilized nations
concerning government and order. 1. Among the ancient Germans, as well as other
nations in a similar state of society, the right of avenging injuries was a
private and personal right, exercised by force of arms, without any reference
to an umpire, or any appeal to a magistrate for decision. The clearest proofs
of this were produced Note VI. 2. This practice subsisted among the barbarous
nations after their settlement in the provinces of the Empire which they
conquered; and as the causes of dissension among them multiplied, their family
feuds and private wars became more frequent. Proo^ of this occur in their early
historians. Greg. Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. 18. lib. x. c. 27.
and likewise in the codes of their laws. It was not only allowable for the
relations to avenge the injuries of their family, but it was incumbent on them.
Thus by the laws of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque hereditas terrae
pervenerit, ad illum vestis bellica id est lorica and ultio proximi, and
solatio leudis, debet pertinere. tit. vi. 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Salic. tit. 63.
Legi Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14 10. -- 3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble
birth, had the right of private war. All disputes among slaves, villani, the
inhabitants of towns, and freemen of inferior condition, were decided in the
courts of justice. All disputes between gentlemen and persons of inferior rank
were terminated in the same manner. The right of private war supposed nobility
of birth, and equality of rank in the contending parties. Beaumanoir Coustumes
de Beauv. chapter lix. p. 300. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. ii. 395. xvii. 508.
xv. etc. The dignified ecclesiastics likewise claimed and exercised the right
of private war; but as it was not altogether decent for them to prosecute
quarrels in person, advocati or vidames were chosen by the several monasteries
and bishoprics. These were commonly men of high rank and reputation, who
became the protect^^ of the churches and convents by whom they were elected;
espoused their quarrels, and fought their battles, armis omnia quae erant
ecclesiae viriliter defendebant, et vigilanter protegebant. Brussel Usage des
fiefs, tom. i. p. 144. Du Cange voc. advocatus. On many occasions, the martial
ideas to which ecclesiastics of noble birth were accustomed, made them forget
the pacifick spirit of their profession, and led them into the field in person
at the head of their vassals, "flamma, ferro, caede, possessiones ecclesiarum
praelati defendebant." Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange. Ib. p. 179. -- 4. It was not
every injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make war upon his
adversary. Atrocious acts of violence, insults and affronts publicly
committed, were legal and permitted motives for taking arms against the authors
of them. Such crimes as are now punished capitally in civilized nations, at
that time justified private hostilities. Beauman. chapter lix. Du Cange Dissert.
xxix. sur Joinville, p. 331. But though the avenging of injuries was the only
motive that could legally authorize a private war, yet disputes concerning
civil property, often gave rise to hostilities, and were terminated by the
sword. Du Cange Dissert. p. 332. -- 5. All persons present when any quarrel
arose, or any act of violence was committed, were included in the war which it
occasioned, for it was supposed to be impossible for any man in such a
situation, to remain neutral, without taking side with one or other of the
contending parties. Beauman. p. 300. -- 6. All the kindred of the two
principals in the war were included in it, and obliged to espouse the quarrel
of the chieftain with whom they were connected. Du Cange, ib. 332. This was
founded on the maxim of the ancient Germans, "suscipere tam inimicitias seu
patris, seu propinqui, quam amicitias, necesse est;" a maxim natural to all
rude and simple nations, among which the form of society, and political union
strengthens such a sentiment. The method of ascertaining the degree of affinity
which obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of a kinsman was curious.
While the church prohibited the marriage of persons within the seventh degree
of affinity, the vengeance of private war extended as far as this absurd
prohibition, and all wh^ (...) such a remote connection with any of the
principals were involved in the calamities of war. But when the church relaxed
somewhat of its rigor, and did not extend its prohibition of marrying beyond
the fourth degree of affinity, the same restriction took place in the conduct
of private war. Beauman. 303. Du Cange Dissert. 333. -- 7. A private war could
not be carried on between two full brothers, because both have the same common
kindred, and consequently neither have any persons bound to stand by him
against the other, in the contest; but two brothers of the half blood might
wage war, because each of them has a distinct kindred. Beauman. p. 299 -- 8.
The vassals of each principal in any private war were involved in the contest,
because by the feudal maxims they were bound to take arms in defense of their
chieftain of whom they held, and to assist him in every quarrel. As soon,
therefore, as the feudal tenures were introduced, and this artificial
connection was established between vassals and the baron of whom they held,
vassals came to be considered as in the same state with relations. Beauman. 303
-- 9. Private wars were very frequent for several centuries. Nothing
contributed more to increase those disorders in government, and that ferocity
of manners which reduced the nations of Europe to that wretched state which
distinguished the period of history which I am reviewing. Nothing was such an
obstacle to the introduction of a regular administration of justice. Nothing
could more effectually discourage industry, or retard the prog^^ss and
cultivation of the arts of peace. Private wars ^ere carried on with all the
destructive rage, which is to be dreaded from violent resentment when armed
with force, and authorized by law It appears from the laws prohibiting or
restraining the exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion of the most
barbarous enemy could not be more desolating to a country, or more fatal to its
inhabitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon. t. i. p. 701. tom. ii. 395, 408,
507, etc. The contemporary historians describe the excesses committed in
prosecution of these quarrels, in such terms, as excite astonishment and
horror. I shall mention only one passage from the history of the Holywar, by
Guibert, Abbot of Nogent: "Erat eo tempore maximis ad invice^ hostilitatibus,
totius Francorum regni facta turbatio; cebra ubique latrocinia, viarum
obsessio: andiebantur passim, immo fiebant incendia infinita; nullis praeter
sola and indomita cupiditate existentibus causis extruebantur praelia; and ut
brevi totum claudam quicquid obtutibus cupidorum subjacebat, nusqua^ attendendo
cujus esset, praedae patebat. Gesta Dei per Francos. vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus collected the chief regulations which custom had established
concerning the right and exercise of private war, I shall enumerate in
chronological order the various expedients employed to abolish or restrain this
fatal custom. 1. The first expedient employed by the civil magistrate in order
to set some bounds to the violence of private revenge, was the fixing by law
the fine or composition to be paid for each different crime. The injured person
was originally the sole judge concerning the nature of the wrong which he had
suffered, the degree of vengeance which he should exact, as well as the species
of atonement or reparation with which he should rest satisfied. Resentment
became of course as implacable as it was fierce. It was often a point of honor
not to forgive, nor to be reconciled. This made it necessary to fix those
compositions which make so great a figure in the laws of barbarous nations. The
nature of crimes and offenses was estimated by the magistrate, and the sum due
to the person offended was ascertained with a minute, and often a whimsical
accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of the Lombards, who reigned about the
middle of the seventh century, discovers his intention both in ascertaining the
composition to be paid by the offender, and in increasing its value; it is,
says he, that the enmity may be extinguished, the prosecution may cease, and
peace may be restored. Leg. Langob. lib. ^ tit. 7. (...). About the beginning
of the ninth century, Charlemagne struck at the root of the evil, and enacted,
"That when any person had been guilty of a crime, or had committed an outrage,
he should immediately submit to the penance which the church imposed, and offer
to pay the composition which the law prescribed; and if the injured person or
his kindred should refuse to accept of this, and presume to avenge themselves
by force of arms, their lands and properties should be forfeited. Capitul. A.
D. 802. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 371 -- 3. But in this, as well as in other
regulations, the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the spirit of his age.
The ideas of his contemporaries concerning regular government were too
imperfect, and their manners too fierce to submit to this law. Private wars,
with all the calamities whcih they occasioned, became more frequent than ever
after the death of that great monarch. His successors were unable to restrain
them. The church found it necessary to interpose. The most early of these
interpositions now extant, is toward the end of the tenth century. In the year
990, several Bishops in the south of France assembled, and published various
regulations, in order to set some bounds to the violence and frequency of
private wars; if any person within their diocesses should venture to
transgress, they ordained that he should be excluded from all Christian
privileges during his life, and be denied Christian burial after his death, Du
Mont Corpse Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 41. These, however, were only partial
remedies; and therefore a council was held at Limoges, A. D. 994. The bodies of
the saints, according to the custom of those ages, were carried thither; and by
these sacred relics men were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extinguish
their animosities, and to swear that they would not for the future violate the
public peace by their private hostilites. Bouquet Recueil des Histor. vol. x.
p. 49, 147. Several other councils issued decrees to the same effect. Du Cange
Dissert. 343 -- 4. But the authority of councils, how venerable soever in those
ages, was not sufficient to abolish a custom which flattered the pride of the
nobles, and gratified their favorite passions. The evil grew so intolerable,
that it became necessary to employ supernatural means for surpressing it. A
bishop of Aquitaine, A. D. 1032, pretended that an angel had appeared to him,
and brought him a writing from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their
hostilities, and to be reconciled to each other. It was during a season of
public calamity that he published this revelation. The minds of men were
disposed to receive such pious impressions; and willing to perform any thing in
order to avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace and cessation from
hostilities took place, and continued for seven years; and a resolution was
formed that no man should in times to come attack or molest his adversaries
during the seasons set apart for celebrating the great festivals of the church,
or from the evening of Thursday in each week to the morning of Monday in the
week ensuing, the intervening days being considered as particularly holy, our
Lord's passion having happened on one of these days, and his resurrection on
another. A change in the disposition of men so sudden, and which produced a
resolution so unexpected, was considered as miraculous; and the respite from
hostilities which followed upon it, was called The Truce of God. Glaber.
Rodulphus Histor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet, vol. x. p. 59. This, from being a
regulation or concert in one kingdom, became a general law in Christendom, and
was confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and the violaters were subjected to
the penalty of excommunication. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal, lib. i. tit. 34.
c. 1. Du Cange Glossar. voc. Treuga. An act of the council of Toulujes in
Roussillon, A. D. 1041, containing all the stipulations required by the truce
of God, is published by Dom de Vic and Dom Vaissette Hist. de Languedoc, tom.
ii. Preuves, p. 206. A cessation from hostilities during three complete days in
every week, allowed such a considerable space for the passions of the
antagonists to cool, and for the people to enjoy a respite from the calamities
of war, as well as to take measures for their own security, that, if this truce
of God had been exactly observed, it must have gone far toward putting an end
to private wars. This, however, seems not to have been the case; the nobles,
disregarding the truce, prosecuted their quarrels without interruption as
formerly. Qua nimirum tempestate, universae provinciae adeo devastationis
continuae importunitate inquietantur, ut ne ipsa, pro observatione divinae
pacis, professa sacramenta custodiantur. Abbas Uspergensis apud Datt de pace
imperii publica, p. 13. No. 35. The violent spirit of the nobility could not be
restrained by any engagements. The complaints of this were frequent; and
bishops in order to compel them to renew their vows and promises of ceasing
from their private wars, were obliged to enjoin their clergy to suspend the
performance of divine service, and the exercise of any religious function
within the parishes of such as were refractory and obstinate. Hist. de Langued.
par. D. D. de Vic and Vaisette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 118 -- 5. The people,
eager to obtain relief from their sufferings, called in a second time a
pretended revelation to their aid. Toward the end of the twelfth century, a
carpenter in Guienne gave out that Jesus Christ together with the blessed
Virgin had appeared to him, and having commanded him to exhort mankind to
peace, had given him, as a proof of his mission, an image of the Virgin holding
her son in her arms, with this inscription, Lamb of God, who take away the
sins of the world, give us peace. This low fanatic addressed himself to an
ignorant age, prone to credit what was mavelous. He was received as an
inspired messenger of God. Many prelates and barons assembled at Puy, and took
an oath, not only to make peace with all their own enemies, but to attack such
as refused to lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to their enemies. They
formed an association for this purpose, and assumed the honorable name of the
Brotherhood of God. Robertus de Monte Michaele ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i.
Ordon. p. 29. But the influence of this superstitious terror or devotion was
not of long continuance -- 6. The civil magistrate was obliged to exert his
authority in order to check a custom which threatened the dissolution of
government. Philip Augustus, as some imagine, or St Louis as is more probable,
published an ordonance, A. D. 1^45, prohibiting any person to commence
hostilities against the friends and vassals of his adversary, until forty days
after the commission of the crime or offense which gave rise to the quarrel;
declaring, that if any man presumed to transgress this statute, he should be
considered as guilty of a breach of public peace, and be tried and punished by
the judge ordinary as a traitor, Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This was called the
Royal Truce, and afforded time for the violence of resentment to subside, as
well as leisure for the good offices of such as were willing to compose the
difference. The happy effects of this regulation seem to have been
considerable, if we may judge from the solicitude of succeeding monarchs to
enforce it. -- 7. In order to restrain the exercise of private war still
farther, Philip the Fair, toward the close of the same century, A. D. 1296,
published an ordonance commanding all private hostilities to cease, whilst he
was engaged in war against the enemies of the state. Ordon. tom. i. p. 328,
390. This regulation, which seems to be almost essential to the existence and
preservation of society, was often renewed by his successors, and being
enforced by the regal authority, proved a considerable check to the destructive
contests of the nobles. Both these regulations, introduced first in France,
were adopted by the other nations in Europe. -- 8. The evil, however, was so
inveterate, that it did not yield to all these remedies. No sooner was public
peace established in any kingdom, than the barons renewed their private
hostilities. They not only struggled to maintain this pernicious right, but to
secure the exercise of it without any restraint. Upon the death of Philip the
Fair, the nobles of different provinces in France formed associations, and
presented remonstrances to his successor, demanding the repeal of several laws,
by which he had abridged the privileges of their order. Among these, the right
of private war is always mentioned as one of the most valuable; and they claim,
that the restraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal truce, as well as
that arising from the ordonance of the year 1296, should be taken off. In some
instances, the two sons of Philip who mounted the throne successively eluded
their demands; in others they were obliged to make concessions. Ordon. tom. i.
p. 551, 557, 561, 573. The ordonances to which I here refer, are of such length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extremely curious, and may be
peculiarly instructive to an English reader, as they throw considerable light
on that period of English history in which the attempts to circumscribe the
regal prerogative were carried on, not by the people struggling for liberty,
but by the nobles contending for power. It is not necessary to produce any
evidence of the continuance and frequency of private wars under the successors
of Philip the Fair. -- 9. A practice somewhat similar to the royal truce was
introduced, in order to strengthen and extend it. Bonds of assurance on mutual
security, were demanded from the parties at variance, by which they obliged
themselves to abstain from all hostilities, either during a time mentioned in
the bond, or for ever: and became subject to heavy penalties, if they violated
this obligation. These bonds were sometimes granted voluntarily, but more
frequently exacted by the authority of the civil magistrate. Upon a petition
from the party who felt himself weakest, the magistrate summoned his adversary
to appear in court, and obliged him to give a bond of assurance. If, after
that, he committed any farther hostilities, he became subject to all the
penalties of treason. This restraint on private war was known in the age of St.
Louis. Establissemens, live. i. c. 28. It was frequent in Bretagne, and what is
very remarkable, such bonds of assurance were given mutually between vassals
and the lord of whom they held. Oliver de Clisson grants one to the Duke of
Bretagne, his sovereign. Morace Mem. pour servir de preuves a l'hist. de Bret.
tom. i. p. 846. ii. p. 371. Many examples of bonds of assurance in other
provinces of France are collected by Brussel. tom. ii. p. 856. The nobles of
Burgundy remonstrated against this practice, and obtained exemption from it as
an encroachment on the privileges of their order. Ordon. tom. i. p. 558. This
mode of security was first introduced in cities, and the good effects of it
having been felt there, was extended to the nobles. See Note XVI -- 10. The
calamities occasioned by private wars, became at some times so intolerable,
that the nobles entered into voluntary associations; binding themselves to
refer all matters in dispute, whether concerning civil property, or points of
honor, to the determination of the majority of the associates. Morice Mem.
pour servir de preuves a l'hist. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 728 -- 11. But all these
expedients proving ineffectual, Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an ordonance
expressly prohibiting private wars on any pretext whatsoever, with power to the
judge ordinary to compel all persons to comply with this injunction, and to
punish such as should prove refractory or disobedient, by imprisoning their
persons, seizing their goods, and appointing the officers of justice, Mangeurs
and Gasteurs, to live at free quarters on their estate. If those who were
disobedient to this edict could not be personally ^rested, he appointed their
friends and vassals to be seized, and detained until they gave surety for
keeping the peace; and he abolished all laws, customs, or privileges which
might be pleaded in opposition to this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138. How
slow is the progress of reason and of civil order! Regulations which to us
appear so equitable, obvious, and simple, required the efforts of civil and
ecclesiastical authority, during several centuries, to introduce and establish
them. Even posterior to this period. Louis XI. was obliged to abolish private
wars in Dauphine, by a particular edict, A. D. 1451. Du Cange dissert. p. 348.

THIS note would swell to a disproportional bulk, if I should attempt to
enquire with the same minute attention into the progress of this pernicious
custom in the other countries of Europe. In England, the ideas of the Saxons
concerning personal revenge, the right of private wars, and the composition due
to the party offended, seem to have been much the same with those which
prevailed on the continent. The law of Ina de Vindicantibus, in the eighth
century, Lamb. p. 3; those of Edmund in the tenth century, de homicidio, Lamb.
p. 72. etc. de inimicitiis, p. 76; and those of Edward the Confessor, in the
eleventh century, de temporibus and diebus pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 126,
are perfectly similar to the ordonances of the French Kings their
contemporaries. The laws of Edward, de pace regis, are still more explicit than
those of the French Monarchs, and by several provisions in them, discover that
a more perfect police was established in England at that period. Lambard. p.
128. fol. verse. Even after the conquest, private wars, and the regulations for
preventing them, were not altogether unknown, as appears from Madox Formulare
Anglicanum, No. CXLV. and from the extracts from Domesday Book, published by
Gale Scriptores hist. Britan. p. 759, 777. The well known clause in the form of
an English indictment, which, as an aggravation of the criminal's guilt,
mentions his having assaulted a person, who was in the peace of God and of the
King, seems to be borrowed from the Treuga or Pax Dei and the Pax Regis which I
have explained. But after the conquest, the mention of private wars among the
nobility, occurs more rarely in the English history, than in that of any other
European nations, and no laws concerning them are to be found in the body of
their statutes. Such a change in their own manners, and such a variation from
those of their neighbors is remarkable. Is it to be ascribed to the
extraordinary power which William the Norman acquired by right of conquest, and
transmitted to his successors, which rendered the execution of justice more
vigorous and decisive, and the jurisdiction of the King's court more extensive
than under the monarchs on the continent? Or, was it owing to the settlement of
the Normans in England, who having never adopted the practice of private war in
their own country, abolished it in the kingdom which they conquered? It is
asserted in an Ordonance of John King of France, that in all times past,
persons of every rank in Normandy have been probibited to wage war, and the
practice has been deemed unlawful. Ordon. tom. ii. p. 407. If this fact were
certain, it would go far toward explaining the peculiarity which I have
mentioned. But as there are some English Acts of Parliament, which, according
to the remark of the learned author of the Observations on the Statutes,
chiefly the more ancient, which recite falsehoods, it may be added, that this is
not peculiar to the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the positive
assertion contained in this public law of France, there is good reason for
considering it as a statute which recites a falsehood. This, however, is not the
place for discussing that point. It is an inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of
an English antiquarian.

IN Castile, the pernicious practice of private war prevailed, and was
authorized by the customs and law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri. tit. 76. cum
commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 551. As the Castilian nobles were no less
turbulent than powerful, their quarrels and hostilities involved their country
in many calamities. Innumerable proofs of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the
right of private revenge was likewise authorized by law; exercised in its full
ex^ent, and accompanied with the same unhappy consequences. Hieron. Blanca
Comment. de rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. Hispan. illustrat. vol. iii. p. 733. Lex
Jacobi I. A. D. 1247. Fueros and Observancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib. ix. p.
182. Several confederacies between the Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for
the restoring of peace, founded on the truce of God, are still extant, Petr. de
Marca. Marca sivi Limes Hispanic. App. 1303, 1388, 1428. As early as the year
1165, we find a combination of the King and court of Aragon, in order to
abolish the right of private war, and to punish those who presumed to claim
that privilege. Anales de Aragon por Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so
inveterate, that Charles V. A. D. 1519. was obliged to publish a law, enforcing
all former regulations tending to suppress this practice. Fueros and Observanc.
lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lombards, and other northern nations who settled in Italy, introduced the
same maxims concerning the right of revenge in that country, and these were
followed by the same effects. As the progress of the evil was perfectly similar
to what happened in France, the expedients employed to check its career, or to
extirpate it finally, resembled those which I have enumerated. Murat. Ant.
Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany, the disorders and calamities occasioned by the right of private
war, were greater and more intolerable than in any other country of Europe. The
Imperial authority was so much shaken and enfeebled by the violence of the
civil wars, excited by the contests between the Popes and the Emperors of the
Franconian and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but the cities
acquired almost independent power, and scorned all subordination and obedience
to the laws. The frequency of these faidae or private wars, are often mentioned
in the German annals, and the fatal effects of them are most pathetically
described, Datt. de pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. no. 30. and passim. The
Germans early adopted the Treuga Dei, which was first established in France.
This, however, proved but a temporary and ineffectual remedy. The disorders
multiplied so fast, and grew so enormous, that they threatened the dissolution
of society, and compelled the Germans to have recourse to the only remedy of
the evil. viz. an absolute prohibition of private wars. The Emperor William
published his edict to this purpose, A. D. 1255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in France. Datt. lib. i. cap. 4. no.
20. But neither honor his successors had authority to secure the observance of
it. This gave rise to a practice in Germany, which conveys to us a striking
idea both of the in^^lerable calamities occasioned by private wars, and of the
feebleness of government during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The
cities and nobles entered into alliances and associations, by which they bound
themselves to maintain the public peace, and to make war on such as should
violate it. This was the origin of the league of the Rhine, of Suabia, and of
many smaller confederacies distinguished by various names. The rise and
beneficial effects of these associations are traced by Datt with great
accuracy. Whatever degree of public peace or of regular administration, was
preserved in the Empire from the beginning of the twelfth century to the close
of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these leagues. During that period, political
order, respect for the laws, together with the equal administration of justice
made considerable progress in Germany. But the final and perpetual abolition of
the right of private war was not accomplished until A. D. 1495. The Imperial
authority was by that time more firmly established, the ideas of men with
respect to government and subordination were become more just. That barbarous
and pernicious privilege which the nobles had so long possessed, was declared
to be incompatible with the happiness and existence of society. In order to
terminate any differences which might arise among the various numbers of the
Germanick body, the Imperial chamber was instituted with supreme jurisdiction,
to judge without appeal in every question brought before it. That court has
subsisted since that period, forming a very respectable tribunal, of essential
importance in the German constitution. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v. Pfeffel abrege de
l'Histoire du Droit, etc. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. [Y] SECT. I.
IT would be tedious and of little use to enumerate the various modes of
appealing to the justice of God, which superstition introduced during the ages
of ignorance, I shall mention only one, because we have an account of it in a
placitum or trial in the presence of Charlemagne, from which we may learn the
imperfect manner in which justice was administered even during his reign. In
the year 775, a contest arose between the bishop of Paris and the abbot of St.
Denis, concerning the property of a small abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds
and records, in order to prove the right to be in them. Instead of trying the
authenticity, or considering the import of these, the point was referred to the
judicium crucis. Each produced a person, who, during the celebration of mass,
stood before the cross with his arms expanded; and he whose representative
first became weary, and altered his posture, lost the cause. The person
employed by the bishop on this occasion, had strength or less spirit than his
adversary, and the question was decided in favor of the abbot. Mabillon de re
Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne
countenanced such an absurd mode of decision, it is no wonder that other
monarchs should tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu has treated of the trial
by judicial combat at considerable length. The two talents which distinguish
that illustrious author, industry in tracing all the circumstaces of ancient
and obscure institutions, and sagacity in penetrating into the causes and
principles which contributed to establish them, are equally conspicuous in his
observations on this subject. To these I refer the reader, as they contain most
of the principles by which I have endeavored to explain this practice. De
l'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be probable from the remarks of M.
de Montesquieu, as well as from the facts produced by Muratori, tom. iii.
Dissert. xxxviii. that the appeals to the justice of God by the experiments
with fire and water, etc. were practiced by the people who settled in the
different provinces of the Roman Empire, before they had recourse to the
judicial combat. The judicial combat, however, was the most ancient mode of
terminating any controversy among the barbarous nations in their original
settlements. This is evident from Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 118. who
informs us, that all Questions which were decided among the Romans by legal
trial, were terminated among the Germans by arms. The same thing appears in the
ancient laws and customs of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. O. Stiernhook de Jure
Sueonum and Gothorum vetusto. 4to. Holmiae, 1682. lib. i. c. 7. It is probable,
that when the various tribes which invaded the Empire were converted to
Christianity, the repugnance of the custom of allowing judicial combats to the
precepts of religion, was so glaring, that, for some time, it was abolished,
and by degrees, several circumstances which I have mentioned, led them to
resume it.

It seems likewise to be probable from a law quoted by Stiernhook in the
treatise which I have mentioned, that the judicial combat was originally
permitted, in order to determine points respecting the personal character or
reputation of individuals, and was afterward extended not only to criminal
cases, but to questions concerning property. The words of the law are, "if any
man shall say to another these reproachful words. "you are not a man equal to
other men," or, "you have not the heart of a man," and the other shall reply,
"I am a man as good as you." Let them meet on the highway. If he who first gave
offense appear, and the person offended absent himself, let the latter be
deemed worse than he was called; let him not be admitted to give evidence in
judgment, either for man or woman, and let him not have the privilege of making
a testament. If the person offended appear, and he who gave offense be absent,
let him call upon the other thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark upon the
earth, and then let him who absented himself, be deemed infamous, because he
uttered words which he durst not support. If both shall appear properly armed,
and the person offended shall fall in the combat, let a half compensation be
paid for his death. But if the person who gave the offense shall fall, let it
be imputed to his own rashness. The petulance of his tongue has been fatal to
him. Let him lie in the field without any compensation being demanded for his
death." Lex Up^andica ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people were extremely delicate
with respect to every thing that affected their reputation as soldiers. By the
laws of the Salians, if any man called another a hare, or accused him of having
left his shield in the field of battle, he was ordained to pay a large sine.
Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii, 4. 6. By the law of the Lombards, if any one called
another arga, i. e. a good for nothing fellow, he might immediately challenge
him to combat. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v. 1. By the law of the Salians, if
one called another cenitus, a term of reproach equivalent to arga, the fine
which he was bound to pay was very high. Tit. xxxii. 1. Paulus Diaconus relates
the violent impression which this reproachful expression made upon one of his
countrymen, and the fatal effects with which it was attended. De Gestis
Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas concerning the point of honor, which
we are apt to consider as a modern refinement, as well as the practice of
duelling, to which it gave rise, are derived from the notions of our ancestors,
while in a state of society very little improved.

AS M. de Montesquieu's view of this subject did not lead him to consider every
circumstance relative to judicial combats, I shall mention some particular
facts necessary for the illustration of what I have said with respect to them.
A remarkable instance occurs of the decision of an abstract point of law by
combat. A question arose in the tenth century concerning the right of
representation, which was not then fixed, though now universally established in
every part of Europe. ^ It was a matter of doubt and dispute (says the
historian) whether the sons of a son ought to be reckoned among the children of
the family, and succeed equally with their uncles, if their father happened to
die while their grandfather was alive. An assembly was called to deliberate on
this point, and it was the general opinion, that it ought to be remitted to the
examination and decision of judges. But the Emperor following a better course,
and desirous of dealing honorably with his people and nobles, appointed the
matter to be decided by battle between two champions. He who appeared in behalf
of the right of children to represent their deceased father, was victorious;
and it was established by a perpetual decree, that they should hereafter share
in the inheritance together with their uncles. Wittickindus Corbeins, lib.
Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii. If we can suppose the
caprice of folly to lead men to any action more extravagant than this, of
settling a point in law by combat, it must be that of referring the truth or
falsehood of a religious opinion, to be decided in the same manner, To the
disgrace of human reason, it has been capable even of this extravagance. A
question was agitated in Spain in the eleventh century, whether the Musarabic
Liturgy and ritual which had been used in the churches of Spain, or that
approved of by See of Rome, which differed in many particulars from the other,
contained the form of worship most acceptable to the Deity. The Spaniards
contended zealously for the ritual of their ancestors. The Popes urged them to
receive that to which they had given their infallible sanction. A violent
contest arose. The nobles proposed to decide the controversy by the sword. The
King approved of this method of decision. Two knights in complete armor
entered the lists. John Ruys de Matanca, the champion of the Musarabic Liturgy,
was victorious. But the Queen and Archbishop of Toledo, who favored the other
form, insisted on having the matter submitted to another trial, and had
interest enough to prevail in a request, inconsistent with the laws of combat,
which being considered as an appeal to God, the decision ought to have been
acquiesced in as final. A great fire was kindled. A copy of each Liturgy was
cast into the flames. It was agreed that the book which stood this proof, and
remained untouched, should be received in all the churches of Spain. The
Musarabic Liturgy triumphed likewise in this trial, and if we may believe
Roderigo de Toledo, remained unhurt by the fire, when the other was reduced to
ashes. The Queen and Archbishop had power or art sufficient to elude this
decision also, and the use of the Musarabic form of devotion was permitted only
in certain churches. A determination no less extraordinary than the whole
transaction. Rodr. de Toledo, quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol. d'Espagne,
tom. i. p. 217. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378. -- A remarkable proof
of the general use of trial by combat, and of the praedilection for that mode
of decision occurs in the laws of the Lombards. It was a custom in the middle
ages, that any person might choose the law to which he would be subjected; and
by the prescriptions of that law he was obliged to regulate his transactions,
without being bound to comply with any practice authorized by other codes of
law. Persons who had subjected themselves to the Roman law, and adhered to the
ancient jurisprudence, as far as any knowledge of it was retained in those ages
of ignorance, were exempted from paying any regard to the forms of proceedings
established by the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and other barbarous
people. But the Emperor Otho, in direct contradiction to this received maxim,
ordained, "That all persons, under whatever law they lived, even although it
were the Roman law, should be bound to conform to the edicts concerning the
trial by combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 55. 38. While the judicial combat
subsisted, proof by charters, contracts, or other deeds, became ineffectual;
and even this species of evidence, calculated to render the proceedings of
courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When a charter or other instrument was
produced by one of the parties, his opponent might challenge it, affirm that it
was false and forged, and offer to prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. 34.
It is true, that among the reasons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on account of
which judges might refuse to permit a trial by combat, one is, "If the point in
contest can be clearly proved or ascertained by other evidence." Coust. de
Beauv. chapter 63. p. 323. But that regulation removed the evil only a single step.
For the party who suspected that a witness was about to depose in a manner
unfavourable to his cause, might accuse him of being suborned, give him the
lie, and challenge him to combat; if the witness was vanquished in battle, no
other evidence was admitted, and the party by whom he was summoned to appear
lost his cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 16. 2. Leg. Burgund. tit. 45. Beauman. chapter
61. p. 315. The reason given for obliging a witness to accept of a defiance,
and to defend himself by combat, is remarkable, and contains the same idea
which is still the foundation of what is called the point of honor; "for it is
just, that if any one affirms that he perfectly knows the truth of any thing,
and offers to give oath upon it, that he should not hesitate to maintain the
veracity of his affirmation in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was established in every country of Europe,
is a fact well known, and requires no proof. That this mode of decision was
frequent, appears not only from the codes of ancient laws which established it,
but from the earliest writers concerning the practice of law in the different
nations of Europe. They treat of this custom at great length; they enumerate
the regulations concerning it with minute accuracy; and explain them with much
solicitude. It made a capital and extensive article in jurisprudence. There is
not any one subject in their system of law which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or
the compilers of the assizes de Jerusalem seem to have considered as of greater
importance; and none on which they have bestowed so much attention. The same
observation will hold with respect to the early authors of other nations. It
appears from Madox, that trials of this kind were so frequent in England, that
fines, paid on these occasions, made no inconsiderable branch of the King's
revenue. Hist. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A very curious account of a
judicial combat between Mesire Robert de Beaumanoir, and Mesire Pierre
Tournemine, in presence of the duke of Bretagne, A. D. 1385, is published by
Maurice Mem. pour servir de preuves a l'hist. de Bretagne, tom. ii. p. 498. All
the formalities observed in such extraordinary proceedings are there described
more minutely, than in any ancient monument which I have had an opportunity of
considering. Tournemine was accused by Beaumanoir of having murdered his
brother. The former was vanquished, but was saved from being hanged upon the
spot, by the generous intercession of his antagonist. A good account of the
origin of the laws concerning judicial combat, is published in the history of
Pavia, by Bernado Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8. in Graev. These. Antiquit. Ital. vol.
iii. 743.

THIS mode of trial was so acceptable, that ecclesiastics, notwithstanding the
prohibitions of the church, were constrained not only to connive at the
practice, but to authorize it. A remarkable instance of this is produced by
Pasquier Recherches, lib. iv. chapter i. p. 350. The abbot Wittikindus, whose words
I have produced in this note, considered the determination of a point in law by
combat, as the best and most honorable mode of decision. In the year 978, a
judicial combat was fought in the presence of the Emperor Henry. The archbishop
Aldebert advised him to terminate a contest which had arisen between two
noblemen of his court, by this mode of decision. The vanquished combatant,
though a person of high rank, was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Episc.
Mersb. chez Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. 121. Questions concerning the
property of churches and monasteries, were decided by combat. In the year 961,
a controversy concerning the church of St. Medard, whether it belonged to the
abbey of Beaulieu, was terminated by judicial combat. Bouquet Recueil des Hist.
tom. ix. p. 729. Ibid. p. 612, etc. The Emperor Henry I. declares, that his law
authorizing the practice of judicial combats, was enacted with consent and
applause of many faithful bishops. Ibid p. 231. So remarkably did the martial
ideas of those ages prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon law, which
in other instances had such credit and authority with ecclesiastics. A
judicial combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles V. A. D. 1522. The
combatants fought in the Emperor's presence, and the battle was conducted with
all the rites prescribed by the ancient laws of chivalry. The whole transaction
is described at great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Austriac. lib. viii. c.
17. p. 205.

THE last instance which occurs in the history of France, of a judicial combat
authorized by the magistrate, was the famous one between M. Jarnac and M. de la
Chaistaignerie, A. D. 1547. A trial by combat was appointed in England, A. D.
1571. under the inspection of the judges in the court of common pleas; and
though it was not carried to the same extremity with the former, Queen
Elizabeth having interposed her authority, and enjoined the parties to compound
the matter, yet in order to preserve their honor, the lists were marked out,
and all the forms previous to the combat were observed with much ceremony.
Spelm. Gloss. voc. Campus, p. 103. In the year 1631. a judicial combat was
appointed between Donald Lord Rea, and David Ramsay, Esquire by the authority of
the Lord high Constable, and Earl Marshal of England; but that quarrel likewise
terminated without bloodshed, being accommodated by Charles I. Another instance
occurs seven years later. Rushworth in Observations on the Statutes, etc. p.
266.

NOTE XXIII. [Z]. SECT. I.
THE text contains the great outlines which mark the course of private and
public jurisdiction in the several nations of Europe. I shall here follow more
minutely the various steps of this progress, as the matter is curious and
important enough to merit this attention. The payment of a fine by way of
satisfaction to the person or family injured, was the first device of a rude
people, in order to check the career of private resentment, and to extinguish
those faidae, or deadly feuds which were prosecuted among them with the utmost
violence. This custom may be traced back to the ancient Germans. Tacit. de
Morib. Ger. c. 21. and prevailed among other uncivilized nations. Many examples
of this are collected by the ingenious and learned author of Historical
Law-Tracts, vol. i. p. 41. These fines were ascertained and levied in three
different manners. At first they were settled by voluntary agreement between
the parties at variance. When their rage began to subside, and they felt the
bad effects of their continuing in enmity, they came to terms of concord, and
the satisfaction made was called a composition, implying that it was fixed by
mutual consent. De l'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from some
of the more ancient codes of laws, that when these were compiled matters still
remained in that simple state. In certain cases, the person who had committed
an offense was left exposed to the resentment of those whom he had injured,
until he should recover their favor, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex Frision. tit.
11. 1. The next mode of levying these fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called in the Regiam majestatem amicabilis compositor. lib. 11. c.
4. 10. He could estimate the degree of offense with more impartiality than the
parties interested, and determine with greater equity what satisfaction ought
to be demanded. It is difficult to bring an authentic proof of a custom
previous to the records preserved in any nation of Europe. But one of the
Formulae Andegavenses compiled in the sixth century, seems to allude to a
transaction carried on not by the authority of a judge, but by the mediation of
arbiters. Bouquet Recueil des Histor. tom. iv. p. 566. But as an arbiter wanted
authority to enforce his decisions, judges were appointed with compulsive power
to oblige both parties to acquiesce in their decisions. Previous to this last
step, the expedient of paying compositions was an imperfect remedy against the
pernicious effects of private resentment. As soon as this important change was
introduced, the magistrate, putting himself in place of the person injured,
ascertained the composition with which he ought to rest satisfied. Every
possible injury that could occur in the course of human society, was considered
and estimated, and the compositions due to the person aggrieved were fixed with
such minute attention as discovers, in most cases, amazing discernment and
delicacy, in some instances, unaccountable caprice. Besides the composition
payable to the private party, a certain sum, called a fredum, was paid to the
King or state, as Tacitus expresses it, or to the fiscus, in the language of
the barbarous laws. Some authors, blending the refined ideas of modern policy
with their reasonings concerning ancient transactions, have imagined that the
fredum was a compensation due to the community, on account of the violation of
the public peace. But it is manifestly the price paid to the magistrate for
the protection which he afforded against the violence of resentment. The
enacting of this was a considerable step toward improvement in criminal
jurisprudence. In some of the more ancient codes of laws, the freda are
altogether omitted, or so seldom mentioned, that it is evident they were but
little known. In the latter codes the fredum is as precisely specified as the
composition. In common cases it was equal to the third part of the composition.
Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some extraordinary cases, where it was more
difficult to protect the person who had committed violence, the fredum was
augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. 515. These freda made a considerable branch in
the revenues of the barons; and wherever territorial jurisdiction was granted,
the royal judges were prohibited from levying any freda. In explaining the
nature of the fredum, I have followed, in a great measure, the opinion of M. de
Montesquieu, though I know that several learned antiquarians have taken the
word in a different sense. De l'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxx. c. 20, etc. The
great object of judges was to compel the one party to give, and the other to
accept the satisfaction prescribed. They multiplied regulations to this
purpose, and enforced them by grievous penalties. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
34. Ib. tit. 37. 1, 2. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371. 22. The person who received a
composition was obliged to cease from all farther hostility, and to confirm his
reconciliation with the adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
8. As an additional and more permanent evidence of reconciliation, he was
required to grant a bond of security to the person from whom he received a
composition, absolving him from all farther prosecution. Marculfus and the
other collectors of ancient writs have preserved several different forms of
such bonds. Marc. lib. 11. 18. append. 23. Form. Sirmandicae, 39. The Letters
of Slanes, known in the law of Scotland, are perfectly similar to these bonds
of security. By the letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a person who
had been murdered, bound themselves, in consideration of an Assythment or
composition paid to them, to forgive, pass over, and forever forget, and in
oblivion inter all rancour, malice, revenge, prejudice, grudge and resentment,
that they have or may conceive against the aggressor or his posterity, for the
crime which he had committed, and discharge him of all action, civil or
criminal, against him or his estate, for now and ever. System of Styles by
Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862. In the ancient form of letters of Slanes, the
private party not only forgives and forgets, but pardons and grants remission
of the crime. This practice, Dallas, reasoning according to the principles of
his own age, considers as an encroachment on the rights of sovereignty, as
none, says he, could pardon a criminal but the king. Ibid. But in early and
rude times, the punishment, and the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of the
private person who was injured. Madox has published two writs, one in the reign
of Edward I. the other in the reign of Edward III. by which private persons
grant a release or pardon of all trespasses, felonies, robberies, and murders
committed. Formul. Anglican. No. 702, 705. In the last of these instruments,
some regard seems to be paid to the rights of the sovereign, for the pardon is
granted en quant que en nous est. Even after the authority of the magistrate is
interposed in punishing criminals, the punishment of criminals is long
considered chiefly as a gratification to the resentment of the persons who have
been injured. In Persia a murderer is still delivered to the relations of the
person whom he has slain, who put him to death with their own hands. If they
refuse to accept of a sum of money as a compensation, the sovereign, absolute
as he is, cannot pardon the murderer. Tavernier's voyages, book v. c. 5 and 10.
By a law in the kingdom of Aragon as late as the year 1564, the punishment of
one condemned to death cannot be mitigated but by consent of the parties who
have been injured. Fueros and Observancias del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204, 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from enmity, which I have mentioned,
any person renewed hostilities, and was guilty of any violence, either toward
the person from whom he had received a composition, or toward his relations
and heirs, this was deemed a most heinous crime, and punished with
extraordinary rigor. It was an act of direct rebellion against the authority
of the magistrate, and was repressed by the interposition of all his power.
Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. 8, 34. Capit. vol. i. p. 371. 22. Thus the
avenging of injuries was taken out of private hands, a legal composition was
established, and peace and amity were restored under the inspection, and by the
authority of a judge. It is evident, that at the time when the barbarians
settled in the provinces of the Roman Empire, they had fixed judges established
among them with compulsive authority. Persons vested with this character are
mentioned by the earliest historians. Du Cange, voc. Judices. The right of
territorial jurisdiction was not altogether an usurpation of the feudal barons.
There is good reason to believe that the powerful leaders who seized different
districts of the countries which they conquered, and kept possession of them as
allodial property, assumed at the same time the right of jurisdiction, and
exercised it within their own territories. This jurisdiction was supreme, and
extended to all causes. The clearest proofs of this are produced by M. Bouquet.
Le Droit public de France eclairci, etc. tom. i. p. 206, etc. The privilege
of judging his own vassals, appears to have been originally a right inherent in
every baron who held a fief. As far back as the archives of nations can conduct
us with any certainty, we find the jurisdiction and fief united. One of the
earliest charters to a layman which I have met with, is that of Ludovicus Pius,
A. D. 814. And it contains the right of territorial jurisdiction, in the most
express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 1405. There are many charters
to churches and monasteries of more early date, containing grants of similar
jurisdiction, and prohibiting any royal judge to enter the territories of those
churches or monasteries, or to perform any act of judicial authority there.
Bouquet. Recuel. des Hist. tom. iv. p. 628, 631, 633. tom. v. p. 703, 710, 752,
762. Muratori has published many very ancient charters containing the same
immunities. Antiq. Ital. Dissert. lxx. In most of these deeds, the exacting of
Freda is particularly prohibited, which shows that they constituted a valuable
part of the public revenue at that juncture. The expense of obtaining a
sentence in a court of justice during the middle ages was so considerable, that
this circumstance alone was sufficient to render men unwilling to decide any
contest in judicial form. It appears from a charter in the thirteenth century,
that the baron who had the right of justice, received the fifth part of the
value of every subject, the property of which was tried and determined in his
court. If, after the commencement of a law suit, the parties terminated the
contest in an amicable manner, or by arbitration, they were nevertheless bound
to pay the fifth part of the subject contested to the court before which the
suit had been brought. Hist. de Dauphine. Geneve, 1722, tom. i. p. 22. Similar
to this is a regulation in the charter of liberty granted to the town of
Friburg, A. D. 1120. If two of the citizens shall quarrel, and if one of them
shall complain to the superior Lord, or to his judge, and after commencing the
suit shall be privately reconciled to his adversary; the judge, if he does not
approve of this reconciliation, may compel him to insist in his lawsuit; and
all who were present at the reconciliation shall forfeit the favor of the
superior Lord. Historia Zaringo Badensis. Auctor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus.
Carolsr. 1765. 4to. vol. v. p. 55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurisdiction which those who held fiefs possessed
originally, we cannot now determine with certainty. It is evident that during
the disorders which prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, the great vassals
took advantage of the feebleness of their Monarchs, and enlarged their
jurisdictions to the utmost. As early as the tenth century, the more powerful
barons had usurped the right of deciding all causes, whether civil or criminal.
They had acquired the High Justice as well as the Low. Establ. de St. Louis,
lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their sentences were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any superior court. Several striking instances of this are collected by
Brussel. Traite des Fiefs, live. iii. c. 11, 12, 13. Not satisfied with this,
the more potent barons got their territories erected into Regalities, with
almost every royal prerogative and jurisdiction. Instances of these were
frequent in France. Bruss. ib. In Scotland, where the power of the feudal
nobles became exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical Law Tracts, vol.
i. tract. vi. Even in England, though the authority of the Norman Kings
circumscribed the jurisdiction of the barons more than in any feudal kindom,
several counties palatine were erected, into which the king's judges could not
enter, and no writ could come in the King's name, until it received the seal of
the county palatine. Spelman. Gloss. voc. Commites Palatini; Blackstone's
Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. iii. p. 78. These lords of regalities
had a right to claim or rescue their vassals from the King's judges, if they
assumed any jurisdiction over them. Brussel ubi supra. In the law of Scotland
this privilege was termed the right of repledging; and the frequency of it not
only interrupted the course of justice, but gave rise to great disorders in the
exercise of it. Hist. Law Tracts, ib. The jurisdiction of the counties palatine
was productive of like inconveniences in England.

THE remedies provided by Princes against the bad effects of these usurpations
were various, and gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and his immediate
descendants, the regal prerogative still retained great vigor, and the Duces,
Comites, and Missi Dominici, the former of whom were ordinary and fixed judges,
the latter extraordinary and itinerant judges, in the different provinces of
their extensive dominions, exercised a jurisdiction coordinate with the barons
in some cases, and superior to them in others. Du Cange voc. Dux. Comites and
Missi. Murat. Antiq. Dissert. viii. and ix. But under the feeble race of
Monarchs who succeeded them, the authority of the royal judges declined, and
the barons usurped that unlimited jurisdiction which has been described. Louis
VI. of France attempted to revive the function of the Missi Dominici under the
title of Juges des Exempts, but the barons were become too powerful to bear
such an encroachment on their jurisdiction, and he was obliged to desist from
employing them. Henaut. A brege Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His successors (as has
been observed) had recourse to expedients less alarming. The appeal de defaute
de Droit, or on account of the refusal of justice, was the first which was
attended with any considerable effect. According to the maxims of feudal law,
if a baron had not as many vassals as enabled him to try by their peers, the
parties who offered to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused to
proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried, by appeal, to the court of
the superior lord of whom the baron held, and tried there. De l'Esprit des
Loix, live. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange voc. defectus Justitiae. The number of Peers
or assessors in the courts of Barons was frequently very considerable. It
appears from a criminal trial in the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D.
1299, that upwards of two hundred persons were present, and assisted in the
trial, and voted in passing judgment. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic. and
Vaisette, tom, iv. Preuves, p. 114. As the right of jurisdiction had been
usurped by many inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to hold courts.
This gave frequent occasion to such appeals, and rendered the practice
familiar. By degrees, such appeals began to be taken from the courts of the
more powerful barons, and it is evident, from a decision recorded by Brussel,
that the royal judges were willing to give countenance to any pretext for them.
Traite des Fiefs, tom. i. p. 235, 261. This species of appeal had less effect
in abridging the jurisdiction of the nobles, than the appeal on account of the
injustice of the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were powerful, and their
judges possessed extensive authority, such appeals seem to have been frequent.
Capitul. vol. 1. p. 175, 180; and they were made in a manner suitable to the
rudeness of a simple age. The persons aggrieved resorted to the palace of their
sovereign, and with outcries and loud noise called to him for redress. Capitul.
lib. iii. c. 59. Chronic. Lawterbergiense ap. Mencken. Script. German, vol. ii.
p. 284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the appeals to the Justiza or supreme
judge were taken in such a form as supposed the appellant to be in immediate
danger of death, or of some violent outrage; he rushed into the presence of the
judge, crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Fuerza, Fuerza, thus imploring (as
it were) the instant interposition of that supreme judge in order to save him.
Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Pistorii, vol.
iii. p. 753. The abolition of the trial by combat, facilitated the revival of
appeals of this kind. The effects of this subordination which appeals
established, in introducing attention, equity, and consistency of decision into
courts of judicature, were soon conspicuous; and almost all causes of
importance were carried to be finally determined in the King's courts. Brussel,
tom. i. 252. Various circumstances which contributed toward the introduction
and frequency of such appeals, are enumerated De l'Esprit de Loix, live. xxviii.
c. 27. Nothing however, was of such effect as the attention which monarchs gave
to the constitution and dignity of their courts of justice. It was the ancient
custom for the feudal monarchs to preside themselves in their courts, and to
administer justice in person. Marculf. lib. i. 25. Murat, Dissert. xxxi.
Charlemagne, whilst he was dressing, used to call parties into his presence,
and having heard and considered the subject of litigation, gave judgment
concerning it. Eginhartus vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hist. of Exchequer,
vol. 1. p. 91. This could not fail of rendering their courts respectable. St.
Louis, who encouraged to the utmost the practice of appeals, revived this
ancient custom, and administered justice in person with all the ancient
simplicity. "I have often seen the saint," says Joinville. "sit under the shade
of an oak in the wood of Vincennes, when all who had any complaint, freely
approached him. At other times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden,
and seating himself upon it, heard the causes that were brought before him."
Hist. de St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior rank, who possessed
the right of justice, sometimes dispensed it in person, and presided in their
tribunals. Two instances of this occur with respect to the Dauphines of Vienne.
Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and Princes
could not decide every cause in person, nor bring them all to be determined in
the same court; they appointed Baillis, with a right of jurisdiction, in
different districts of their kingdom. These possessed powers somewhat similar
to those of the ancient Comites. It was toward the end of the twelfth century,
and beginning of the thirteenth, that this office was first instituted in
France. Brussel, live. ii. c. 35. When the King had a court established in
different quarters of his dominions, this invited his subjects to have recourse
to it. It was the private interest of the Baillis, as well as an object of
public policy, to extend their jurisdiction. They took advantage of every
defect in the rights of the barons, and of every error in their proceedings, to
remove causes out of their courts, and to bring them under their own
cognizance. There was a distinction in the feudal law, and an extremely ancient
one, between the high justice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. D. 812. 4. A. D. 815.
3. Establ. de St. Louis, live. i. c. 40. Many barons possessed the latter
jurisdiction who had no title to the former. The former included the right of
trying crimes of every kind, even the highest; the latter was confined to petty
trespasses. This furnished endless pretexts for obstructing, restraining and
reviewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457. 25. 458. 29. --
A regulation of greater importance succeeded the institution of Baillis. The
King's supreme court or parliament was rendered fixed as to the place, and
constant as to the time of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of justice was originally ambulatory,
followed the person of the monarch, and was held only during some of the great
festivals. Philip Augustus, A. D. 1^05. rendered it sedentary at Paris, and
continued its terms during the greater part of the year. Pasquier Recherches,
live. ii. c. 2 and 3. etc. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. 62. He and his successors
vested extensive powers in that court: they granted the members of it several
privileges and distinctions which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pasquier.
ib. Velly hist. de France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons eminent for integrity and
skill in law were appointed judges there. Ib. By degrees the final decision of
all causes of importance was brought into the parliament of Paris, and the
other parliaments which administered justice in the King's name, in different
provinces of the kingdom. This jurisdiction, however, the parliament of Paris
acquired very slowly, and the great vassals of the crown made violent efforts
in order to obstruct the attempts of this parliament to extend its authority.
Toward the close of the thirteenth century, Philip the fair was obliged to
prohibit his parliament from taking cognizance of certain appeals brought into
it from the courts of the Count of Bretagne, and to recognize his right of
supreme and final jurisdiction. Memoirs pour servir de Preuves a l'Histoire de
Bretagne par Morice, tom. i. p. 1037. 1074. Charles VI. at the end of the
following century was obliged to confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in
more ample form. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 580, 581. So violent was the opposition of
the barons to this right of appeal which they considered as fatal to their
privileges and power, that the authors of the Encyclopedie have mentioned
several instances in which barons put to death, or mutilated, or confiscated
the goods of such as ventured to appeal from the sentences pronounced in their
courts, to the parliament of Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parliament, p. 25.

THE progress of jurisdiction in the other feudal kingdoms was in a great
measure similar to that which we have traced in France. In England, the
territorial jurisdiction of the barons was both ancient and extensive. Leg.
Edw. Conf. No 5 and 9. After the Norman conquest it became more strictly
feudal; and it is evident from facts recorded in the English history, as well
as from the institution of counties Palatine, which I have already mentioned,
that the usurpations of the nobles in England were not inferior to those of
their contemporaries on the continent. The same expedients were employed to
circumscribe or abolish those dangerous jurisdictions. William the Conqueror
established a constant court in the hall of his palace; from which the four
courts now entrusted with the administration of justice in England took their
rise. Henry II. divided his kingdom into six circuits, a^^^ent itinerant judges
to hold their courts in them at stated seasons. Blackstone's Commentaries on
the laws of England, vol. iii. p. 57. Justices of peace were appointed in every
county by subsequent monarchs; to whose jurisdiction the people gradually had
recourse in many civil causes. The privileges of the Counties Palatine were
gradually limited; with respect to some points they were abolished; and the
administration of justice was brought into the King's courts, or before judges
of his appointment. The several steps taken for this purpose are enumerated in
Dalrymple's History of Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland, the usurpations of the nobility were more exorbitant than in any
other feudal kingdom, The progress of their encroachments, and the methods
taken by the crown to limit or abolish their territorial and independent
jurisdictions, both which I had occasion to consider and explain in a former
work, differed very little from those of which I have now given the detail.
History of Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in the labyrinth of German
jurisprudence, were I to attempt to delineate the progress of jurisdiction in
the Empire with a minute accuracy. It is sufficient to observe, that the
authority which the Aulick council and ^^perial chamber now possess, took its
rise from (...) same abuse of territorial jurisdiction, and was acquired in the
same manner that the royal (...) ^^^tained influence in other countries. All
the important facts with respect to both these particulars, (...) be found in
Phil. Datt. de pace publica Imp^^^ (...) iv. The capital articles are pointed
out in (...) ^^^brege de l'Histoire and Droit public d' Allemagne (...) 556,
581; and in Traite du Droit public de ^^^pire par M. le Coq. de Villeray.
Both the (...) treatises are of great authority, having been (...) under the
eye of M. Schoepslin of Strasburgh (...) of the ablest public lawyers in
Germany.

NOTE XXIV. [AA]. SECT. I.
IT is not easy to fix with precision the period, at which Ecclesiastics first
began to claim exemption from the civil jurisdiction. It is certain, that
during the early and purest ages of the church, they pretended to no such
immunity. The authority of the civil magistrates extended to all persons, and
to all causes. This fact has not only been clearly established by Protestant
authors, but is admitted by many Roman Catholics of eminence, and particularly
by the writers in defense of the liberties of the Gallican church. There are
several original papers published by Muratori, which show that in the ninth and
tenth centuries, causes of the greatest importance relating to ecclesiastics
were still determined by civil judges. Antiq. Ital. vol. v. Dissert. lxx.
Ecclesiastics did not shake off all at once their subjection to civil courts.
This privilege, like their other usurpations, was gained slowly, and step by
step. This exemption seems at first to have been merely an act of complaisance,
flowing from veneration for their character. Thus from a charter of Charlemagne
in favor of the church of Man's, A. D. 796, to which M. l'Abbe de Foy refers in
his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 201, that monarch directs his judges, if any
difference should arise between the administrators of the revenues of that
church and any person whatever, not to summon the administrators to appear in
mallo publico; but first of all to meet with them, and to endeavor to
accommodate the difference in an amicable manner. This indulgence was in
process of time improved into a legal exemption; which was founded on the same
superstitious respect of the laity for the clerical character and function. A
remarkable instance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick Barbarossa, A. D.
1172, to the monastery of Altenburg. He grants them judicium non tantum
sanguinolentis plagae, sed vitae and mortis; he prohibits any of the royal
judges from disturbing their jurisdiction; and the reason which he gives for
this ample concession is, nam quorum ex Dei gratia, ratione divini ministerii
onus leve est, and jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus illius oppressionis
contumelia, velmanu Laica fatigari. Mencken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii. p.
1067.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is contained in the text, that I
should describe the manner in which the code of the canon law was compiled, and
show that the doctrines in it most favorable to the power of the clergy, are
founded on ignorance, or supported by fraud and forgery. The reader will find a
full account of these in Gerard. Van Mastricht, Historia Juris Ecclesiastici,
and in Science de Government par M. Real, tom. vii. c. 1. and 3. 2, 3, etc. The
history of the progress and extent of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, with an
account of the arts which the clergy employed, in order to draw causes of every
kind into the spiritual courts, is no less curious, and would throw a great
light upon many of the customs and institutions of the dark ages; but it is
likewise foreign from the present subject. Du Cange in his Glossary, voc. Curia
Christianitatis, has collected most of the causes with respect to which the
clergy arrogated an exclusive jurisdiction, and refers to the authors or
original papers, which confirm his observations, Giannone in his Civil History
of Naples, lib. xix. 3. has ranged these under proper heads, and scrutinizes
the pretensions of the church with his usual boldness and discernment. M.
Fleury observes, that the clergy multiplied at such a rate, the pretexts for
extending the authority of the spiritual courts, that it was in their power to
withdraw every person and every cause from the jurisdiction of the civil
magistrate. Hist. Eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But how ill founded
soever the jurisdiction of the clergy may be, or whatever might be the abuses
to which their manner of exercising it gave rise, the principles and forms of
their jurisprudence were far more perfect, than that which was known in the
civil courts. It is probable, that ecclesiastics never submitted during any
period of the middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes of the barbarous
nations, but were governed entirely by the Roman law. They regulated all their
transactions by such of its maxims as were preserved by tradition, or were
contained in the Theodosian code, and other books extant among them. This we
learn from a custom which prevailed universally in those ages. Every person was
permitted to choose among the various codes of laws then in force, that to which
he was willing to conform. In any transaction of importance, it was usual for
the persons contracting to mention the law to which they submitted, that it
might be known how any controversy that should arise between them was to be
decided. Innumerable proofs of this occur in the charters of the middle ages.
But the clergy considered it as such a valuable privilege of their order to be
governed by the Roman law, that when any person entered into holy orders, it
was usual for him to renounce the laws to which he had been formerly subject,
and to declare that he now submitted to the Roman law. Constat me Johannem
clericum, filium quondam Verandi, qui professus sum, ex natione mea, lege
vivere Langobardorum, sed tamen, pro honor ecclesiastico, lege nunc videor
vivere Romana. Charta A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui professus sum, more
sacerdotii mei, lege vivere Romana. Charta, A. D. 1075. Muratori Antichita
Estensi. vol. i. p. 78.

THE code of the cannon law began to be compiled early in the ninth century.
Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript. tom. xviii. p. 346, etc. It was above two
centuries after that before any collection was made of those customs, which
were the rule of judgment in the courts of the barons. Spiritual judges
decided, of course, according to written and known laws; Lay judges, left
without any fixed guide, were directed by loose traditionary customs. But
besides this general advantage of the canon law, its forms and principles were
more consonant to reason, and more favorable to the equitable decision of
every point in controversy, than those which prevailed in lay courts. It
appears from Notes XXI. and XXII. concerning private wars, and the trial by
combat, that the whole spirit of ecclesiastical jurisprudence was adverse to
these sanguinary customs which were destructive of justice; and the whole force
of ecclesiastical authority was exerted to abolish them, and to substitute
trials by law and evidence in their room. Almost all the forms in lay courts
which contribute to establish, and continue to preserve order in judicial
proceedings, are borrowed from the canon law. Fleury Instit. du droit canon,
part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St. Louis in his Establissemens confirms many of his new
regulations concerning property, and the administration of justice, by the
authority of the canon law, from which he borrowed them. Thus, for instance,
the first hint of attaching movables for the recovery of a debt, was taken
from the canon law. Establ. live. ii. c. 21 and 40. And likewise the cessio
bonorum, by a person who was insolvent. Ibid. In the same manner he established
new regulations with respect to the effects of persons dying intestate, live. i.
c. 89. These and many other salutary regulations, the Canonists borrowed from
the Roman law. Many other examples might be produced of more perfect
jurisprudence in the canon law than was known in lay courts. For that reason it
was deemed an high privilege to be subject to ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
Among the many immunities, by which men were allured to engage in the dangerous
expeditions for the recovery of the Holy Land, one of the most considerable was
the declaring those who took the Cross to be subject only to the spiritual
courts. See note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilegia.

NOTE XXV. [BB]. SECT. I.
THE rapidity with which the knowledge and study of the Roman law spread over
Europe, is amazing. The copy of the Pandects was found at Amalphi, A. D. 1137.
Irnerius opened a college of civil law at Bologne a few years after Giann.
Hist. book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught as a part of academical learning in
different parts of France before the middle of the century. Vaccarius gave
lectures on the civil law at Oxford as early as the year 1147. A regular system
of feudal law, formed plainly in imitation of the Roman code, was composed by
two Milanese lawyers about the year 1150. Gratian published the code of canon
law, with large additions and emendations, about the same time. The earliest
collection of these customs, which served as the rules of decision in the
courts of justice, is the Assizes de Jerusalem. They were compiled, as the
preamble informs us, in the year 1099, and are called Jus Consuetudinarium quo
regebatur regnum orientale. Willerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. 2. But peculiar
circumstances were the occasion of this early compilation. The victorious
Crusaders settled as a colony in a foreign country, and adventurers from all
the different nations of Europe composed this new society. It was necessary on
that account to ascertain the laws and customs which were to regulate the
transactions of business, and the administration of justice among them. But
there was at that time no collection of customs, and no attempt to render law
fixed in any country of Europe. The first undertaking of that kind was by
Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in his Tractatus de Legibus and
Consuetudinibus Angliae, composed about the year 1181. The Regiam Majestatem in
Scotland, ascribed to David I. seems to be an imitation, and a servile one of
Glanville. Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us that he was the first who had
attempted such a work in France, composed his Conseil, which contains an
account of the customs of the country of Vermandois, in the reign of St. Louis,
which began, A. D. 1226. Beaumanoir, the author of the Coustumes de Beauvoisis,
lived about the same time. The Establissemens of St. Louis, containing a large
collection of the customs which prevailed within the royal domains, were
published by the authority of that monarch. As soon as men became acquainted
with the advantages of having written customs and laws to which they could have
recourse on every occasion, the method of collecting them became common.
Charles VII. of France, by an ordonance, A. D. 1453, appointed the customary
laws in every province of France to be collected and arranged. Velly and
Villaret. Histoire tom. xvi. p. 113. His successor, Louis XI. renewed the
injunction. But this salutary undertaking has never been fully executed, and
the French jurisprudence remains more obscure and uncertain than if these
prudent regulations of their monarch had taken effect. A practice was
established in the middle ages, which affords the clearest proof that judges
while they had no other rule to direct their decrees but unwritten and
traditionary customs, were often at a loss how to find out the facts and
principles, according to which they were bound to decide. They were obliged in
dubious cases to call a certain number of old men, and to lay the case before
them, that they might inform them what was the practice or custom with regard
to the point. This was called Enqueste par tourbe. Du Cange, voc. Turba. The
effects of the revival of the Roman jurisprudence have been explained by M. de
Montesquieu, live. xxviii. c. 42. and by Mr Hume, Hist. of England, vol. ii. p.
441. I have adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend to review any subject
which such writers have considered, without receiving from them light and
information? At the same time I am convinced that the knowledge of the Roman
law was not so entirely lost in Europe during the middle ages, as is commonly
believed. My subject does not require me to examine this point. Many striking
facts with regard to it are collected by Donato Antonio D'Asti Dal' Uso e
autorita della ragione civil nelle provincie dell' Imperio Occidentale. Nap.
1751. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately connected with the municipal jurisprudence in
several countries of Europe, is a fact so well known, that it needs no
illustration. Even in England, where the Common law is supposed to form a
system perfectly distinct from the Roman code, and although those who apply in
that country to the study of the Common law boast, with affectation, of this
distinction, it is evident that many of the ideas and maxims of the civil law
are incorporated into the English jurisprudence. This is well illustrated by
the ingenious and learned author or Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the
more ancient. 2d edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI. [CC] SECT. I.
THE whole history of the middle ages makes it evident that war was the sole
profession of gentlemen, and the only subject attended to in their education,
Even after some change in manners began to take place, and the civil arts of
life had acquired some reputation, the ancient ideas with respect to the
accomplishments necessary for a person of noble birth, continued long in force.
In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9. etc. we have an account of the youthful
exercises and occupations of Francis I. and they are altogether martial and
athletic. That father of letters owed his relish for them, not to education,
but to his own good sense, and good taste. The manners of the superior order of
ecclesiastics, during the middle ages, furnish the strongest proof, that the
distinction of professions was scarce known in Europe. The functions and
character of the clergy are obviously very different from those of laymen; and
among the inferior orders of churchmen, this constituted a distinct character,
separate from that of their citizens. But the dignified ecclesiastics, who were
frequently of noble birth, were above such a distinction; they retained the
idea of what belonged to them as gentlemen, and in spite of the decrees of
Popes, or the canons of counsels, they bore arms, led their vassals to the
field, and fought at their head in battle. Among them the priesthood was scarce
a separate profession; the military accomplishments which they thought
essential to them as gentlemen, were cultivated; the theological science, and
pacific virtues suitable to their spiritual function, were neglected and
despised.

AS soon as the science of law became a laborious study, and the practice of it
a separate profession, such as rose, to eminence in it obtained honors
formerly appropriated to soldiers. Knighthood was the most illustrious mark of
distinction during several ages, and conferred privileges to which rank or
birth alone were not entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent for their
knowledge of law were advanced, and by that were placed on a level with those
whom their military talents had rendered conspicuous. Miles Justitiae, Miles
Literatus became common titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as early as
A. D. 1251. If a judge attained a certain rank in the courts of justice, that
alone gave him a right to the honor of knighthood. Pasquier Recherches, live.
11. c. 16. p. 130. Dissertations historiques sur la Chevalerie par Honor de
Saint Marie, p. 164, etc. A profession which led to offices that enobled such
as held them, grew into credit, and the people of Europe become accustomed to
see men rise to eminence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. [DD]. SECT. I.
THE chief intention of these notes, was to bring at once under the view of my
readers, such facts and circumstances as tend to illustrate or confirm what is
contained in that part of the history to which they refer. When these lay
scattered in many different authors, and were taken from books not generally
known, or which it would be disagreeable to consult, I thought it would be of
advantage to collect them together. But when everything necessary for the proof
or illustration of my narrative or reasonings may be found in any one book
which is generally known, or deserves to be so. I shall satisfy myself with
referring to it. This is the case with respect to Chivalry. Almost every fact
which I have mentioned in the text, together with many other curious and
instructive particulars, concerning this singular institution, may be found in
Memoires sur l'ancienne Chevalerie consideree comme un establissement politic
and militaire, par. M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. [EE] SECT. III.
THE subject of my enquiries does not call me to write a history of the
progress of science. The facts and observations which I have produced are
sufficient to illustrate the effects of its progress upon manners and the state
of of society. While science was altogether extinct in the western parts of
Europe, it was cultivated in Constantinople and other parts of the Grecian
Empire. But the subtle genius of the Greeks turned almost entirely to
theological disputation. The Latins borrowed that spirit from them, and many of
the controversies which still occupy, and divide Theologians, took their rise
among the Greeks, from whom the other Europeans derived a considerable part of
their knowledge. See the testimony of Aeneas Sylvius ap Coringium de antiq.
academicis, p. 43. Histoire literaire de France, tom. vii. p. 113, etc. tom.
ix. p. 151, etc. Soon after the Empire of the Caliphs was established in the
East, some illustrious princes arose among them, who encouraged science. But
when the Arabians turned their attention to the literature cultivated by the
ancient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and correct taste of their works of
genius appeared frigid, and unanimated to a people of a more warm imagination.
It was impossible for them to admire the poets and historians of Athens, or of
Rome. But they were sensible of the merit of their philosophers. The operations
of the intellect are more fixed and uniform than those of the fancy or taste.
Truth makes an impression nearly the same in every place; the ideas of what is
beautiful, elegant, or sublime, vary in different climates. The Arabians,
though they neglected Homer, translated the most eminent of the Greek
philosophers into their own language; and, guided by their precepts and
discoveries, applied themselves with great ardour to the study of geometry,
astronomy, medicine, dialectics and metaphysics. In the three former they made
considerable and useful improvements, which have contributed not a little to
advance those sciences to that high degree of perfection which they have
attained. In the two latter, they choose Aristotle for their guide, and
refining on the subtle and distinguishing spirit which characterizes his
philosophy, they rendered it altogether frivolous or unintelligible. The
schools established in the East for teaching and cultivating these sciences,
were in high reputation. They communicated their love of science to their
countrymen, who conquered Asia and Spain; and the schools instituted there were
little inferior in fame to those in the East. Many of the persons who
distinguished themselves by their proficiency in science in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, were educated among the Arabians. Bruckerus collects many
instances of this. Histor. Philos. v. iii. p. 681, etc. Almost all the men
eminent for science during several centuries, were instructed in the sciences
by the Arabians. The first knowledge of the Aristotelian philosophy in the
middle ages, was acquired by translations of his works out of the Arabic. The
Arabian commentators were deemed the most skilful and authentic guides in the
study of his system. Conring. antiq. acad. Diss. iii. p. 95, etc. Supplem. p.
241, etc. Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, etc. From them the schoolmen
derived the genius and principles of their philosophy, which contributed so
much to retard the progress of true science.

THE establishment of Colleges or universities is a remarkable era in literary
history. The schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined themselves chiefly
to the teaching of grammar. There were only one or two masters employed in that
office. But in colleges, professors were appointed to teach all the different
parts of science. The time that ought to be allotted to the study of each was
ascertained. A regular form of trying the proficiency of students was
prescribed; and academical titles and honors were conferred on such as
acquitted themselves with approbation. A good account of the origin and nature
of these is given by Seb. Bacmeisterus Antiquitates Rostochienses, sive,
Historia Urbis and Academiae Rostoch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per E.
J. de Westphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. 1743. The first obscure mention of
these academical degrees in the University of Paris, (from which the other
universities in Europe have borrowed most of their customs and institutions)
occurs, A. D. 1215. Crevier. hist. de l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, etc.
They were completely established, A. D. 1231. lb. 248. It is unnecessary to
enumerate the several privileges to which batchelors, masters and doctors were
entitled. One circumstance is sufficient to demonstrate the high degree of
estimation in which they were held. Doctors in the different faculties
contended with knights for the precedence, and the dispute was terminated in
many instances by advancing the former to the dignity of knighthood, the high
prerogatives of which I have mentioned. It was even asserted, that a doctor had
a right to that title without creation. Bartolus taught -- doctorem actualiter
regentem in jure civili per decennium effici militem ipso facto. Honor de St.
Marie Dissert. p. 165. This was called Chevalierie de lectures, and the persons
advanced to that dignity, milites Clerici. These new establishments for
education, together with the extraordinary honors conferred on learned men,
greatly increased the number of scholars. In the year 1262, there were ten
thousand students in the university of Bologna; and it appears from the history
of that university, that law was the only science taught in it at that time. In
the year 1340, there were thirty thousand in the university of Oxford. Speed's
Chron. ap. Anderson's Chronol. Deduction of Commerce, vol. i. p. 172. In the
same century, ten thousand persons voted in a question agitated in the
university of Paris; and as graduates alone were admitted to that privilege,
the number of students must have been vastly great. Velly Hist. de France, tom.
xi. p. 147. There were indeed few universities in Europe at that time; but such
a number of students may nevertheless be produced as a proof of the
extraordinary ardour with which men turned to the study of science in those
ages; it shows likewise that they already began to consider other professions
than that of a soldier as honorable and useful.

NOTE XXIX. [FF]. SECT. III.
THE great variety of subjects which I have endeavored to illustrate, and the
extent of this upon which I now enter, will justify my adopting the words of M.
de Montesquieu, when he begins to treat of commerce. The subject which follows
would require to be discussed more at large; but the nature of this work does
not permit it. I wish to glide on a tranquil stream; but I am hurried along by
a torrent.

MANY proofs occur in history of the little intercourse between nations during
the middle ages. Toward the close of the tenth century, Count Bouchard
intending to found a monastery at St. Maur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to
an Abbot of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his sanctity, entreating him to
conduct the monks thither. The language in which he addressed that holy man is
singular: He tells him that he had undertaken the labor of such a great
journey; that he was fatigued with the length of it, therefore hoped to obtain
his request, and that his journey into such a distant country should not be in
vain. The answer of the abbot is still more extraordinary: He refused to comply
with his desire, as it would be extremely fatiguing to go along with him into a
strange and unknown region. Vita Burchardi venerabiles Comites ap. Bouquet Rec.
des Hist. vol. x. p. 351. Even so late as the beginning of the twelfth century,
the monks of Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know that there was such
a city as Tournay in Flanders; and the monks of St. Martin of Tournay, were
equally unacquainted with the situation of Ferrrieres. A transaction in which
they were both concerned, made it necessary for them to have some intercourse.
The mutual interest of both monasteries prompted each to find out the situation
of the other. After a long search, which is particularly described, the
discovery was made by accident. Herimannus Abbas de Restauratione St. Martini
Tornacensis ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of the middle
ages with respect to the situation and geography of remote countries was still
more remarkable. The most ancient geographical chart which now remains as a
monument of the state of that science in Europe during the middle ages, is
found in a manuscript of the Chronique de St. Denis. There the three parts of
the earth then known are so represented, that Jerusalem is placed in the middle
of the globe, and Alexandria appears to be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de
l'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tom. xvi. p. 185, There seem to have been no inns
or houses of entertainment for the reception of travelers during the middle
ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 581, etc. This is a proof of the little
intercourse which took place between different nations. Among people whose
manners are simple, and who are seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is a
virtue of the first rank. This duty of hospitality was so necessary in that
state of society which took place during the middle ages, that it was not
considered as one of those virtues which men may practice or not, according to
the temper of their minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Hospitality was
enforced by statutes, and those who neglected this duty were liable to
punishment. Quicumque hospiti venienti lectum, aut focum negaverit, trium
selidorum inlatione mulctetur, Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. 1. Si quis homini
aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit sexaginta solidos componat in
publico. Capitul. lib. vi. 82. This increase of the penalty, at a period so
long after that in which the laws of the Burgundians were published, and when
the state of society was much improved, is very remarkable. Other laws of the
same purport are collected by Jo. Fred. Polac Systema Jurisprud. Germanicae,
Lips. 1733. p. 75. The laws of the Slavi were more rigorous than any that he
mentions; they ordained, "that the movables of an inhospitable person should
be confiscated, and his house burnt. They were even so solicitous for the
entertainment of strangers, that they permitted the landlord to steal for the
entertainment of his guest." Quot noctu furatus fueris, eras appone hospitibus.
Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 1751. p. 50. In
consequence of these laws or of that state of society which made it proper to
enact them, hospitality abounded while the intercourse among men was
inconsiderable, and secured the stranger a kind reception under every roof
where he chose to take shelter. This two proves clearly, that the intercourse
among men was rare for as soon as this increased, what was a pleasure became a
burden, and the entertaining of travelers was converted into a branch of
commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof still more convincing of the
small intercourse between different nations. The genius of the Feudal system,
as well as the spirit of jealousy which always accompanies ignorance, joined in
discouraging strangers from settling in any country. If a person removed from
one province in a kingdom to another, he was bound within a year and a day, to
acknowledge himself the vassal of the baron in whose estate he settled; if he
neglected to do so, he became liable to a penalty, and if at his death he
neglected to leave a certain legacy to the baron within whose territories he
resided, all his goods were confiscated. The hardships imposed on foreigners
settling in a strange country, were still more intolerable. In more early
times, the superior lord of any territory, in which a foreigner settled, might
seize his person, and reduce him to servitude. Very striking instances of this
occur in the history of the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the Normans
in the ninth century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime provinces of
France, to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom. But instead of being
received with that humanity to which their wretched condition entitled them,
they were reduced to a state of servitude. Both the civil and ecclesiastical
powers found it necessary to interpose, in order to put a stop to this
barbarous practice. Potgiesser. de Statu Servor. lib. i. c. 1. 16. In other
countries, the laws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime provinces, to
reduce such as were shipwrecked on their coast, to servitude. Ibid. 17. This
barbarous custom prevailed in other countries of Europe. The practice of
seizing the goods of persons who had been shipwrecked, and of confiscating as
the property of the lord on whose manor they were thrown, seems to have been
universal. De Westphalen Monum. inedita Rer. Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, etc. et Du
Cange, voc Laganum, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512. Among the ancient Welsh,
three sorts of persons, a madman, a stranger, and a leper, might be killed with
impunity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in observat. on the Statutes, chiefly the more
ancient, p. 22. M. de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds which prove, that
in different provinces of France, strangers became the slaves of the lord on
whose lands they settled. Glossaire du Droit Francois, Art. Aubaine, p. 92.
Beaumanoir says, "that there are several places in France, in which, if a
stranger fixes his residence for a year and a day, he becomes the slave of the
lord of the manor. Coust. de Beauv. chapter 45. p. 254. But as a practice so
contrary to humanity could not subsist, the superior lords found it necessary
to rest satisfied with levying certain annual taxes from aliens, by imposing
upon them some extraordinary duties or services. But when any stranger died, he
could not convey his effects by a will; and all his real as well as personal
estate fell to the king, or to the lord of the barony, to the exclusion of his
natural heirs. This is termed in France Droit d'Aubaine. Pref. de Laurier.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 15. Brussel. tom. ii. p. 944. Du Cange, voc. Albani. Pasquier
Recherches, p. 367. This practice of confiscating the effects of strangers upon
their death, was very ancient. It is mentioned, though very obscurely, in a law
of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul. Baluz. p. 507. 5. Not only persons who were
born in a foreign country were subject to the Droit d'Aubaine, but even such as
removed from one diocese to another, or from the lands of one baron to another.
Brussel. vol. ii. p. 947, 949. It is scarce possible to conceive any law more
unfavourable to the intercourse between nations. Something similar to it,
however, may be found in the ancient laws of every kingdom in Europe. With
respect to Italy, see Murat. Ant. vol. ii. p. 14. It is no small disgrace to
the French jurisprudence, that this barbarous, inhospitable custom, should
still remain in a nation so highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded under a feeble form of government,
incapable of framing or executing salutary laws, rendered the communication
between the different provinces of the same kingdom extremely dangerous. It
appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in the ninth century, that
the highways were so much infested by banditti, that it was necessary for
travelers to form themselves into companies or caravans, that they might be
safe from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. vol. vii. 515. The
numerous regulations published by Charles the bald in the same century,
discover the frequency of these disorders; and such acts of violence were
become so common, that by many they were hardly considered as criminal; and for
this reason, the inferior judges called Centenarii, were required to take an
oath, that they would neither commit any robbery themselves, nor protect such
as were guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63, 68. The
historians of the ninth and tenth centuries give pathetic descriptions of these
disorders. Some remarkable passages to this purpose are collected by Mat. Jo.
Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They became so frequent and audacious,
that the authority of the civil magistrate was unable to repress them. The
ecclesiastical jurisdiction was called in to aid it. Councils were held with
great solemnity, the bodies of the saints were brought thither, and in presence
of the sacred relics, anathemas were denounced against robbers, and other
violators of the public peace. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. 360, 431,
536. One of these forms of excommunication issued A. D. 988, is still
preserved, and is so singular, and composed with eloquence of such a peculiar
kind, that it will not perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After the usual
introduction, and mentioning the outrage which gave occasion to the anathema,
it runs thus, "Obtenebrescant occuli vesstri, qui concupiverunt; arescant
manus, quae rapuerunt; debilitentur omnia membra, quae adjuverunt. Semper
laboretis, nec requiem inveniatis, fructuque vestri laboris privemini.
Formidetis, and paveatis, a facie persequentis, and non persequentis hostis, ut
tabescendo deficiatis. Sit portio vestra cum Juda traditore Domini, in terra
mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda vestra ad satisfactionem plenam convertantur.
Ne cessent a vobis hae malidictiones, scelerum vestroram persecutrices, quamdiu
permanebitis in peccato pervasionis. Amen. Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. lb. p. 517.

WITH respect to the progress of commerce which I have described, p. 78, etc.
it may be observed that the Italian states carried on some commerce with the
cities of the Greek empire, as early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of the east. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
vol. ii. p, 882. In the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a trade with
Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The inhabitants of Amalphi and Pisa had likewise
extended their trade to the same ports. Murat. Ib. p. 884, 885. The effects of
the Crusades in increasing the wealth and commerce of the Italian states, and
particularly that which they carried on with the East, I have already explained
in this volume. They not only imported the Indian commodities from the East,
but established manufactures of curious fabric in their own country. Several of
these are enumerated by Muratori in his Dissertations concerning the arts and
the weaving of the middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399. They made
great progress particularly in the manufacture of silk, which had long been
peculiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk stuffs were of such high price
in ancient Rome, that only a few persons of the first rank were able to
purchase them. Under Aurelian, A. D. 270, a pound of silk was equal in value to
a pound of gold. Absit ut auro fila pensentur. Libra enim auri tune libra
serici fuit. Vopiscus in Aureliano. Justinian, in the sixth century, introduced
the art of rearing silkworms into Greece, which rendered the commodity
somewhat more plentiful, though still it was of such great value, as to remain
an article of luxury or magnificence, reserved only for persons of the first
order, or for public solemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily, about the year 1130,
carried off a number of artificers in the silk trade from Athens, and settling
them in Palermo, introduced the culture of silk into his kingdom, from which it
was communicated to other parts of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7.
This seems to have rendered silk so common, that about the middle of the
fourteenth century, a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared in one procession
clad in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a production of the East. Some plants of
the sugar-cane were brought from Asia; and the first attempt to cultivate them
in Sicily was made about the middle of the twelfth century. From thence they
were transplanted into the southern provinces of Spain. From Spain they were
carried to the Canary and Madeira isles, and at length into the new world.
Ludovico Guicciardini, in enumerating the goods imported into Antwerp, about
the year 1560, mentions the sugar which they received from Spain and Portugal
as a considerable article. He describes that as the product of the Madeira and
Canary islands. Descritt. de Paesi Bassi, p. 180, 181. The sugar-cane was
either not introduced into the West Indies at that time, or the cultivation of
it was not so considerable as to furnish an article in commerce. In the middle
ages, though sugar was not raised in such quantities, or employed for so many
purposes, as to become one of the common necessaries of life, it appears to
have been a considerable article in the commerce of the Italian states.

THESE various commodities with which the Italians furnished the other nations
of Europe, procured them a favorable reception in every kingdom. They were
established in France in the thirteenth century with most extensive immunities.
They not only obtained every indulgence favorable to their commerce, but
personal rights and privileges were granted to them, which the natives of the
kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv. p. 688. By a special proviso, they were
exempted from the droit d'aubaine. Ibid, p. 670. As the Lombards engrossed the
trade of every kingdom in which they settled, they became masters of its cash.
Money of course was in their hands not only a sign of the value of their
commodities, but became an object of commerce itself. They dealt largely as
bankers. In an ordonance, A. D. 1295, we find them styled mercatores and
campsores. They carried on this as well as other branches of their commerce
with somewhat of that rapacious spirit which is natural to monopolizers, who
are not restrained by the concurrence of rivals. An absurd opinion, which
prevailed in the middle ages, was, however, in some measure, the cause, of
their exorbitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology for them. Commerce
cannot be carried on with advantage unless the persons who lend a sum are
allowed a certain premium for the use of their money, and as a compensation for
the risk which they run in permitting another to traffic with their stock.
This premium is fixed by law in all commercial countries, and is called the
legal interest of money. But the Fathers of the church preposterously applied
the prohibitions of usury in scripture to the payment of legal interest, and
condemned it as a sin. The schoolmen, misled by Aristotle, whose sentiments
they followed implicitly, and without examination, adopted the same error, and
enforced it. Blackstone's Commentaries on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455.
Thus the Lombards found themselves engaged in a traffic which was deemed
criminal and odious. They were liable to punishment if detected. They were not
satisfied, therefore, with that moderate premium, which they might have
claimed, if their trade had been open and authorized by law. They exacted a sum
proportional to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Accordingly, we find the
it was usual for them to demand twenty per cent. for the use of money in the
thirteenth century. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About the beginning of
that century, the countess of Flanders was obliged to borrow money in order to
pay her husband's ransom. She procured the sum requisite, either from Italian
merchants or from Jews. The lowest interest which she paid to them was above
twenty per cent. and some of them exacted near thirty. Martene and Durand.
Thesaur. Anecdotorum. vol. i. p. 886. In the fourteenth century, A. D. 1311,
Philip IV. fixed the interest which might be legally exacted in the fairs of
Ch^mpagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i. p. 484. The interest of money in
Aragon was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. 1242. fixed it by law at eighteen per
cent. Petr. de Marca. Marca sive Limes Hispan, app. 1433. As late as the year
1490, it appears that the interest of money in Placentia, was at the rate of
forty per cent. This is the more extraordinary, because at that time the
commerce of the Italian States was become considerable. Memoire Storiche de
Piacenza, tom. viii. p. 134. Piac. 1760. It appears from Lud. Guicciardini,
that Charles V. had fixed the rate of interest in his dominions in the
Low Countries at twelve per cent. and at the time when he wrote about the year
1560, it was not uncommon to exact more than that sum. He complains of this as
exorbitant, and points out its bad effects both on agriculture and commerce.
Descritt. di Paesi Bassi, p. 172. This high interest of money, is alone a proof
that the profits on commerce were exorbitant. -- The Lombards were likewise
established in England, in the thirteenth century, and a considerable street in
the city of London still bears their name. They enjoyed great privileges, and
carried on an extensive commerce, particularly as bankers. See Anderson's
Chronol. Deduction, vol. i. p. 137, 160, 204, 231, where the statutes or other
authorities, which confirm this are quoted. But the chief mart for Italian
commodities was at Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfect, that a voyage
between the Baltic and Mediterranean could not be performed in one summer. For
that reason, a magazine or storehouse half way between the commercial cities in
the North, and those in Italy became necessary. Bruges was pitched upon as the
most convenient station. That choice introduced vast wealth into the
Low Countries. Bruges was at once the staple for English wool; for the woollen
and linen manufactures of the Netherlands; for the naval stores, and other
bulky commodities of the north; and for the Indian commodities, as well as
domestic productions imported by the Italian States. The extent of its
commerce in Indian goods with Venice alone appears from one fact. In the year
1318, five Venetian galeasses laden with Indian commodities arrived at Bruges,
in order to dispose of their cargoes at the fair. L. Guic. Descritt, di Paesi
Bassi, p. 174. Galeasses were vessels of very considerable burden. It was the
greatest emporium in all Europe. Many proofs of this occur in the historians
and records of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. But instead of
multiplying quotations, I shall refer my readers to Anderson, vol. i. p. 12,
137, 213, 246, The nature of this work prevents me from entering into any long
details, but there are some detached facts, which give an high idea of the
wealth both of the Flemish and Italian commercial states. The Duke of Brabant
contracted his daughter to the Black Prince, son of Edward III. of England, A.
D. 1339, and gave her a portion which would amount to three hundred thousand
pounds of our present money. Rymer's Faed^^, vol. v. p. 113. John Galeazzo
Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a treaty of marriage between his daughter and
Lionel Duke of Clarence Edward's third son. A. D. 1367, and granted a portion
equal to two hundred thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer Faeder. vol.
vi. p. 547. These exorbitant sums so far exceeding what was then granted by the
most powerful monarchs, and which appear extraordinary even in the present age,
when the wealth of Europe is so much increased, must have arisen from the
riches which flowed into these countries from their extensive and lucrative
commerce. The first source of wealth to the towns situated on the Baltic sea,
seems to have been the herring fishery; the shoals of herring frequenting at
that time the coasts of Sweden and Denmark, in the same manner as they now
resort to the British coasts. The effects of this fishery are thus described by
an author of the thirteenth century. The Danes, says he, who were formerly clad
in the poor garb of sailors, are now clothed in scarlet, purple and fine
linen. For they abound with wealth flowing from their annual fishery on the
coast of Schonen; so that all nations resort to them, bringing their gold,
silver and precious commodities, that they may purchase herrings, which the
divine bounty bestows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecensis ap. Conring. de Urbib.
German. 87.

THE Hanseatick league is the most powerful commercial confederacy known in
history. Its origin toward the close of the twelfth century, and the objects
of its union, are described by Knipscildt Tractatus Historico-Politico
Juridicus de Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson has mentioned the
chief facts with respect to their commercial progress, the extent of the
privileges which they obtained in different countries, their successful wars
with several monarchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with which they contended
for those liberties and rights, without which it is impossible to carry on
commerce to advantage. The vigorous efforts of a society attentive only to
commercial objects, could not fail of diffusing over Europe new and more
liberal ideas concerning justice and order wherever they settled.

IN England the progress of commerce was extremely slow; and the causes of this
are obvious. During the Saxon heptarchy, England, split into many petty
kingdoms, which were perpetually at variance with each other, exposed to the
fierce incursions of the Danes, and other northern pirates, and sunk in
barbarity and ignorance, was in no condition to cultivate commerce, or to
pursue any system of useful and salutary policy. When a better prospect began
to open by the union of the kingdom under one monarch, the Norman conquest took
place. This occasioned such a violent shock, and such a sudden and total
revolution of property, that the nation did not recover from it during several
reigns. By the time that the constitution began to acquire some stability, and
the English had so incorporated with their conquerors as to become one people,
the nation engaged with no less ardour than imprudence in support of their
monarch's pretensions to the crown of France, and long wasted its vigor and
genius in its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom. When by ill success and
repeated disappointments, a period was at last put to this fatal frenzy, and
the nation beginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure to breathe and to gather
new strength, the destructive wars between the houses of York and Lancaster
broke out, and involved the kingdom in the worst of all calamities. Thus,
besides the common obstructions of commerce occasioned by the nature of the
feudal government, and the state of manners during the middle ages, its
progress in England was retarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of
events adverse to the commercial spirit was sufficient to have checked its
growth, although every other circumstance had favored it. The English were
accordingly one of the last nations in Europe who availed themselves of their
natural commercial advantages. Before the reign of Edward III. all the wool of
England except a a small quantity wrought into course cloths for home
consumption, was sold to the Flemings or Lombards, and manufactured by them.
Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some of the Flemish weavers to
settle in England, it was long before the English were capable of fabricating
cloth for foreign markets, and the export of unwrought wool still continued to
be the chief article of their commerce. Anderson passim. All foreign
commodities were brought into England by the Lombard or Hanseatick merchants.
The English ports were frequented by ships both from the north and south of
Europe, and they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits arising from
the supply of their wants. The first commercial treaty of England on record, is
that with Haquin King or Norway, A. D. 1217. Anders. vol. i. p. 108. But they
did not venture to trade in their own ships to the Baltic until the beginning
of the fourteenth century. Ib. 151. It was after the middle of the fifteenth
before they sent any ships into the mediterranean. Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long
before this period that their vessels visited the ports of Spain or Portugal.
But though I have pointed out the slow progress of the English commerce, as a
fact little attended to, and yet meriting consideration; the concourse of
foreigners to the ports of England, together with the communication among all
the different countries in Europe, which went on increasing from the beginning
of the twelfth century, is sufficient to justify all the observations and
reasonings in the text concerning the influence of commerce on the state of
manners, and of society.

NOTE XXX. [GG.] SECT. III.
I HAVE not been able to discover the precise manner in which the Justiza was
appointed, Among the claims of the junta or union formed against James I. A. D.
1264, this was one; that the King should not nominate any person to be Justiza
without the consent or approbation of the ricos-hombres. Zurita Anales de
Aragon, vol. i. p. 180. But the King in his answer to their remonstrance
asserts, "that it was established by immemorial practice, and was conformidable
to the laws of the kingdom, that the King, in virtue of his royal prerogative,
named the Justiza. Zurita, Ibid. 181. Blanca, 656. From another passage in
Zurita, it appears that while the Aragonese enjoyed the privilege of the union,
i. e. the power of confederating against their sovereign as often as they
conceived that he had violated any of their rights and immunities. the Justiza
was not only nominated by the King, but held his office during his pleasure.
Nor was this practice attended with any bad effects, as the privilege of the
union was a sufficient and effectual check to any abuse of the royal
prerogative. But when the privilege of the union was abolished as dangerous to
the order and peace of society, it was agreed that the Justiza should continue
in office during life. Several kings, however, attempted to remove the Justizas
who were obnoxious to them, and they sometimes succeeded in the attempt. In
order to guard against this encroachment, which would have destroyed the
intention of the institution, and have rendered the Justiza the dependant and
tool of the crown, instead of the guardian of the people, a law was enacted in
the Cortes, A. D. 1442, ordaining that the Justiza should continue in office
during life, and should not be removed from it unless by the authority of the
Cortes. Fueros and Observancial del Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By former
laws the person of the Justiza had been declared sacred, and he was responsable
only to the Cortes. Ibid. p. 15. b. Zurita and Blanca, who both published their
histories, while the Justiza of Aragon retained the full exercise of his
privileges and jurisdiction, have neglected to explain several circumstances
with regard to the office of that respectable magistrate, because they
addressed their works to their countrymen, who were well acquainted with every
particular concerning the functions of a judge, to whom they looked up as to
the guardian of their liberties. It is in vain to consult the latter historians
of Spain, about any point, with respect to which the excellent historians whom
I have named are silent. The ancient constitution of their country was
overturned, and despotism, established on the ruin of its liberties, when the
writers of this and the preceding century composed their histories, and on
that account they had little curiosity to know the nature of those institutions
to which their ancestors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or they were afraid to
describe them with much accuracy. The spirit with which Mariana, his
continuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write their histories, is very different
from that of the two historians of Aragon, from whom I have taken my account of
the constitution of that kingdom.

TWO circumstances concerning the Justiza, besides those which I have mentioned
in the text, are unworthy of observation. 1. None of the ricos-hombres, or
noblemen of the first order, could be appointed Justiza. He was taken out of
the second class or cavalleros, who answer nearly to gentlemen or commoners in
Great Britain. Fueros and Observanc. del Reyno, etc. lib. 1. p. 21. b. The
reason was. By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were not subject to
capital punishment; but as it was necessary for the security of liberty, that
the Justiza should be accountable for the manner in which he executed the high
trust reposed in him, it was a powerful restraint upon him to know that he was
liable to be punished with the utmost rigor. Blanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita, tom.
ii. 229. Fueros and Observanc. lib. ix. p. 182. b. 183. It appears too from
many passages in Zurita, that the Justiza was appointed to check the
domineering and oppressive spirit of the nobles, as well as to set bounds to
the power of the monarch, and therefore he was chosen from an order of citizens
equally interested in opposing both.

2. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such vast powers as the Justiza, might have
exercised them in a manner pernicious to the state, if he himself had been
subject to no control. A constitutional remedy, however, was provided against
this danger. Seventeen persons were chosen by lot in each meeting of the
Cortes. These formed a tribunal called the court of inquisition into the office
of Justiza. This court met at three stated terms in each year. Every person had
liberty of complaining to it of any inquiry or neglect of duty in the Justiza,
or in the inferior judges, who acted in his name. The Justiza and his deputies
were called to answer for their conduct. The members of the court passed
sentence by ballot. They might punish by degradation, confiscation of goods, or
even with death. The law which erected this court, and regulated the forms of
its procedure, was enacted A. D. 1461. Zurita Anales, iv. 102. Blanca Comment.
Rer. Aragon 770. Previous to this period, inquiry was made into the conduct of
the Justiza, though not with the same formality. He was from the first
institution of the office subject to the review of the Cortes. The constant
dread of such an impartial and severe inquiry into his behavior, was a
powerful motive to the vigilant and faithful discharge of his duty. A
remarkable instance of the authority of the Justiza when opposed to that of the
King, occurs, in the year 1386. By the constitution of Aragon, the eldest son
or heir apparent of the crown possessed considerable power and jurisdiction in
the kingdom. Fueros and Observan. del Reyno de Arag. lib. 1. p. 16. Peter IV.
instigated by a second wife, attempted to deprive his son of this, and enjoined
his subjects to yield him no obedience. The Prince immediately applied to the
Justiza; "the safeguard and defense, says Zurita, against all violence and
oppression. The Justiza granted him the firmo de derecho, the effect of which
was, that upon his giving surety to appear in judgment, he could not be
deprived of any immunity or privilege, which he possessed, but in consequence
of a legal trial before the Justiza, and of a sentence pronounced by him. This
was published throughout the kingdom, and notwithstanding the proclamation in
contradiction to this which had been issued by the King, the Prince continued
in the exercise of all his rights, and his authority was universally
recognized. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. [HH.] SECT. III.
I HAVE been induced by the concurring testimony of many respectable authors,
to mention this as the constitutional form of the oath of allegiance, which the
Aragonese swore to their Sovereigns. I must acknowledge, however, that I have
not found this singular oath in any Spanish author whom I have had an
opportunity to consult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor Blanca, nor
Argensola, no^ Sayas, who were all historiographers appointed by the Cortes of
Aragon to record the transactions of the kingdom. All these writers possess a
merit, which is very rare among historians. They are extremely accurate in
tracing the progress of the laws and constitution of their country. Their
silence with respect to this, creates some suspicion concerning the genuiness
of the oath. But as it is mentioned by so many authors, who produce the ancient
Spanish words in which it is expressed, it is probable that they have taken it
from some writer of credit, whose works have not fallen into my hands. The
spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the genius of the Aragonese
constitution.

THE privilege of Union which I mentioned in the preceding note, and alluded to
in the text, is indeed one of the most singular which could take place in a
regular government, and the oath that I have mentioned expresses nothing more
than this constitutional privilege entitled the Aragonese to perform. If the
King or his Ministers violated any of the laws or immunities of the Aragonese,
and did not grant immediate redress in consequence of their representations and
remonstrances, the nobles of the first rank, or Ricos-hombres de natura. and de
mesnada, the equestrian order, or the nobility of the second class, called
Hidalgos and Infanciones, together with the magistrates of cities, might either
in the cortes, or in a voluntary assembly, join in union, and binding
themselves by mutual oaths and the exchange of hostages to be faithful to each
other, they might require the King, in the name and by the authority of this
body corporate, to grant them redress. If the King refused to comply with their
request, or took arms in order to oppose them, they might, in virtue of the
privilege of union, instantly withdraw their allegiance from the King, refuse
to acknowledge him as their Sovereign, and proceed to elect another Monarch;
nor did they incur any guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that
account. Blanca Com. Rer. Arag. 661. 669. This union did not resemble the
confederacies in other feudal kingdoms. It was a constitutional association,
which pretended to legal privileges, which issued its mandates under a common
seal, and proceeded in all its operations by regular and ascertained forms.
This dangerous right was not only claimed, but exercised in the year 1287, the
Aragonese formed an union in opposition to Alfonso III. and obliged the King
not only to comply with their demands, but to ratify a privilege so fatal to
the power of the crown, Zurita Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the year 1347, an
union was formed against Peter IV. with equal success, and a new ratification
of the privilege was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202. But soon after, the
King having defeated the leaders of the union in battle, the privilege of union
was finally abrogated in the Cortes, and all the laws or records which
contained any confirmation of it, were cancelled or destroyed. The King, in
presence of the Cortes, called for the act whereby he had ratified the union,
and having wounded his hand with his poiniard, he held it above the record,
That privilege, says he, which has been so fatal to the kingdom, and so
injurious to royalty, should be effaced with the blood of a King. Zurita, tom.
ii. p. 229. The law abolishing the union is published. Fueros and Observanc.
lib. ix. p. 178. From that period the Justiza became the constitutional
guardian of public liberty, and his power and jurisdiction occasioned none of
those violent convulsions which the tumultuary privilege of the union was apt
to produce. The constitution of Aragon, however, still remained extremely free.
One source of this liberty was from the early admission of the representatives
of cities into the Cortes. It seems probable, from Zurita, that the burgesses
were constituent members of the Cortes from its first institution. He mentions
a meeting of Cortes, A. D. 1133, in which the procuradores de las ciudades y
villas were present. Tom. i. p. 51. This is the constitutional language in
which their presence is declared in the Cortes. after the journals of that
court were regularly kept. It is probable, that an historian so accurate as
Zurita, would not have used these words, if he had not taken them from some
authentic record. It was more than a century after this period before the
representatives of cities formed a constituent part in the supreme assemblies
of the other European nations. The free spirit of the Aragonese government is
conspicuous in many particulars. The Cortes not only opposed the attempts of
their Kings to increase their revenue, or to extend their prerogative, but they
claimed right and exercised powers which will appear extraordinary even in a
country accustomed to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year 1286, the Cortes
claimed the privilege of naming the members of the King's council and the
officers of his household, and they seem to have obtained it for some time.
Zurita, tom. i. p. 303, 307. It was the privilege of the Cortes to name the
officers who commanded the troops raised by their authority. This seems to be
evident from a passage in Zurita. When the Cortes, in the year 1503, raised a
body of troops to be employed in Italy, it passed an act empowering the King to
name the officers who should command them, Zurita, tom. v. p. 274; which
plainly implies that without this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue
of his prerogative. In the Fueros and Observancias del reyno de Aragon, two
general declarations of the rights and privileges of the Aragonese are
published; the one in the reign of Pedro I. A. D. 1284, the other in that of
James II. A. D. 1323. They are of such length, that I cannot insert them, but
it is evident from these, that not only the privileges of the nobility, but the
rights of the people, personal as well as political, were, at that period, more
extensive, and better understood than in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. 1. p. 7,
9. The oath by which the King bound himself to observe those rights and
liberties of the people, was very solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. and p. 15. The Cortes
of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and vigilance, which are peculiar to
free states, in guarding the essential parts of the constitution, but they were
scrupulously attentive to observe the most minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed. According to the established laws and customs of Aragon,
no foreigner had liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes assembled.
Ferdinand, in the year 1481, appointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the
kingdom, while he was absent during the course of the campaign. The law
required that a regent should take the oath of fidelity in presence of the
Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner, before she could be admitted, the
Cortes thought it necessary to pass an act authorizing the serjeant-porter to
open the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter; so attentive were they,
says Zurita, to observe their laws and forms, even such as may seem most
minute. Tom. iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonese were no less solicitous to secure the personal rights of
individuals, than to maintain the freedom of the constitution; and the spirit
of their statutes with respect to both was equally liberal. Two facts relative
to this matter merit observation. By an express statute in the year 1325, it
was declared to be unlawful to put any native Aragonese to the torture. If he
could not be convicted by the testimony of witnesses, he was instantly
absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the regulation with the
satisfaction natural to an historian, when he contemplates the humanity of his
countrymen. He compares the laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both exempted
citizens and freemen from such ignominious and cruel treatment, and had
recourse to it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason to bestow such an
encomium on the laws of his country. Torture was at that time permitted by the
laws of every other nation in Europe. Even in England, from which the mild
spirit of legislation has long banished it, torture was not, at that time,
unknown. Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, etc. p. 66.

THE other fact shows, that the same spirit which influenced the legislature,
prevailed among the people. In the year 1485, the religious zeal of Ferdinand
and Isabella, prompted them to introduce the inqusition into Aragon. Though the
Aragonese were no less superstitiously attached, than the other Spaniards, to
the Roman Catholic faith, and no less desirous to root out the seeds of error
and of heresy which the Jews and Moors had scattered, yet they took arms
against the inquisitors, murdered the chief inquisitor, and long opposed the
establishment of that tribunal. The reason which they gave for their conduct,
was, that the mode of trial in the inquisition, was inconsistent with liberty.
The criminal was not confronted with the witnesses, he was not acquainted with
what they deposed against him, he was subjected to torture, and the goods of
persons condemned were confiscated. Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

THE form of Government in the kingdom of Valencia, and principality of
Catalonia, which were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was likewise extremely
favorable to liberty. The Valencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the
same manner with the Aragonese. But they had no magistrate resembling the
Justiza. The Catalonians were no less jealous of their liberties than the two
other nations, and no less bold in asserting them. But it is not necessary for
illustrating the following history, to enter into any farther detail concerning
the peculiarities in the constitution of these kingdoms.

NOTE XXXII. [II]. SECT. III.
I HAVE searched in vain among the historians of Castile, for such information
as might enable me to trace the progress of laws and government in Castile, or
to explain the nature of the constitution with the same degree of accuracy,
wherewith I have described the political state of Aragon. It is manifest, not
only from the historians of Castile, but from its ancient laws, particularly
the Fuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally elective. Ley 2, 5, 8. They
were chosen by the bishops, the nobility, and the people, ibid. It appears from
the same venerable code of laws, that the prerogative of the Castilian monarchs
was extremly limited. Villaldiego in his commentary on these laws, produces
many facts and authorities in confirmation of both these particulars. Dr.
Geddes, who was well acquainted with Spanish literature, complains that he
could find no author who gave a distinct account of the Cortes, or supreme
assembly of the nation, or who described the manner in which it was held, or
mentioned the precise number of members who had a right to sit in it. He
produces, however, from Gil Gonzales d'Avila, who published a history of Henry
II. the writ of summons to the town of Abula, requiring it to choose
representatives to appear in the Cortes which he called to meet A. D. 1390.
From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes, Marquisses, the masters of the three
military orders, Conde's and Riccos-hombres were required to attend. These
composed the bodies of ecclesiastics and nobles, which formed two members of
the legislature. The cities which sent members to that meeting of the Cortes,
were forty-eight. The number of representatives (for the cities had right to
choose more or fewer, according to their respective dignity) amounted to an
hundred and twenty-five. Geddes Miscellaneous Tracts, vol. i. 331. Zurita
having occasion to mention the Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro, A. D. 1505,
in order to secure to himself the government of Castile after the death of
Isabella, records with his usual accuracy, the names of the members present,
and of the cities which they represented. From that list it appears, that only
eighteen cities had deputies in this assembly. Annals de Aragon, tom. vi. p.
3. What was the occasion of this great inequality, in the number of cities
represented in these two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable to explain.

NOTE XXXIII. [KK] SECT. III.
A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was engrossed by the nobility. L.
Marinaeus Siculus, who composed his treatise de Rebus Hispaniae during the
reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue of the Spanish nobility, together with
the yearly rent of their estates. According to his account, which he affirms
was as accurate as the nature the subject would admit, the sum total of the
annual revenue of their lands amounted to one million four hundred and
eighty-two thousand ducats. If we make allowance for the vast difference in the
value of money in the fifteenth century, from that which it now bears, and
consider that the catalogue of Marinaeus includes only the Titulados, or
nobility, whose families were distinguished by some honorary title, their
wealth must appear very great. L. Marinaeus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hispan. vol.
i. p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their contests with the crown, which I
shall hereafter relate, complain of the extensive property of the nobility, as
extremely pernicious to the kingdom. In one of their manifesto's they assert,
that from Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an hundred leagues, the
crown did not possess more than three villages. All the rest belonged to the
nobility, and could be subjected to no public burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor,
Carl. V. vol. 1. p. 422. It appears from the testimony of authors quoted by
Bovadilla, that these vast possessions were bestowed upon the Ricos-hombres,
hidalgos, and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile, in reward for the assistance,
which they had received from them in expelling the Moors. They likewise
obtained by the same means, a considerable influence in the cities, many of
which anciently depended upon the nobility. Politica para Corregidores. Amb.
1750. vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXIV. [LL]. SECT. III.
I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain, as I observed Note XVIII. with
respect to the origin of communities or free cities in Spain. It is probable,
that as soon as these were recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed
their residence in them, being persons of distinction and credit, had all the
privileges of municipal government and jurisdiction, conferred upon them. Many
striking proofs occur of the splendor, wealth, and power of the Spanish
cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a description of Barcelona in the year 1491,
and compares the dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and the elegance of
its buildings, the variety of its manufactures, and the extent of its commerce
to Florence, Hieron. Paulus ap. Scottum. Script. Hisp. ii. 844., Marinaeus
describes Toledo as a large and populous city. A great number of its
inhabitants were persons of quality, and of illustrious rank. Its commerce was
great. It applied particularly to the manufactures of silk and wool; and the
number of inhabitants employed in these two branches of trade, amounted nearly
to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 308. I know no city, says he, that I would
prefer to Valladolid for elegance and splendor. Ibid. p. 312. We may form some
estimate of its populousness from the following circumstances. The citizens
took arms in the year 1516, in order to oppose a measure concerted by cardinal
Ximenes, and they mustered in the city, and in the territory which belonged to
it, thirty thousand fighting men. Sandow. Vida del Emper. Carl. V. tom. i. p.
81. The manufactures carried on in the towns of Spain, were not intended merely
for home consumption, they were exported to foreign countries, and that
commerce was a considerable source of wealth to the inhabitants. The maritime
laws of Barcelona, are the foundation of mercantile jurisprudence in modern
times, as the Leges Rhodiae were among the ancients. All the commercial states
in Italy adopted these laws, and regulated their trade according to them. Sandi
Storia Civil Veneziana, vol, ii. 865. It appears from several ordonances of
the Kings of France, that the merchants of Aragon and Castile were received on
the same footing, and admitted to the same privileges with those of Italy.
Ordonances des Roys, etc. tom. ii. p. 135. iii. 166, 504, 635. Cities in such a
flourishing state became a respectable part of the society, and were entitled
to a considerable share in the legislature. The magistrates of Barcelona
aspired to the highest honor a Spanish subject can enjoy, that of being
covered in the presence of their Sovereign, and of being treated as grandees of
the kingdom. Origin de la dignidad de Grande de Castilla por Don Alonso
Carillo. Madr. 1657. p. 18.

NOTE XXXV. [MM]. SECT. III.
THE military order of St. Jago, the most honorable and opulent of the three
Spanish orders, was instituted about the year 1170. The bull of confirmation by
Alexander III. is dated A. D. 1176. At that time a considerable part of Spain
was subject to the Moors, and the whole country much exposed to the
depredations, not only of the enemy, but of banditti. It is no wonder, then,
that an institution, the object of which was to oppose the enemies of the
Christian faith, and to restrain and punish those who disturbed the public
peace, should be extremely popular, and meet with general encouragement. The
wealth and power of the order became so great, that one historian says, that
the Grand Master of St. Jago, was the person in Spain of the greatest power and
dignity next to the King. Ael. Anton. Nebrissensis, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hisp. i.
812. Another observes, that the order possessed every thing in Castile that a
King would most desire to obtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22. The knights took the
vows of obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chastity. By the former they
were bound implicitly to obey the commands of their grandmaster. The order
could bring into the field a thousand men at arms. Ael. Ant. Nebres. p. 813. If
these men at arms were accompanied as was usual in that age, this was a
formidable body of cavalry. There belonged to this order eighty-four
commanderies, and two hundred priories and other benefices. Dissertations sur
la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p. (...) is easy to see how formidable to
his sovereign the command of these troops, the administration of such revenues,
and the disposal of so many offices, must have rendered a subject. The other
two orders though, inferior to that of St. Jago in power and wealth, were
nevertheless very considerable. When the conquest of Granada deprived the
knights of St. Jago of those enemies against whom their zeal was originally
directed, superstition found out a new object, in defense of which they engaged
to employ their courage. To their usual oath, they added the following clause:
"We swear to believe, to maintain, and to contend in public and in private,
that the Virgin Mary, the mother of God, our Lady, was conceived without the
stain of original sin." This singular addition was made about the middle of the
seventeenth century. Honor de St. Marie Dissertations, etc. p. 263.

NOTE XXXVI. [NN]. SECT. III.
I HAVE frequently had occasion to take notice of the defects in police during
the middle ages, occasioned by the feebleness of Government, and the want of
proper subordination among the different ranks of men. I have observed in a
former note, that this greatly interrupted the intercourse between nations, and
even between different places in the same kingdom. The description which the
Spanish historians give of the frequency of rapine, murder, and every act of
violence, in all the provinces of Spain, are amazing, and present to us the
idea of Society but little removed from the disorder and turbulence of that
which has been called a state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 175, Ael.
Ant. Nebrissensis rer. a Ferdin. gestar. Hist. ap. Schottum II. 849. Though the
access of these disorders rendered the institution of the Santa Hermandad
necessary, great care was taken at first to avoid giving any offense or alarm
to the nobility. The jurisdiction of the judges of the Hermandad, was expressly
confined to crimes that violated the public peace. All other offenses were left
to the cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a person was guilty of the most
notorious perjury, in any trial before a judge of the Hermandad, he could not
punish him, but was obliged to remit the case to the ordinary judge of the
place. Commentaria in Regias Hispan. Constitut. per. Alph. de Azevedo, pars v.
p. 220, etc. fol. Duaci, 1612. Notwithstanding these restrictions, the Barons
were sensible how much the Hermandad would encroach on their jurisdiction. In
Castile. some opposition was made to the institution; but Ferdinand had the
address to obtain the consent of the Constable to the introduction of the
Hermandad into that part of the kingdom where his estate lay; and by that
means, as well as the popularity of the institution, he surmounted every
obstacle that stood in its way. Ael. Ant. Nebrissen. 851. In Aragon the Nobles
combined against it with greater spirit; and Ferdinand, though he supported it
with vigor, was obliged to make some concessions in order to reconcile them.
Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The power and revenue of the Hermandad in
Castile seems to have been very great* Ferdinand, when preparing for the war
against the Moors of Granada, required of the Hermandad to furnish him sixteen
thousand beasts of burden, together with eight thousand men to conduct them,
and he obtained what he demanded, Ael. Ant. Nebriss. 881. The Hermandad has
found to be of so much use in preserving peace, and restraining or detecting
crimes, that it is still continued in Spain, although it be no longer necessary
either for moderating the power of the nobility, or extending that of the crown.

NOTE XXXVII. [OO.] SECT. III.
NOTHING is more common among Antiquarians, and there is not a more copious
source of error, than to decide concerning the institutions and manners of past
ages, by the forms and ideas which prevail in their own times. The French
lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries having found their
sovereigns in possession of absolute, power, seem to think it a duty incumbent
on them, to maintain that such unbounded authority belonged to the crown in
every period of their monarchy. "The government of France, says M. de Real very
gravely, is purely monarchical at this day, as it was from the beginning. Our
Kings were absolute originally as they are at present." Science du Government,
tom. ii. p. 31. It is impossible, however, to conceive two states of civil
society more unlike to each other, than that of the French nation under Clovis,
and that under Louis XV. It is evident from the codes of laws of the various
tribes which settled in Gaul and the countries adjacent to it, as well as from
the history of Gregory of Tours, and other early annalists, that among all
these people the form of government was extremely rude and simple, and that
they had scarce begun to acquire the first rudiments of that order and police
which are necessary in extensive societies. The King or leader had the command
of soldiers or companions, who followed his standard from choice, not by
constraint. I have produced the clearest evidence of this, Note VI. An event
related by Gregory of Tours, lib. iv. c. 14, affords the most striking proof of
the dependence of the early French Kings on the sentiments and inclinations of
their people. Clotaire I. having marched at the head of his army, in the year
553, against the Saxons, that people, intimidated at his approach sued for
peace, and offered to pay a large sum to the offended monarch. Clotaire was
willing to close with what they proposed. But his army insisted to be led forth
to battle. The King employed all his eloquence to persuade them to accept of
what the Saxons were ready to pay. The Saxons, in order to sooth them,
increased their original offer. The King renewed his solicitations: But the
army enraged, rushed upon the King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of
it, and would have slain him on the spot, if he had not consented to lead them
instantly against the enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France possessed such limited authority, even while
at the head of their army, their prerogative during peace will be found to be
still more confined. They ascended the throne not by any hereditary right, but
in consequence of the election of their subjects. In order to avoid an
unnecessary number of quotations, I refer my readers to Hottomanni
Francogallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will find the fullest
proof of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the most authentic
historians of the Merovingian Kings. The effect of this election was not to
invest them with absolute power. Whatever related to the general welfare of the
nation, was submitted to public deliberation, and determined by the suffrage
of the people, in the annual assemblies called Les Champs des Mars, and Les
Champs de May. These assemblies were called Champs, because, according to the
custom of all the barbarous nations, they were held in the open air, in some
plain capable of containing the vast number of persons who had a right to be
present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis veterum Germanorum. vol. i. 19, etc.
They were denominated Champs de Mars and de May, from the Months in which they
were held. Every free man seems to have had a right to be present in these
assemblies. Sorberus, ibid.. 133, etc. The ancient annals of the Franks
describe the persons who were present in the assembly held A. D. 788, in these
words: In placito Ingelheimensi convenient pontifices, majores, minores,
sacerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, praefecti, cives, oppidani, Apud Sorber.
304. There every thing that concerned the happiness of their country, says an
ancient historian, every thing that could be of benefit to the Franks was
considered, and enjoined. Fredegarius ap. Du Cange Glossar. voc. Campus Martii.
Clotharius II. describes the business, and acknowledges the authority of these
assemblies. They are called, says he, that whatever relates to the common
safety may be considered and resolved by common deliberation; and whatever they
determine, to that I will conform. Amoinus de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap.
Bouquet Recueil. iii. 116. The statutory clauses, or words of legislative
authority in the decrees issued in these assemblies, run not in the name of the
King alone. "We have treated, says Childebert, in a decree A. D. 532, in the
assemby of March, together with our Nobles, concerning some affairs, and we now
publish the conclusion, that it may come to the knowledge of all." Childeb.
Decret. ap. Bouquet Recueil des Histor. tom. iv. p. 3. We have agreed together
with our vassals. Ibid. 2. It is agreed in the assembly in which we are all
united. Ibid. 4. The Salic laws, the most venerable monument of French
jurisprudence, were enacted in the same manner, Dictaverunt Salicam legem
proceres ipsius gentis, qui tunc temporis apud eam erant Rectores. Sunt autem
electi de pluribus viri quatuor -- qui per tres Mallos convenientes, omnes
causarum origines solicete discurrendo, tractantes de singulis judicium
decreverunt hoc modo. Praef. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid. p. 122. Hoc
decretum est apud regem and principes ejus, and apud cunctum populum
christianum, qui infra regnum Merwingorum consistunt. Ibid. p. 124. Nay, even
in their charters, the Kings of the first race are careful to specify that they
were granted with the consent of their vassals. Ego Childebertus Rex una cum
consensu and voluntate Francorum, etc. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 622.
Clotharius III. una cum patribus nostris episcopis, optimatibus, caeterisque
palatii nostri ministris, A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De consensu fidelium nostorum.
Mably Observe. tom. i. p. 239. The historians likewise describe the functions of
the King ^^ the national assemblies in such terms, as imply that his authority
there was extremely small, and that every thing depended on the court itself.
Ipse Rex (says the authors Annals Francorum, speaking of the field of March)
sedebat in sella regia, circumstante exercitu, praecipiebatque is, die illo,
quicquid a Francis decretum erat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT the general assemblies exercised supreme jurisdiction over all persons,
and with respect to all causes, is so evident as to stand in need of no proof.
The trial of Brunchaut. A. D. 613, how unjust soever the sentence against her
may be, as related by Fredegarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet, ibid. 430. is in
itself sufficient proof of this. The notorious violence and iniquity of the
sentence serve to demonstrate the extent of jurisdiction which this assembly
possessed, as a Prince so sanguinary as Clothaire II. thought the sanction of
its authority would be sufficient to justify his rigourous treatment of the
mother and grandmother of so many Kings.

WITH respect to conferring donatives on the Prince, we may observe that among
nations whose manners and political institutions are simple, the public, as
well as individuals, having few wants, they are unacquainted with taxes, and
free uncivilized tribes disdain to submit to any stated imposition. This was
remarkably the case of the Germans, and of all the various people that issued
from that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes not to be of the German
origin, because they submitted to pay taxes. De Morib. Germ. c. 43; and
speaking of another tribe according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he says,
"they were not degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid c. 29. Upon their
settlement in Gaul, we may conclude that while elated with the consciousness of
victory, they would not renounce the high-spirited ideas of their ancestors, or
voluntarily submit to a burden which they regarded as a badge of servitude.
The evidence of the earliest records and historians justify this conclusion. M.
de Montesquieu in the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thirteenth book of
l'Esprit des Loix, and M. de Mably Observat. sur l'Hist. de France, tom. i. p.
247. have investigated this fact with great attention, and have proved clearly
that the property of no freeman among the Franks was subject to any stated
tax. That the state required nothing from persons of this rank but military
service at their own expense, and that they should entertain the King in their
houses when he was upon any progress through his dominions, or his officers
when sent on any public employment, furnishing them with carriages and horses.
Monarchs subsisted almost entirely upon the revenues of their own domains, and
upon the perquisites arising from the administration of justice, together with
a few small fines and forfeitures exacted from those who had been guilty of
certain trespasses. It is foreign from my subject to ennumerate these. The
reader may find them in Observat. de M. de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by freemen to their sovereign it was
purely voluntary. In the annual assembly of March or May it was the custom to
make the King a present of money, of horses or arms, or of some other thing of
value. This was an ancient custom, and derived from their ancestors the
Germans. Mos est civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus vel
armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honor acceptum, etiam necessitatibus subvenit.
Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 15. These gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning
them from the general terms in which they are mentioned by the ancient
historians, were considerable, and made no small part of the royal revenue.
Many passages to this purpose are produced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. sur
Joinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people specified the gift which they
bound themselves to pay annually, and it was exacted as a debt if they failed.
Annals Metenses, ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. 155. It is probable that the first
step toward taxation was to ascertain the value of these gifts which were
originally gratuitous, and to compel the people to pay the sum at which they
were rated. Still, however, some memory of their original was preserved, and
the aids granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Europe were termed
benevolences or free gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were raised to the throne by the
election of the people, Pepinus Rex pius, says an author who wrote a few years
after the transaction which he records, per authoritatem Papae, and unctionem
sancti chrismatis, and electionem omnium Francorum in regni solio sublimatus
est. Clausula de Pepini consecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des Histor. tom. v. p.
9. At the same time, as the chief men of the nation had transferred the crown
from one family to another, an oath was exacted of them that they should
maintain on the throne the family which they had now promoted; ut nunquam de
alterius lumbis regem in aevo praesumant eligere. Ibid. p. 10. This oath the
nation faithfully observed during a considerable space of time. The posterity
of Pepin kept possession of the throne; but with respect to the manner of
dividing their dominions among their children, Princes were obliged to consult
the general assembly of the nation. Thus Pepin himself, A. D. 768, appointed
his two sons, Charles and Charlomannus, to reign as joint sovereigns; but he
did this, una cum concensu Francorum and procerum suorum seu and episcoporum,
before whom he laid the matter in their general assembly. Conventus apud
sanctum Dionysium. Capitular. vol. i. p. 187. This destination the French
confirmed in a subsequent assembly, which was called upon the death of Pepin;
for, as Eginhart relates, they not only appointed them Kings, but by their
authority they regulated the limits of their respective territories, Vita Car.
Magni. ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. 90. In the same manner, it was by the
authority of the supreme assemblies that any dispute which arose among the
descendants of the royal family was determined. Charlemagne recognizes this
important part of their jurisdiction, and confirms it in his charter concerning
the partition of his dominions; for he appoints, that, in case of any
uncertainty with respect to the right of the several competitors, he whom the
people shall choose, shall succeed to the crown. Capitular, vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the assembly of the nation, distinguished by
the name of coventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly assembled once a year at
least, and frequently twice in the year. One of the most valuable monuments of
the history of France is the treatise of Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheims, de
ordine Palatii. He died A. D. 882. only sixty-eight years after Charlemagne,
and he relates in that short discourse the facts which were communicated to him
by Adalhardus, a minister and confident of Charlemagne. From him we learn that
this great monarch never failed to hold the general assembly of his subjects
every year. In quo placito generalitas universorum majorum tam clericorum quam
laicorum conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii. c. 29. 211. In
these assemblies, matters which related to the general safety and state of the
kingdom were always discussed, before they entered upon any private or less
important business. Ibid. c. 33. p. 213. His immediate successors imitated his
example, and transacted no affair of importance without the advice of their
great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings; the genius of the French government continued
to be in a good measure democratical. The nobles the dignified ecclesiastics,
and the great officers of the crown, were not the only members of the national
council; the people, or the whole body of freemen, either in person, or by
their representatives, had a right to be present in it. Hincmarus, in
describing the manner of holding the general assemblies, says, that if the
weather was favorable, they met in the open air, but, if otherwise, they had
different apartments allotted to them, so that the dignified clergy were
separated from the laity, and the comites vel hujusmodi principes sibimet
honorificabiliter a caetera multitudine segregarentur. Ibid. p. c. 35. p. 114.
Agobardus, archbishop of Lions, thus describes a national council in the year
833, wherein he was present. Qui ubique conventus extitit ex reverentissimis
episcopis, and magnificentissimis viris inlustribus, collegio quoque abatum and
comitum, promiscuaeque aetatis and dignitatis populo. The caetera multitudo of
Hincmarus is the same with the populus of Agobardus, and both describe the
inferior order of freemen, the same who were afterward known in France by the
name of the third estate, and in England by the name of commons. The people, as
well as the members of higher dignity, were admitted to a share of the
legislative power. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803, it is ordained, "that the
question shall be put to the people with respect to every new law, and if they
shall agree to it, they shall confirm it by their signature. Capit. vol. i.
394. There are two capitularia which convey to us a full idea of the part which
the people had in the administration of government. When they felt the weight
of any grievance, they had a right to petition the sovereign for redress. One
of these petitions, in which they desire that ecclesiastics might be exempted
from bearing arms, and from serving in person against the enemy, is still
extant. It is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and expressed in such terms
as could have been used only by men conscious of liberty, and of the extensive
privileges which they possessed. They conclude with requiring him to grant
their demand, if he wished that they should any longer continue faithful
subjects to him. That great monarch, instead of being offended or surprised at
the boldness of their petition, received it in a most gracious manner, and
signified his willingness to comply with it. But sensible that he himself did
not possess legislative authority, he promises to lay the matter before the
next general assembly, that such things as were of common concern to all might
be there considered and established by common consent. Capitul. tom. i. p. 405
-- 409. As the people by their petitions brought matters to be proposed in the
general assembly, we learn from another capitulare the form in which they were
approved there, and enacted as laws. The propositions were read aloud, and then
the people were required to declare whether they assented to them or not. They
signified their assent by crying three times, "We are satisfied," and then the
capitulare was confirmed by the subscription of the monarch, the clergy and the
chief men of the laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 822. It seems probable
from a capitulare of Carolus Calvus, A. D. 851, that the sovereign could not
refuse his assent to what was proposed and established by his subjects in the
general assembly. Tit. ix. 6. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is unnecessary to
multiply quotations concerning the legislative power of the national assembly
of France under the second race, or concerning its rights to determine with
regard to peace and war. The uniform style of the Capitularia is an abundant
confirmation of the former. The reader who desires any farther information with
respect to the latter, may consult Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gouvernement de la
France, tom. iii. p. 87. etc. What has been said with respect to the admission
of the people or their representatives in the supreme assembly merits attention
not only in tracing the progress of the French government, but on account of
the light which it throws upon a similar question agitated in England,
concerning the time when the commons became part of the legislative body in
that kingdom.

NOTE XXXVIII. [PP]. SECT. III.
THAT important change which the constitution of France underwent, when the
legislative power was transferred from the great council of the nation to the
King, has been explained by the French antiquarians with less care, than they
bestow in illustrating other events in their history. For that reason I have
endeavored with the greater attention to trace the steps which led to this
memorable revolution. I shall here add some particulars which tend farther to
illustrate it. The Leges Salicae, the Leges Burgundionum, and other codes
published by the several tribes which settled in Gaul, were general laws
extending to every person, to every province and district where their authority
was acknowledged. But they seem to have become obsolete; and the reason of
their falling into disuse is very obvious. Almost the whole property of the
nation was allodial when these laws were framed. But when the feudal
institutions became general, and gave rise to an infinite variety of questions
peculiar to that species of tenure, the ancient codes were of no use in
deciding with regard to these, because they could not contain regulations
applicable to cases which did not exist at the time when they were compiled.
This considerable change in the nature of property made it necessary to publish
the new regulations contained in the Capitularia. Many of these as is evident
from the perusal of them, were general laws extending to the whole French
nation, in the general assembly in which they were enacted. The weakness of the
greater part of the monarchs of the second race, and the disorder into which
the nation was thrown by the depredations of the Normans, encouraged the barons
to usurp an independent power formerly unknown in France. The nature and extent
of that jurisdiction which they assumed, I have formerly considered. The
political union of the kingdom was at an end, its ancient constitution was
dissolved, and only a feudal relation subsisted between the King and his
vassals. The regal jurisdiction extended no further than the domains of the
crown. Under the last Kings of the second race, these were reduced almost to
nothing. Under the first Kings of the third race, they comprehended little more
than the patrimonial estate of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the crown. Even
with this accession, they continued to be very narrow. Velly. Hist. de France,
tom. iii. p. 32. Many of the most considerable provinces of France did not at
first acknowledge Hugh Capet as a lawful Monarch. There are still extant
several charters, granted during the first years of his reign, with this
remarkable clause in the form of dating the charter; "Deo regnante, rege
expectante," regnante domino nostro Jesu Christo, Francis autem contra jus
regnum usurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Recueil. tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose
title was thus openly disputed, was not in a condition to assert the royal
jurisdiction, or to limit that of the barons.

ALL these circumstances rendered it easy for the barons to usurp the rights of
royalty within their own territories. The capitularia became no less obsolete
than the ancient laws; local customs were every where introduced, and became
the sole rule by which all civil transactions were conducted, and all causes
were tried. The wonderful ignorance, which became general in France, during the
ninth and tenth centuries, contributed to the introduction of customary law.
Few persons, except ecclesiastics, could read; and as it was not possible for
them to have recourse to written laws, either as their guide in business, or
their rule in administering justice, the customary law universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general assembly of the nation seems not to have been
called, nor to have once exerted its legislative authority. Local customs
regulated and decided every thing. A striking proof of this occurs in tracing
the progress of the French jurisprudence. The last of the Capitularia collected
by M. Baluze, was issued in the year 921, by Charles the Simple. An hundred and
thirty years elapsed from that period to the publication of the first ordonance
of the Kings of the third race, contained in the great collection of M.
Lauriere, and the first ordonance which appears to be an act of legislation
extending to the whole kingdom is that of Philip Augustus, A. D. 1190. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 1, 18. During that long period of one hundred and sixty-nine years,
all transactions were directed by local customs, and no addition was made to
the statutory law of France. The ordonances, previous to the reign of Philip
Augustus, contain regulations, the authority of which did not extend beyond the
King's domains.

VARIOUS instances occur of the caution with which the King's of France
ventured at first to exercise legislative authority. M. l'Ab. de Mably produces
an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A. D. 1206, concerning the Jews, who, in that
age, were in some measure the property of the lord in whose territories they
resided. But it is not so much an act of royal power, as a treaty of the King
with the countess of Champagne, and the comte de Dampierre; and the regulations
in it seem to be established not by his authority, but by their consent.
Observat. sur l'hist. de France, ii. p. 355. In the same manner an ordonance of
Louis VIII. concerning the jews, A. D 1223, is a contract between the King and
his nobles, with respect to their manner of treating that unhappy race of men.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The Establissemens of St. Louis, though well adapted to
serve as general laws to the whole kingdom, were not published as such, but
only as a complete code of customary law, to be of authority within the King's
domains The wisdom, the equity and the order conspicuous in that code of St.
Louis, procured it a favorable reception throughout the kingdom. The
veneration due to the virtues and good intentions of its author, contributed
not a little to reconcile the nation to that legislative authority, which the
King began to assume. Soon after his time, the idea of the King's possessing
supreme legislative power became common. If, says Beaumanoir, the King makes
any establishment specially for his own domain, the barons may nevertheless
adhere to their ancient customs; but if the establishment be general, it shall
be current throughout the kingdom, and we ought to believe that such
establishments are made with mature deliberation, and for the general good.
Count de Beauvoisis, c. 48. p. 265. Though the Kings of the third race did not
call the general assembly of the nation, during the long period from Hugh Capet
to Philip the fair, yet they seem to have consulted the bishops and barons who
happened to be present in their court, with respect to any new law which they
published. Examples of this occur Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 and 5. The practice seems
to have continued as late as the reign of St. Louis, when the legislative
authority of the crown was well established. Ordon. tom. 1. p. 58. A. D. 1246.
This attention paid to the barons facilitated the King's acquiring such full
possession of the legislative power, as enabled them afterward to exercise it
without observing that formality.

THE assemblies, distinguished by the name of the States General, were first
called, A. D. 1302, and were held occasionally from that period to the year
1614, since which time they have not been summoned. These were very different
from the ancient assemblies of the French nation under the Kings of the first
and second race. There is no point with respect to which the French
antiquarians are more generally agreed, than in maintaining that the States
General had no suffrage in the passing of laws, and possessed no proper
jurisdiction. The whole tenor of the French history confirms this opinion. The
form of proceeding in the States General was this. The King addressed himself
to the whole body assembled in one place, and laid before them the affairs on
account of which he had summoned them. The deputies of each ^^ the three
orders, of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate, met apart, and prepared
their cahier or memorial, containing their answer to the propositions which had
been made to them, together with the representations which they thought proper
to lay before the King. These answers and representations were considered by
the King in his council, and generally gave rise to an ordonance. These
ordonances were not addressed to the three estates in common. Sometimes the
King addressed an ordonance to each of the estates in particular. Sometimes he
mentioned the assembly of the three estates. Sometimes mention is made only of
the assembly of that estate to which the ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no
mention at all is made of the assembly of estates, which suggested the
propriety of enacting the law. Preface au tom. iii. des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the
States General had only the privilege of advising and remonstrating; the
legislative authority resided in the King alone.

NOTE XXXIX. [QQ.] SECT. III.
IF the parliament of Paris be considered only as the supreme court of justice,
every thing relative to its origin and jurisdiction is clear and obvious. It is
the ancient court of the King's palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and
invested with an extensive and ascertained jurisdiction. The power of this
court, while employed in this part of its functions, is not the object of
present consideration. The pretensions of the parliament to control the
exercise of the legislative authority, and its claim of a right to interpose
with respect to public affairs and the political administration of the
kingdom, lead to enquiries attended with greater difficulty. As the officers
and members of the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated by the King,
were paid by him, and on several occasions were removed by him at pleasure
(Chroniq. Scandeleuse de Louis XI. chez les Mem. de Comines, tom. ii. p. 51.
Edit. de M. Lenglet de Fresnoy), they cannot be considered as representatives
of the people, nor could they claim any share in the legislative power as
acting in their name. We must search for some other source of this high
privilege. The parliament was originally composed of the most eminent persons
in the kingdom. The peers of France, ecclesiastics of the highest order, and
noblemen of illustrious birth were members of it, to whom were added some
clerks and consellors learned in the laws. Pasquier Recherches, p. 44, etc.
Encyclopedie, tom. xii. Art* Parliament, p. 3, 5. A court thus constituted, was
properly a committee of the States General of the Kingdom, and was composed of
these barons and fideles, whom the Kings of France were accustomed to consult
with regard to every act of jurisdiction or legislative authority. It was
natural, therefore, during the intervals between the meetings of the States
General, or during those periods when that assembly was not called, to consult
the parliament, to lay matters of public concern before it, and to obtain its
approbation and concurrence, before any ordonance was published, to which the
people were required to conform. 2. Under the second race of Kings, every new
law was reduced into proper form by the Chancellor of the kingdom, was proposed
by him to the people, and when enacted, was committed to him to be kept among
the public records, that he might give authentic copies of it to all who
should demand them. Hincm. de ord. palate. c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv. tit. xiv.
11. tit. xxxiii. The Chancellor presided in the parliament of Paris at its
first institution. Encyclopedie, tom. iii. art. Chancelier, p. 88. It was
therefore natural for the King to continue to employ him in his ancient
functions of framing, taking into his custody, and publishing the ordonances
which were issued. To an ancient copy of the Capitularia of Charlemagne, the
following words are subjoined. Anno tertio Clementissimi domini nostri Caroli
Augusti, sub ipso anno, haec facta Capitula sunt, and consignata Stephano
comiti, ut haec manifesta faceret Parisiis mallo publico, and illa legere
faceret coram Scabineis, quod ita and fecit, and omnes in uno consenserunt,
quod ipsi voluissent observare usque in posterum, etiam omnes Scabinei,
Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria subter signaverunt. Bouquet Recueil.
tom. v. p. 663. Mallus signifies not only the public assembly of the nation,
but the court of justice held by the comes, or missus dominicus. Scabini were
the judges, or the assessors of the judges in that court. Here then seems to be
a very early instance, not only of laws being published in a court of justice,
but of their being verified or confirmed by the subscription of the judges. If
this was the common practice, it naturally introduced the verifying of edicts
in the parliament of Paris. But this conjecture I propose with that diffidence,
which I felt in all my reasonings concerning the laws and institutions of
foreign nations. 3. This supreme court of justice in France was dignified with
the appellation of parliament, the name by which the general assembly of the
nation was distinguished toward the close of the second race of Kings; and
men, both in reasoning and in conduct, are wonderfully influenced by the
similarity of names. The preserving the ancient names of the magistrates,
established while republican government subsisted in Rome, enabled Augustus and
his successors to assume new powers, with less observation, and greater ease.
The bestowing the same name in France upon two courts, which were extremely
different, contributed not a little to confound their jurisdiction and
functions.

ALL these circumstances concurred in leading the Kings of France to avail
themselves of the parliament of Paris, as the instrument of reconciling the
people to their exercise of legislative authority. The French, accustomed to
see all new laws examined and authorized before they were published, did not
sufficiently distinguish between the effect of performing this in the national
assembly, or in a court appointed by the King. But as that court was composed
of respectable members, and well skilled in the laws of their country, when any
new edict received its sanction, that was sufficient to dispose the people to
implicit submission.

WHEN the practice of verifying and registering the royal edicts in the
parliament of Paris became common, the parliament contended, that this was
necessary in order to give them legal authority. It was established as a
fundamental maxim in French jurisprudence, that no law could be published in
any other manner; that without this formality, no edict or ordonance could have
any effect; that the people were not bound to obey it, and ought not to
consider it as an edict or ordonance until it was verified in the supreme
court, after free deliberation. Roche-flavin des Parlemens de France, 4to. Genesis
1621. p. 921. The parliament, at different times, has with great fortitude and
integrity, opposed the will of their sovereigns, and notwithstanding their
repeated and peremptory requisitions and commands, has refused to verify and
publish such edicts, as it conceived to be oppressive to the people, or
subversive of the constitution of the kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons that
between the year 1562, and the year 1589, the parliament refused to verify more
than a hundred edicts of the Kings. Ibid. 924. Many instances of the spirit and
constancy, with which the parliaments of France opposed pernicious laws, and
asserted their own privileges, are enumerated by Limnaeus Notitiae Regni
Franciae, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain and defend this privilege, bore no
proportion to its importance, or to the courage with which its members asserted
it. When any monarch was determined that an edict should be carried into
execution, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved not to verify or
publish it, he could easily supply this defect by the plenitude of his regal
power. He repaired to the parliament in person, he took possession of his seat
of justice, and commanded the edict to be read, verified, registered, and
published in his presence. Then, according to another maxim of French law, the
King himself being present, neither the parliament, nor any magistrate
whatever, can exercise any authority, or perform any function. Adveniente
Principe, cessat magistratus. Roche-flavin. ibid. p. 928, 929. Encyclopedie,
tom. ix. Art. Lit de Justice, p. 581. Roche-flavin mentions several instances
of Kings who actually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to the residue of the
rights and liberties, transmitted to the French by their ancestors. Pasquier
produces some instances of the same kind. Rech. p. 61. Limnaeus enumerates many
others, which the length to which this note has swelled, prevents me from
inserting at length though they tend greatly to illustrate this important
article in the French history. Thus by an ex^ution of prerogative, which,
though violent, seems to be constitutional, and is justified by innumerable
precedents, all the efforts of the parliament to limit and control the King's
legislative authority, are rendered ineffectual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the constitution or jurisdiction of any
parliament in France, but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon the model
of that most ancient and respectable tribunal, and all my observations
concerning it will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. [RR]. SECT. III.
THE humilitating posture, in which a great Emperor implored absolution, is an
event so singular, that the words in which Gregory himself describes it, merit
a place here, and convey a striking picture of the arrogance of that Pontiff.
Per triduum, ante portam castri, deposito omni regio cultu, miserabiliter,
utpote discalceatus, and laneis indutus, pesistens, non prius cum multo fletu
apostolicae miserationis auxilium, and consolationem implorari destitit, quam
omnes qui ibi aderant, and ad quos rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, and
compassionis misericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus and lacrimis
intercedentes, omnes quidem insolitam nostrae mentis duritiem mirarentur;
nonulli vero in nobis non apostolicae sedis gravitatem. sed quasi tyrannicae
feritatis crudelitatem esse clamarent Epist. Gregor. ap. Memory della Contessa
Matilda de Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756, vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLI. [SS]. SECT. III.
AS I have endeavored in the history to trace the various steps in the
progress of the constitution of the Empire, and to explain the peculiarities in
its policy very fully, it is not necessary to add much by way of illustration.
What appears to be of any importance I shall range under distinct heads.

1. WITH respect to the power, jurisdiction and revenue of the Emperors. A very
just idea of these may be formed by attending to the view which Pfeffel gives
of the rights of the Emperors at two different periods. The first at the close
of the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, according to his enumeration were the
right of conferring all the great ecclesiastical benifices in Germany; of
receiving the revenues of them during a vacancy; of Mort-main, or of succeeding
to the effects of ecclesiastics who died intestate. The right of confirming or
of annulling the elections of the Popes. The right of assembling councils, and
of appointing them to decide concerning the affairs of the church. The right of
conferring the title of King upon their vassals. The right of granting vacant
fiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the Empire, whether arising from
the Imperial domains, from imposts and tolls, from gold or silver mines, from
the taxes paid by the Jews, or from forfeitures. The right of governing Italy
as its proper sovereigns. The right of erecting free cities, and of
establishing fairs in them. The right of assembling the diets of the Empire,
and of fixing the time of their duration. The right of coining money, and of
conferring that privilege on the states of the Empire. The right of
administering both high and low justice within the territories of the different
states. Abrege p. 160. The other period is at the extinction of the Emperors of
the families of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D. 1437. According to the same
author the Imperial prerogatives at that time were the right of conferring all
dignities and titles, except the privilege of being a state of the Empire. The
right of Precis primariae or of appointing once during their reign a dignitary
in each chapter or religious house. The right of granting dispensations with
respect to the age of majority. The right of erecting cities, and of conferring
the privilege of coining money. The right of calling the meetings of the diet,
and of presiding in them. Abrege, etc. p. 507. It were easy to show that M.
Pfeffel is well founded in all these assertions, and to confirm them by the
testimony of the most respectable authors. In the one period the Emperors
appear as mighty sovereigns with extensive prerogatives; in the other as the
heads of a confederacy with very limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased still more than their authority. The
early Emperors, and particularly those of the Saxon line, besides their vast
patrimonial or hereditary territories, possessed an extensive domain both in
Italy and Germany which belonged to them as Emperors. Italy belonged to the
Emperors as their proper kingdom, and the revenues which they drew from it were
very considerable. The first alienations of the Imperial revenue were made in
this country. The Italian cities having acquired wealth, and aspiring at
independance, purchased their liberty from different Emperors, as I have
observed Note XV. The sums which they paid, and the Emperors with whom they
concluded these bargains, are mentioned by Casp. Klockius de Aerario Norimb.
1671. p. 85, etc. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus dissipated all that
remained of the Italian branch of the domain. The German domain lay chiefly
upon the banks of the Rhine, and was under the government of the Counts
Palatine. It is not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to estimate the value
of this ancient domain, which has been so long incorporated with the
territories of different Princes. Some hints with respect to it may be found in
the glossary of Speidelius which he has entitled Speculum
Juridico-Philologico-politico-Historicum Observationum, etc. Norimb. 1673. vol.
i. 679. 1045. a more full account of it is given by Klockius de Aerario, p. 84.
Besides this, the Emperors possessed considerable districts of land lying
intermixed with the estates of the Dukes and barons. They were accustomed to
visit these frequently, and drew from them what was sufficient to support their
court during the time of their residence. Annalistae, ap. Struv. tom. i. 611. A
great part of these were seized by the nobles during the long interregnum, or
during the wars occasioned by the contests between the Emperors and the court
of Rome. At the same time that such encroachments were made on the fixed or
territorial property of the Emperors, they were robbed almost entirely of their
casual revenues. The Princes and barons appropriating to themselves taxes and
duties of every kind, which had usually been paid to them, Pfeffel Abrege, p.
374. The profuse and inconfiderate ambition of Charles IV. squandered whatever
remained of the Imperial revenues after so many defalcations. He, in the year
1376, in order to prevail with the electors to choose his son Wenceslaus King of
the Romans, promised each of them a hundred thousand crowns. But being unable
to pay so large a sum, and eager to secure the election to his son, he
alienated to the three ecclesiastical Electors, and to the Count Palatine, such
countries as still belonged to the Imperial domain on the banks of the Rhine,
and likewise made over to them all the taxes and tolls then levied by the
Emperors in that district. Trithemius, and the author of the Chronicle of
Magdeburgh enumerate the territories and taxes which were thus alienated, and
represent this as the last and fatal blow to the Imperial authority. Struv.
Corp. vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the shreds of the ancient revenues
possessed by the Emperors have been so inconsiderable, that in the opinion of
Speidelius, all that they yield would be so far from defraying the expense of
supporting their household, that they would not pay the charge of maintaining
the posts established in the Empire. Speidelii Speculum, etc. vol. i. p. 680.
These funds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to decrease. Granvelle, the
minister of Charles V, asserted in the year 1546, in presence of several of the
German Princes, that his master drew no money at all from the Empire. Sleid.
History of the Reformation. Land. 1689. p. 372. The same is the case at
present. Traite de droit Public de l'Empire par M. le Coq de Villeray, p. 55.
From the reign of Charles IV, whom Maximilian called the pest of the Empire,
the Emperors have depended entirely on their hereditary dominions, as the only
source of their power and even of their subsistence.

2. THE ancient mode of electing the Emperors, and the various changes which it
underwent, require some illustration. The Imperial crown, as well as those of
most monarchies in Europe, were originally attained by election. An opinion
long prevailed among the antiquaries and public lawyers of Germany, that the
right of choosing the Emperors was vested in the archbishops of Mentz, Cologne
and Treves, the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of
Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edict of Otho III,
confirmed by Gregory the V, about the year 996. But the whole tenor of history
contradicts this opinion. It appears that from the earliest period in the
history of Germany, the person who was to reign over all, was elected by the
sufrage of all. Thus Conrad I. was elected by all the people of the Franks,
says some annalists; by all the princes and chief men, says others; by all the
nation, says others. See their words, Struv. Corp. 211. Conringius de German.
Imper. Repub. Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654. p. 103. In the year 1024, posterior
to the supposed regulations of Otho III, Conrad II, was elected by all the
chief men, and his election was approved and confirmed by the people, Struv.
Corp. 284. At the election of Lotharius II, A. D. 1125, sixty thousand persons
of all ranks were present. He was named by the chief men, and their nomination
was approved by the people. Struv. ibid. p. 357. The first author who mentions
the seven Electors is Martinus Polonus, who flourished in the reign of
Frederick II, which ended A. D. 1250. We find that in all the ancient elections
to which I have referred, the Princes of greatest power and authority were
allowed by their countrymen to name the person whom they wished to appoint
Emperor, and the people approved or disapproved of their nomination. This
privilege of voting first is called by the German lawyers the right of
Praetaxation. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was the first origin of the
exclusive right which the Electors acquired. The Electors possessed the most
extensive territories of any Princes in the Empire; all the great offices of
the state were in their hands by hereditary right; as soon as they obtained or
engrossed so much influence in the election, as to be allowed the right of
praetaxation, it became unnecessary for the inferior ecclesiastics and barons
to attend, when they had no other function but that of confirming the deed of
these more powerful Princes, by their assent. During times of turbulence, they
could not resort to the place of election, without a numerous retinue of armed
vassals, the expense of which they were obliged to defray out of their own
revenues. The rights of the seven Electors were supported by all the
descendants and allies of their powerful families, who shared in the splendour
and influence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing privilege. Pfeffel.
Abrege, p. 376. The seven Electors were considered as the representatives of
all the orders, which composed the highest class of German nobility. There were
three archbishops, chancellors of the three great districts into which the
Empire was anciently divided; one King; one Duke; one Marquis; and one Count.
All these circumstances contributed to render the introduction of this
considerable innovation into the constitution of the Germanick body, extremely
easy. Every thing of importance, relating to this branch of the political state
of the Empire, is well illustrated by Onuphrius Panvinius an Augustinian Monk
of Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles V. His treatise, if we make some
allowance for that partiality which he expresses in favor of the powers which
the Popes claimed in the Empire has the merit of being one of the first works
in which a controverted point in history is examined with critical precision,
and with a proper attention to that evidence which is derived from records, or
the testimony of contemporary historians. It is inserted by Goldastus in his
Politica Imperialia, p. 2.

AS the Electors have engrossed the sole right of choosing the Emperors, they
have assumed likewise that of deposing them. This high power the Electors have
not only presumed to claim, but have ventured, in more than one instance, to
exercise. In the year 1298, a part of the Electors desposed Adolphus of Nassau
and substituted Albert of Austria in his place. The reasons on which they found
their sentence, show that this deed flowed from factious, not from
public-spirited motives. Struv. Corp. vol. i. 540. In the first year of the
fifteenth century, the Electors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed the Imperial
crown on the head of Rupert Elector Palatine. The act of deposition is still
extant. Goldasti Constit. vol. i. 379. It is pronounced in the name and by the
authority of the Electors, and confirmed by several prelates and barons of the
Empire, who were present. These exertions of the electoral power demonstrate
that the Imperial authority was sunk very low.

THE other privileges of the electors, and the rights of the electoral college
are explained by the writers on the public law in Germany.

3. WITH respect to the diets or general assemblies of the Empire, it would be
necessary, if my object were to write a particular history of Germany, to enter
into a minute detail, concerning the forms of assembling it, the persons who
have a right to be present, their division into several Colleges or Benches,
the objects of their deliberations, the mode in which they carry on their
debates or give their suffrages, and the authority of their decrees or
recesses. But in a general history it is sufficient to observe, that,
originally, the diets of the Empire were perfectly the same with the assemblies
of March and of May, held by the Kings of France. They met, at least, once a
year. Every freeman had a right to be present. They were assemblies in which a
monarch deliberated with his subjects, concerning their common interest.
Arumaeus de comitiis Romans German Imperii, 4to. Jenae. 1660, cap. 7. No. 20,
etc. But when the Princes, dignified ecclesiastics, and barons, acquired
territorial and independent jurisdiction, the diet became an assembly of the
separate states, which formed the confederacy of which the Emperor was head.
While the constitution of the Empire remained in its primitive form, attendance
on the diets was a duty, like the other services due from feudal subjects to
their sovereign, which the members were bound to perform in person; and if any
member who had a right to be present in the diet neglected to attend in person,
he not only lost his vote, but was liable to an heavy penalty. Arumaeus de
Commit. c. 5. No. 40. Whereas, from the time that the members of the diet became
independent states, the right of suffrage was annexed to the territory or
dignity, not to the person. The members, if they could not, or would not attend
in person, might send their deputies, as Princes send ambassadors, and they
were entitled to exercise all the rights belonging to their constitutients.
Ibid. No. 42, 46, 49. By degrees, and upon the same principle of considering
the diet as an assembly of independent states, in which each confederate had
the right of suffrage, if any member possessed more than one of those states or
characters which entitle to a seat in the diet, he was allowed a proportional
number of suffrages. Pfeffel, Abrege 622. From the same cause the Imperial
cities, as soon as they became free, and acquired supreme and independent
jurisdiction within their own territories, were received as members of the
diet. The powers of the diet extend to every thing relative to the common
concern of the Germanick body, or that can interest or affect it as a
confederacy. The diet takes no cognizance of the interior administration in the
different States, unless that happens to disturb or threaten the general safety.

4. WITH respect to the Imperial chamber, the jurisdiction of which has been
the great source of order and tranquillity in Germany, it is necessary to
observe, that this court was instituted in order to put an end to the
calamities occasioned by private wars in Germany. I have already traced the
rise and progress of this practice, and pointed out its pernicious effects as
fully as their extensive influence during the middle ages merited. In Germany,
private wars seem to have been more frequent and productive of worse
consequences than in the other countries of Europe. There are obvious reasons
for this. The nobility of Germany were extremely numerous, and the causes of
their dissension multiplied in proportion. The territorial jurisdiction which
the German nobles acquired, was more complete than that possessed by their
order in other nations. They became, in reality, independent powers, and they
claimed all the privileges of that character. The long interregnum accustomed
them to an uncontrouled license, and led them to forget that subordination
which is necessary in order to maintain public tranquillity. At the time when
the other monarchs of Europe began to acquire such an increase of power and
revenues, as added new force to their government, the authority and revenues of
the Emperors continued gradually to decline. The diets of the Empire, which
alone had authority to judge between such mighty barons, and power to enforce
its decisions, met very seldom. Conring. Acroamata, p. 234. The diets when they
did assemble were often composed of several thousand members, Chronic,
Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546, and were mere tumultuary assemblies,
ill-qualified to decide concerning any question of right. The session of the
diets continued only two or three days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they
had no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in the smallest degree
intricate. Thus Germany was left, in some measure, without any court of
judicature, capable of repressing the evils of private war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in other countries of Europe in order
to restrain this practice, and which I have described Note XXI. were tried in
Germany with little effect. The confederacies of the nobles and of the cities,
and the division of Germany into various circles, which I mentioned in that
Note, were found likewise insufficient. As a last remedy, the Germans had
recourse to arbiters whom they called Austregae. The barons and states in
different parts of Germany joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all controversies, that might arise between them, to the
determination of Austregae, and to submit to their sentences as final. These
arbiters are named sometimes in the treaty of convention, an instance of which
occurs in Ludewig Reliquae Manuscr. omnis aevi, vol. 2. 212. sometimes they
were chosen by mutual consent; sometimes they were appointed by neutral
persons; and sometimes the choice was left to be decided by lot. Datt. de Pace
publica Imperii, lib. i. cap. 27. No 60, etc. Speidelius Speculum, etc. voc.
Austreg. p. 95. Upon the introduction of this practice, the public tribunals of
justice became, in a great measure, useless, and were almost entirely deserted.

IN order to re-establish the authority of government, Maximilian instituted
the Imperial chamber, at the period which I have mentioned. This tribunal
consisted originally of a president, who was always a nobleman of the first
order, and of sixteen judges. The president was appointed by the Emperor, and
the judges, partly by him, and partly by the States, according to forms which
it is unnecessary to describe. A sum was imposed with their own consent, on the
States of the Empire, for paying the salaries of the judges, and officers in
this court. The Imperial chamber was established first at Francfort on the
Maine. During the reign of Charles V. it was removed to Spires, and continued
in that city above a century and a half. It is now fixed at Wetzlar. This court
takes cognizance of all questions concerning civil right between the States of
the Empire, and passes judgment in the last resort, and without appeal. To it
belongs, likewise, the privilege of judging in criminal causes, which may be
considered as connected with the preservation of the public peace. Pfeffel
Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or jurisdiction, together with
such as respect the territories, which hold of the Empire in Italy, belong
properly to the jurisdiction of the Aulick council. This tribunal was formed
upon tihe model of the ancient court of the palace instituted by the Emperors
of Germany. It depended not upon the States of the Empire, but upon the
Emperor; he having the right of appointing at pleasure all the judges of whom
it is composed. Maximilian, in order to procure some compensation for the
diminution of his authority, by the powers vested in the Imperial chamber,
prevailed on the diet A. D. 1512. to give its consent to the establishment of
the Aulick council. Since that time, it has been a great object of policy in
the court of Vienna to extend the jurisdiction, and support the authority of
the Aulick council, and to circumscribe and weaken those of the Imperial
chamber. The tedious forms and dilatory proceeding of the Imperial chamber have
furnished the Emperors with pretexts for doing so. Lites Spirae, according to
the witticism of a German lawyer, spirant, sed nunquam exspirant. Such delays
are unavoidable in a court composed of members named by States, jealous of each
other. Whereas the judges of the Aulick council, depending on one master, and
being responsible to him alone, are more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf. de
Statu Imper. German. cap. v. 20. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 581.

NOTE XLII. [TT]. SECT. III.
THE description which I have given of the Turkish government is conformable to
the accounts of the most intelligent travelers who have visited that Empire.
The count de Marsigli, in his treatise concerning the military state of the
Turkish Empire, chapter vi. and the Author of observations on the religion, laws,
government and manners of the Turks, published at London 1768, vol i. p. 81.
differ from other writers who have described the political constitution of that
powerful monarchy. As they had opportunity, during their long residence in
Turkey, to observe the order and justice conspicuous in several departments of
administration, they seem unwilling to admit that it should be denominated a
despotism. But when the form of government in any country is represented to be
despotick, this does not suppose that the power of the monarch is continually
exerted in acts of violence, injustice and cruelty. Under government of every
species, unless when some frantic tyrant happens to hold the scepter, the
ordinary administration must be conformable to the principles of justice, and
if not active in promoting the welfare of the people, cannot certainly have
their destruction for its object. A state, in which the sovereign possesses the
absolute command of a vast military force, together with the disposal of an
extensive revenue; in which the people have no privileges, and no part eitheir
immediate or remote in legislation; in which there is no body of hereditary
nobility, jealous of their own rights and distinctions, to stand as an
intermediate order between the Prince and People, cannot be distinguished by
any name but that of a despotism. The restraints, however, which I have
mentioned arising from the Capiculy, and from religion, are powerful. But they
are not such as change the nature or denomination of the government. When a
despotick Prince employs an armed force to support his authority, he commits
the supreme power to their hands. The Praetorian bands in Rome, dethroned,
murdered, and exalted Princes, in the same wanton manner with the soldiery of
the Port at Constantinople. But notwithstanding this, the Roman Emperors have
been considered by all political writers as possessing despotick power.

NOTE XLIII. [UU.] SECT. III.
THE institution, the discipline, and the privileges of the Jani^aries are
described by all the authors who give any account of the Turkish government.
The manner in which enthusiasm was employed in order to inspire them with
courage is thus related by Prince Cantemir, "When Amurath I. had formed them
into a body, he sent them to Haji Bektash a Turkish Saint, famous for his
miracles and prophecies, desiring him to give them a banner to pray to God for
their success, and to give them a name. The saint, when they appeared in his
presence, put the sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads, and says, Let
them be called Yeugicheri. Let their countenance be ever bright, their hands
victorious, their sword keen, let their spear always hang over the heads of
their enemies, and wherever they go, may they return with a shining face.
History of the Ottoman Empire, p. 38. The number of Janissaries, at the first
institution of the body, was not considerable. Under Solomon, in the year 1521,
they amounted to twelve thousand, Since that time their number has greatly
increased, Marsigli, Etat. etc. chapter 16. p. 68. Though Solomon possessed such
abilities and authority as to restrain this formidable body within the bounds
of obedience, yet its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans was, even in
that age, foreseen by sagacious observers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompined
M. d'Aramon ambassador from Henry II. of France to Solomon, published an
account of his travels, in which he describes and celebrates the discipline of
the Janissaries, but at the same time predicts that they would, one day, become
formidable to their masters, and act the same part at Constantinople* as the
Praetorian bands had done at Rome. Collection of Voyages from the Earl of
Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLIV. [XX]. SECT. III.
SOLOMON the Magnificent, to whom the Turkish historians have given the surname
of Ca^^ni, or instituter of rules, first brought the finances and military
establishment of the Turkish Empire into a regular form. He divided the
military force into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Port. which was properly
the standing army, and Serrataculy or soldiers appointed to guard the
frontiers. The chief strength of the latter consisted of those who held
Timariots and Ziams. These were portions of land granted to certain persons for
life, in much the same manner as the military fiefs among the nations of
Europe, in return for which military service was performed. Solomon, in his
Ca^^^ Name or book of regulations, fixed with great accuracy the extent of
these lands in each province of his Empire, appointed the precise number of
soldiers each person who held a Timariot or a Ziam should bring into the field,
and establish the pay which they should receive while engaged in service. Count
Marsigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have been extracts from this book of regulations,
and it appears that the ordinary establishment of the Turkish army exceeded an
hundred and fifty thousand men. When these are added to the soldiery of the
Port, they formed a military power which vastly exceeded what any Christian
State could command. Marsigli Etat Militaire, etc. p. 136. Rycaut's state of
the Ottoman Empire, book iii. chapter 2. As Solomon, during his active reign, was
engaged so constantly in war, that his troops were always in the field, the
Serrataculy became almost equal to the Janissaries themselves in discipline and
valor.

IT is not surprising, then, that the authors of the sixteenth century should
represent the Turks as far superior to the Christians, both in the knowledge
and in the practice of the art of war. Guicciardini informs us, that the
Italians learned the art of fortifying towns from the Turks. Histor. lib. xv.
p. 266. Busbequius, who was ambassador from Ferdinand to Solomon, and who had
opportunity to observe the state both of the Christian and Turkish armies,
published a discourse concerning the best manner of carrying on war against the
Turks, in which he points out at great length the immense advantages which the
infidels possessed with respect to discipline, and military improvements of
every kind. Busbequii opera edit. Elzevir. p. 393, etc. The Testimony of other
authors might be added, if the matter were, in any degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illustrations, I ought to explain the
reason of two omissions in them; one of which it is necessary to mention on my
own account, the other to obviate an objection to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning the progress of government,
manners, literature, and commerce during the middle ages, as well as in my
delineations of the political constitution of the different States of Europe at
the opening of the sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned M. de Voltaire,
who, in his Essay sur l'histoire generale, has reveiwed the same period, and
has treated of all these subjects. This does not proceed from inattention to
the works of that extraordinary man, whose genius, no less enterprizing than
universal, has attempted almost every different species of literary
composition. In many of these he excels, In all if he had left religion
untouched, he is instructive and agreeable. But as he seldom imitates the
example of modern historians in citing the authors from whom they derived their
information. I could not, with propriety, appeal to his authority in
confirmation of any doubtful or unknown fact. I have often, however, followed
him as my guide in these researches; and he has not only pointed out the facts
with respect to which it was of importance to inquire, but the conclusions
which it was proper to draw from them. If he had, at the same time, mentioned
the books which relate these particulars, a great part of my labor would have
been unnecessary, and many of his readers who now consider him only as an
entertaining and lively writer, would find that he is a learned and
well-informed historian.

AS to the other omission; every intelligent reader must have observed, that I
have not entered, either in the historical part of this volume, or in the
Proofs and Illustrations, into the same detail with respect to the ancient laws
and customs of the British kingdoms, as concerning those of the other European
nations. As the capital facts with regard to the progress of government and
manners in their own country are known to most of my readers, such a detail
appeared to me to be less essential. Such facts and observations, however, as
were necessary toward completing my design in this part of the work, I have
mentioned under the different articles which are the subjects of my
disquisitions. The state of government, in all the nations of Europe, having
been nearly the same during several ages, nothing can tend more to illustrate
the progress of the English constitution, than a careful inquiry into the laws
and customs of the kingdoms on the continent. This source of information has
been too much neglected by the English antiquarians and lawyers. Filled with
admiration of that happy constitution now established in Great Britain, they
have been more attentive to its forms and principles, than to the condition and
ideas of remote times, which, in almost every particular, differ from the
present. While engaged in perusing the laws, charters, and early historians of
the continental kingdoms, I have often been led to think that an attempt to
illustrate the progress of the English jurisprudence and policy, by a
comparison with those of other kingdoms in a similar situation, would be of
great utility, and might throw much light on some points which are now obscure,
and decide others, which have been long controverted.

THE END OF THE PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
TO THE READER.
[If the reader of mere English finds his patience almost exhausted by the
necessary multiplicity of Latin quotations in this volume, the Editor takes the
liberty of observing that in the subsequent part of this history, he will find
no foreign languages; but on the contrary, be continually delighted with a
delectable va^^egation of the most pleasing, elegant, and sublime beauties of
the English language, decorating and depicting those grand events which dignify
this history of mankind during the age of Charles the Fifth.]

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF CHARLES THE FIFTH, EMPEROR OF GERMANY, AND OF ALL
THE KINGDOMS AND STATES IN EUROPE, DURING HIS AGE.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I.
CHARLES V. was born at Ghent* on the twenty-fourth day of February, Birth of
Charles V.
in the year one thousand five hundred. His father, Philip the Handsome,
Archduke of Austria, was the son of the Emperor Maximilian, and of Mary, the
only child of Charles the Bold, the last prince of the house of Burgundy. His
mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella, king and
queen of Castile and Aragon.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened the way for this young prince to
the inheritance of more extensive dominions, His dominions, and the events by
which he acquired them.
than any European monarch, since Charles the Great, had possessed. Each of his
ancestors had acquired kingdoms or provinces, toward which their prospect of
succession was extremely remote, The rich possessions of Mary of Burgundy were
destined for another family, she having been contracted by her father to the
only son of Lewis XI. of France; but that capricious monarch, indulging his
hatred to her family, chose rather to strip her of part of her territories by
force, than to secure the whole by marriage; and by this misconduct, fatal to
his posterity, threw^ (...) the Netherlands and Franche Comte into the hands of
a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II. of Castile, far from having any
prospect of that noble inheritance, which she transmitted to her grandson,
passed the early part of her life in obscurity and indigence; but the
Castilians, exasperated against her brother Henry IV. an ill-advised and
vicious prince, publicly charged him with impotence, and his queen with
adultery; and, upon his demise, rejecting Joanna, whom the king had uniformly,
and even on his deathbed, owned to be his lawful daughter, and whom an
assembly of the states had acknowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed Isabella on the throne of
Castile. Ferdinand owed the crown of Aragon to the unexpected death of his
elder brother, and acquired the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by violating the
faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of blood. To all these kingdoms,
Christopher Columbus, by an effort of genius and of intrepidity, the boldest
and most successful that is recorded in the annals of mankind, added a new
world, the wealth of which was one considerable source of the power and
grandeur of the Spanish monarchs.

DON John, the only son of Ferdinand and Isabella, and their eldest daughter,
the queen of Portugal, Philip and Joanna, his father and mother, visit Spain.
being cut off in the flower of youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and
her posterity. But as her husband, the Archduke, was a stranger to the
Spaniards, it was thought expedient to invite him into Spain, that by residing
among them, he might accustom himself to their laws and manners; and it was
expected that the Cortes, or assembly of states, whose authority was then so
great in Spain, that no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless it
received their sanction, would acknowledge his right of succession, together
with that of the Infanta, his wife. 1502.
Philip and Joanna, passing through France, in their way to Spain, were
entertained in that kingdom with the utmost magnificence. The archduke did
homage to Lewis XII. for the earldom of Flanders, and took his seat as a peer
of the realm in the parliament of Paris. They were received in Spain with every
mark of honor that the parental affection of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the
respect of their subjects could devise; and their title to the crown was soon
after acknowledged by the Cortes of both kingdoms.

BUT amidst these outward appearances of satisfaction and joy, Ferdinand
jealous of Philip's power.
some secret uneasiness preyed upon the mind of each of these princes. The
stately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish court was so burdensome to
Philip, a prince young, gay, affable, fond of society and of pleasure, that he
soon began to express a desire of returning to his native country, the manners
of which were more suited to his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declining
health of his queen, with whose life his right to the government of Castile
must cease, easily foresaw, that a prince of Philip's disposition, and who
already discovered an extreme impatience to reign, would never consent to his
retaining any degree of authority in that kingdom; and the prospect of this
diminution of his power, awakened the jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural to a mother, Isabella's
solicitude, with respect to him and her daughter.
the indifference and neglect with which the Archduke treated her daughter, who
was destitute of all those beauties of person, and all those accomplishments of
mind, which fix the affections of an husband. Her understanding, always weak,
was often disordered. She doated on Philip with such an excess of childish and
impertinent fondness, as excited disgust rather than affection. Her jealousy,
for which her husband's behavior gave her too much cause, was proportioned to
her love, and often broke out in the most extravagant actions. Isabella, though
sensible of her defects, could not help pitying her condition, which was soon
rendered altogether deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt resolution of setting
out in the middle of winter for Flanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella
entreated him not to abandon his wife to grief and melancholy, which might
prove fatal to her, as she was near the time of her delivery. Joanna conjured
him to put off his journey for three days only, that she might have the
pleasure of celebrating the festival of Christmas in his company. Ferdinand,
after representing the imprudence of his leaving Spain, before he had time to
become acquainted with the genius, or to gain the affections of the people, who
were one day to be his subjects, besought him at least not to pass through
France, with which kingdom he was then at open war. Philip, without regarding
either the dictates of humanity, or the maxims of prudence, persisted in his
purpose, and on the twenty-second of December set out for the Low Countries, by
the way of France Petri Martyris Anglerii Epistolae, 250, 253.
.

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna sunk into a deep and sullen
melancholy Id. Epist. 255.
, Disorder of Joanna's mind. Birth of Ferdinand, afterward Emperor.
and while she was in that situation bore Ferdinand her second son, for whom
the power of his brother Charles afterward procured the kingdoms of Hungary
and Bohemia, and to whom he at last transmitted the Imperial scepter. Joanna
was the only person, in Spain, who discovered no joy at the birth of this
prince. Insensible to that, as well as to every other pleasure, she was wholly
occupied with the thoughts of returning to her husband; nor did she, in any
degree, recover tranquillity of mind, 1504.
till she arrived at Brussels next year Mariana, lib. 27, c. 11, 14. Flechier
Vie de Ximen. 1. 191.
.

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an interview with Lewis the XII. and
signed a treaty with him, by which he hoped that all the differences between
France and Spain would be finally terminated. But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at
that time, were extremely prosperous in Italy, where the superior genius of
Gonsalvo de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed, on every occasion, over the
arms of France, did not pay the least regard to what his son-in-law had
concluded, and carried on hostilities with greater ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken any part in the affairs of
Spain, waiting, in quiet, Death of Isabella.
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella should open the way to one
of their thrones. The latter of these events was not far distant. The untimely
death of her children had made a deep impression on the mind of Isabella, and
as she could derive but little consolation for the losses she had sustained
either from her daughter Joanna, whose infirmities daily increased, or from her
son-in-law, who no longer preserved even the appearance of a decent respect
toward that unhappy princess, her spirits and health began gradually to
decline, and, after languishing some months, she died at Medina del Campo, on
the twenty-sixth of November, one thousand five hundred and four. She was no
less eminent for virtue than for wisdom; and whether we consider her behavior
as a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, she is justly entitled to the high
encomiums bestowed on her by the Spanish historians P. Mart. Ep. 279.
.

A FEW weeks before her death, she made her last will, Her will, appointing
Ferdinand regent of Castile.
and being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to assume the reins of government
into her own hands, and having no inclination to commit them to Philip, with
whose conduct she was extremely dissatisfied, she appointed Ferdinand regent or
administrator of the affairs of Castile till her grandson Charles attained the
age of twenty; she bequeathed to him likewise one half of the revenues that
should arise from the Indies, together with the grand masterships of the three
military orders; dignities that rendered those who possessed them almost
independent, and which Isabella had, for that reason, annexed to the crown P.
Martyr. Ep. 277 Mar. Hist. lib 28. c. 11. Ferreras Hist Gener. d'Espagne, tom.
viii. 263.
. But before she signed a deed so favorable to Ferdinand, she obliged him to
swear that he would not, by a second marriage, or by any other means, endeavor
to deprive Joanna, or their posterity, of their right of succession to any of
his kingdoms Mar. Hist. lib. 28, C. 14.
.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdinand resigned the title of king of
Castile, and commanded Joanna and Philip to be publicly proclaimed the
sovereigns of that kingdom. But, at the same time, he assumed the character of
Regent, Ferdinand acknowledged as Regent by the Cortes.

1505.


in consequence of Isabella's testament, and not long after he prevailed on the
Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to that office. This, however, he
did not procure without difficulty, nor without discovering such symptoms of
alienation and disgust among the Castilians as filled him with great
uneasiness. The union of Castile and Aragon, The Castilians dissatisfied.
for almost thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the ancient and
hereditary enmity which subsisted between the natives of these kingdoms, that
the Castilian pride could submit, without murmuring, to the government of a
king of Aragon. Ferdinand's own character, with which the Castilians were well
acquainted, was far from rendering his authority desirable. Suspicious,
discerning, severe and parsimonious, he was accustomed to observe the most
minute actions of his subjects with a jealous attention, and to reward their
highest services with little liberality; and they were now deprived of
Isabella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her Castilian subjects,
often tempered his austerity, or rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his
government were especially odious to the Grandees; for that artful prince,
sensible of the dangerous privileges conferred upon them by the feudal
institutions, had endeavored, by extending the royal jurisdiction, by
protecting their injured vassals, by increasing the immunities of cities, and
by other measures equally prudent, to curb their exorbitant power Marian. lib.
28. c. 12.
. From all these causes, a formidable party among the Castilians united against
Ferdinand, and though those who composed it, had not hitherto taken any public
step in opposition to him, he plainly saw, that upon the least encouragement
from their new king, they would proceed to the most violent extremities.

NOR was there less agitation in the Netherlands upon receiving the accounts of
Isabella's death, and of Ferdinand's having assumed the government of Castile.
Philip endeavors to obtain the government of Castile.
Philip was not of a temper tamely to suffer himself to be supplanted by the
unnatural ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities, and the
nonage of Charles rendered them incapable of government, he, as a husband, was
the proper guardian of his wife, and, as a father, the natural tutor of his
son. Nor was it sufficient to oppose to these just rights, and to the
inclination of the people of Castile, the authority of a testament, the
genuineness of which was perhaps doubtful, and its contents certainly
iniquitous. A keener edge was added to Philip's resentment, and new vigor
infused into his councils by the arrival of Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's
ambassador at the Imperial court, but upon the first notice of Isabella's death
repaired to Brussels, flattering himself that in the court of a young and
liberal prince, he might attain to power and honors, which he could never hope
for in the service of an old and frugal master. He had early paid court to
Philip, during his residence in Spain, with such assiduity as entirely gained
his confidence; and having been trained to business under Ferdinand, could
oppose his schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not inferior to those
for which that monarch was distinguished Z^rita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p.
12.
.

BY his advice, ambassadors were dispatched to require Ferdinand to retire into
Aragon, He requires Ferdinand to resign the regency.
and to resign the government of Castile to those persons whom Philip should
entrust with it till his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Castilian nobles
as had discovered any dissatisfaction with Ferdinand's administration, were
encouraged, by every method, to oppose it. At the same time a treaty was
concluded with Lewis XII. by which Philip flattered himself that he had secured
the friendship and assistance of that monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts of address and policy, in order to
retain the power of which he had got possession. By means of Conchillos, an
Aragonian gentleman, he entered into a private negotiation with Joanna, and
prevailed on that weak princess to confirm, by her authority, his right to the
regency. But this intrigue did not escape the penetrating eye of Don John
Manuel; Joanna's letter of consent was intercepted; Conchillos was thrown into
a dungeon; and she herself confined to an apartment in the palace, and all her
Spanish domestics secluded from her presence P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Anales
vi. p. 14
.

THE mortification which the discovery of this scheme occasioned to Ferdinand,
Ferdinand abandoned by the Castilian nobles.
was much increased by his observing the progress that Philip's emissaries made
in Castile. Some of their nobles retired to their castles; others to their
towns in which they had influence; they formed themselves into confederacies,
and began to assemble their vassals. Ferdinand's court was almost totally
deserted; not a person of distinction but Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, the
duke of Alva, and the marquis of Denia, remaining there; while the houses of
Philip's ambassadors were daily crowded with those of the highest rank.

^^^ASPERATED at this universal defection, and piqued, perhaps, Ferdinand (...)
to ^^^try, in order to exclude his daughter from the throne.
at seeing all his schemes defeated by a younger politician Ferdinand resolved,
in defiance of the law of nature and of decency, to deprive his daughter and
her posterity of the crown of Castile, rather than renounce the regency of that
kingdom. His plan for accomplishing this was no less bold, than the intention
itself was wicked. He demanded in marriage Joanna, the supposed daughter of
Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy, Isabella's right to the crown of
Castile was founded; and by reviving the claim of this princess, in opposition
to which he himself had formerly led armies, and fought battles, he hoped once
more to get possession of the throne of that kingdom. But Emanuel, king of
Portugal, in whose dominions Joanna resided, being married to one of
Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella, refused his consent to that unnatural match;
and the unhappy princess herself, having lost, by being long immured in a
convent, all relish for the objects of ambition, discovered no less aversion to
it Sandov. Hist. of Civil Wars in Castile. Land. 1655. p. 5. Zurita Anal^s de
Aragon, tom vi. p. 113.
.

THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambition, were not exhausted. Marries a
niece of the French King
Upon meeting with a repulse in Portugal, he turned toward France, and sought
in marriage German de Foix, a daughter of the viscount of N^^bonne, and of
Mary, the sister of Lewis XII. The wa^ which that monarch had carried on
against Ferdinand in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he listened with joy
to a proposal, which furnished him with an honorable pretense of concluding
peace: And though no prince was ever more remarkable than Ferdinand for making
all his passions bend to the maxims of interest, or become subservient to the
purposes of ambition, yet so vehement was his resentment against his
son-in-law, that in order to be revenged of him, by detaching Lewis from his
interest, and in order to gain a chance of excluding him from his hereditary
throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexed to it, he was ready once more to
divide Spain into separate kingdoms, though the union of these was the great
glory of the reign, and had been the chief object of his ambition; he consented
to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the French faction to their possessions and
honors; and submitted to the ridicule of marrying, inanadvanced age, a
princess of eighteen P Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariana lib. 28. c. 16. 17.
.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived Philip of his only ally, and
threatened him with the loss of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful alarm to him,
and convinced Don John Manuel, that there was now a necessity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spain P. Mart. Ep 393.
. He accordingly instructed the Flemish ambassadors, in the court of Spain, to
testify the strong desire which their master had of terminating all differences
between him and Ferdinand, in an amicable manner, and his willingness to
consent to any conditions that would re-establish the friendship which ought to
subsist between a father and a son-in-law. A treaty between Ferdinand and
Philip.
Ferdinand, though he had made and broken more treaties than any prince of any
age, was apt to confide so far in the sincerity of other men, as to be always
extremely fond of a negotiation. He listened with eagerness to these
declarations, and soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in which it was
stipulated, that the government of Castile should be carried on in the joint
names of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; Nov. 24.
and that the revenues of the crown, and the right of conferring offices should
be shared between Ferdinand and Philip by an equal division Zurita Anales de
Aragon, vi. 19. P. Mart. Ep 293, 294.
.

NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's thoughts than to observe this
treaty. 1506. Philip and Joanna set sail for Spain.
His sole intention in proposing it was to amuse Ferdinand, and to prevent him
from taking any measures for obstructing his voyage into Spain. It had that
effect Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not for some time suspect his
design; and though, when he perceived it, he prevailed on the king of France
not only to remonstrate against the archduke's journey, but to threaten
hostilities if he undertook it, though he solicited the duke of Gueldres to
attack his son-in-law's dominions in the low Countries, Philip and his consort
nevertheless set sail with a numerous fleet, and a good body of land forces.
They were obliged by a violent tempest to take shelter in England, where Henry
VII. in compliance with Ferdinand's soliciations, detained them upwards of
three months Ferrer. Hist. viii, 285.
; at last they were permitted to depart, and after a more prosperous voyage,
April 2.
they arrived in safety at Corrunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand attempt, as
he had once intended, to oppose their landing by force of arms.

THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged hitherto to conceal or dissemble
their sentiments, The nobility of Castile declare for Philip.
now declared openly in favor of Philip. From every corner of the kingdom,
persons of the highest rank, with numerous retinues of their vassals, repaired
to their new king. The treaty of Salamanca was universally condemned, and all
agreed to exclude from the government of Castile a prince, who, by consenting
to disjoin Aragon and Naples from that crown, discovered so little concern for
its true interests. Ferdinand, meanwhile, abandoned by almost all the
Castilians, disconcerted by their revolt, and uncertain whether he would
peaceably relinquish his power, or take arms in order to maintain it, earnestly
solicited an interview with his son-in-law, who, by advice of Manuel,
studiously avoided it. Convinced, at last, by seeing the number and zeal of
Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was in vain to think of resisting
such a torrent, he consented, by a treaty, to resign the regency of Castile
into the hands of Philip, June 27. Ferdinand resigns the regency of Castile,
and retires to Aragon.
to retire into his hereditary dominions of Aragon, and to rest satisfied with
the masterships of the military orders, and that share of the revenue of the
Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to him. Though an interview between the
princes was no longer necessary, it was agreed to on both sides from motives of
decency. Philip repaired to the place appointed, with a splendid retinue of the
Castilian nobles, and a considerable body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared
without any pomp, attended by a few followers, mounted on mules, and unarmed.
On that occasion Don John Manuel had the pleasure of displaying before the
monarch whom he had deserted, the extensive influence he had acquired over his
new master: while Ferdinand suffered, in presence of his former subjects, the
two most cruel mortifications which an artful and ambitious prince can feel;
being at once overreached in conduct, and stripped of power. Zurita Anales de
Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19. 20. P Mart. Ep. 304, 305, etc.


NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and hoping that some favorable
accident would soon open the way for his return into Castile, July.
he took care to protest, though with great secrecy, that the treaty concluded
with his son-in-law, being extorted by force, ought to be deemed void of all
obligations Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hist. viii. 290.
.

PHILIP took possession of his new authority with a youthful joy. The unhappy
Joanna, Philip and Joana acknowledged as king and queen by the Cortes.
from whom he derived it, remained, during all these contests, under the
dominion of a deep melancholy; she was seldom allowed to appear in public; her
father, though he had often desired it, was refused access to her; and Philip's
chief object was to prevail on the Cortes to declare her incapable of
government, that an undivided power might be lodged in his hands, till his son
should attain to full age. But such was the partial attachment of the
Castilians to their native princess, that though Manuel had the address to gain
some members of the Cortes assembled at Valladolid, and others were willing to
gratify their new sovereign in his first request, the great body of the
representatives refused their consent to a declaratation which they thought so
injurious to the blood of their monarchs Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 75.
. They were unanimous, however, in acknowledging Joanna and Philip, queen and
king of Castile, and their son Charles, prince of Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event during Philip's administration. Death
of Philip.
A fever, occasioned by a debauch, put an end to his life in the twenty-eighth
year of his age, Sept. 25.
not having enjoyed the regal dignity, which he had been so eager to obtain,
full three months Marian. lib. 28. c. 23.
.

THE whole royal authority in Castile ought, of course, to have devolved upon
Joanna. The disorder of Joanna's mind increases.
But the shock, occasioned by a disaster so unexpected as the death of her
husband, completed the disorder of her understanding, and her incapacity for
government. During all the time of Philip's sickness, no entreaty could prevail
on her, though in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to leave him for a moment.
When he expired, however, she did not shed one tear, or utter a single groan.
Her grief was silent and settled. She continued to watch the dead body with the
same tenderness and attention as if it had been alive P. Mart. Ep. 316.
, and though at last she allowed it to be buried, she soon removed it from the
tomb to her own apartment. There it was laid upon a bed of state, in a splendid
dress; and having heard from some monk a legendary tale of a king who revived
after he had been dead fourteen years, she kept her eyes almost constantly
fixed on the body, waiting for the happy moment of its return to life. Nor was
this capricious affection for her dead husband less tinctured with jealousy,
than that which she had borne to him while alive. She did not permit any of her
female attendants to approach the bed on which his corpse was laid; she would
not suffer any woman, who did not belong to her family, to enter the apartment,
and rather than grant that privilege to a midwife, though a very aged one had
been chosen of purpose, she bore the princess Catharine without any other
assistance than that of her own domestics Mar. Hist. lib. 29. c. 3 and 5. P.
Mart. Ep. 318, 324, 328, 332.
.

A WOMAN, in such a state of mind, was little capable of governing a great
kingdom; and Joanna, She is incapable of government.
who made it her sole employment to bewail the loss, and to pray for the soul
of her husband, would have thought her attention to public affairs an impious
neglect of those duties which she owed to him. But though she declined assuming
the administration herself, yet, by a strange caprice of jealousy, she refused
to commit it to any other person; and no entreaty of her subjects could
persuade her to name a regent, or even to sign such papers as were necessary
for the execution of justice and the security of the kingdom.

THE death of Philip threw the Castilians into the greatest perplexity. It was
necessary to appoint a regent, both on account of Joanna's frenzy, and the
infancy of her son; and as there was not among the nobles, any person so
eminently distinguished as to be called by the public voice to that high
office, all naturally turned their eyes either to Ferdinand, or to the Emperor
Maximilian. The former claimed that dignity as administrator for his daughter,
Maximilian the Emperor and Ferdinand competitors for the regency.
and by virtue of the testament of Isabella; the latter thought himself the
legal guardian of his grandson, whom, on account of his mother's infirmity, he
already considered as king of Castile. Those who had lately compelled Ferdinand
to resign the government of the kingdom, trembled at the thoughts of his being
restored so soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the return of a monarch
not apt to forgive, and who, to those defects with which they were already
acquainted, added that resentment which the remembrance of their behavior, and
reflection upon his own disgrace, must naturally have excited. Though none or
these objections held against Maximilian, he was a stranger to the laws and
manners of Castile, and destitute of troops and money to support his
pretensions, nor co^^^ his claim be admitted without a public declaration
Joanna's incapacity for government, an indignity, to which, notwithstanding the
notoriety of her distemper, the delicacy of the Castilians would never consent.

DON John Manuel, however, and a few of the nobles, who considered themselves
as most obnoxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared for Maximilian, and
offered to support his claim with all their interest. Maximilian, always
enterprizing, and decisive in council, though feeble and dilatory in execution,
eagerly embraced the offer. But a series of ineffectual negotiations was the
only consequence of this transaction. The Emperor, as usual, asserted his
rights in a high strain, promised a great deal, and performed nothing Mariana,
lib. 29, c. 7. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 93.
.

A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdinand had set out for Naples, that,
by his own presence, Ferdinand absent, on a visit to his kingdom of Naples.
he might put an end, with the greater decency, to the vice-royalty of the
great captain, whose important services, and cautious conduct, did not screen
him from the suspicions of his jealous master. Though an account of his
son-in-law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the territories of Genoa, he
was so solicitous to discover the secret intrigues which he supposed the great
captain to have been carrying on, and to establish his own authority on a firm
foundation in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him from the supreme
command there, that, rather than discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave
Castile in a state of anarchy, and even to risque, by this delay, his obtaining
possession of the government of that kingdom Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 85.
.

NOTHING but the great abilities, and prudent conduct of his adherents, could
have prevented the bad effects of this absence. At the head of these was
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who, Acquires the regency of Castile, chiefly
through the influence of cardinal Ximenes. 1507.
though he had been raised to that dignity by Isabella, contrary to the
inclination of Ferdinand, and though he could have no expectation of enjoying
much power under his jealous administration, was nevertheless so disinterested,
as to prefer the welfare of his country before his own grandeur, and to declare
that Castile could never be so happily governed as by a prince, whom long
experience rendered thoroughly acquainted with its true interest. His zeal to
bring over his countrymen to this opinion, induced him to lay aside somewhat of
his usual austerity and haughtiness. He condescended, on this occasion, to
court the disaffected nobles, and employed address, as well as arguments, to
persuade them. Ferdinand seconded his endeavors with great art; and, by
concessions to some of the grandees, by promises to others, and by letters full
of complaisance to all, he gained many of his most violent opponents Zurita
Anales de Arag. vi. 87. 94 109.
. And though many cabals were formed, and some commotions excited, yet when
Ferdinand, 1507. Aug. 21. Ferdinand returns to Spain.
after having settled the affairs of Naples, arrived in Castile, he entered
upon the administration, without opposition. The prudence with which he
exercised his authority in that kingdom, equalled the good fortune by which he
had recovered it. His prudent administration.
By a moderate, but steady administration, free from partiality and from
resentment, he entirely reconciled the Castilians to his person, and secured to
them, during the remainder of his life, as much domestic tranquillity as was
consistent with the genius of the feudal government, which still subsisted
among them in full vigor Mariana, lib. 29. c. 10.
.

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his hereditary kingdoms, the only
obligation which the archduke Charles owed to the wise regency of his
grandfather; he had the satisfaction, during that period, of seeing very
important acquisitions added to the dominions over which he was to reign.
Conquest of Oran.
On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and other conquests of no small value, were
annexed to the crown of Castile, by cardinal Ximenes, who, with a spirit very
uncommon in a monk, 1509.
led in person a numerous army against the Moors of that country; and, with a
generosity and magnificence still more singular, defrayed the whole expense of
the expedition out of his own revenues Mariana, lib. 29, c. 18.
. While in Europe, Ferdinand, under pretenses both frivolous and unjust, and by
artifices the most shameful and treacherous, expelled John d'Albert,
Acquisition of Navarre.
the lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre; and seizing on that kingdom,
extended the limits of the Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one hand,
to the frontiers of Portugal on the other Mar. lib. 30, c. 11. 12. 19. 24.
.

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandizing the archduke, which influenced
Ferdinand in this or in any other of his actions. He was more apt to consider
that young prince as a rival, who might, one day, wrest out of his hands the
government of Castile, than as a grandson, for whose behoof he was entrusted
with the administration. This jealousy soon begot aversion, Ferdinand jealous
of his grandson Charles.
and even hatred, the symptoms of which he was at no pains to conceal. Hence
proceeded his immoderate joy when his young queen was delivered of a son, whose
life would have deprived Charles of the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and
Sardinia; and upon the untimely death of that prince, he discovered, for the
same reason, an excessive solicitude to have other children. This impatience of
his hastened, in all probability, the accession of Charles to the crown of
Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure a blessing, of which, from his advanced
age, and the intemperance of his youth, he could have little prospect, had
recourse to his physicians, and, by their prescription, took one of those
potions which are supposed to add vigor to the constitution, 1513.
though they more frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effect on a frame
so feeble and exhausted as that of Ferdinand, and though he survived a violent
disorder, which it at first occasioned, it brought on such an habitual languor
and dejection of mind, as rendered him averse from any serious attention to
public affairs, and fond of frivolous amusements, on which he had not hitherto
bestowed much time Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 531. Argensola
Anales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4.
. Though he now despaired of having any son of his own, his jealousy of the
archduke did not abate, nor could he help viewing him with that aversion which
princes often bear their successors. In order to gratify this unnatural
passion, he made a will, 1515. Endeavors to exclude him from the Spanish
kingdoms, by a will in favor of Ferdinand.
appointing prince Ferdinand, who having been born and educated in Spain, was
much beloved by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his kingdoms, till the
arrival of the archduke his brother; and by the same deed he settled upon him
the grand-mastership of the three military orders. The former of these grants
might have put it in his power to have disputed the throne with his brother;
the latter would, in any event, have rendered him almost independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous love of power, which was so
remarkable through his whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at the approach
of death, he removed continually from place to place, in order to fly from his
distemper, or to forget it; and though his strength declined every day, none of
his attendants durst mention his condition; nor would he admit his father
confessor, who thought such silence criminal and unchristian, into his
presence. At last the danger became so imminent, that it could be no longer
concealed. Ferdinand received the intimation with a decent fortitude; and
touched, perhaps, with compunction at the injustice he had done his grandson,
or influenced by the honest remonstrances of Carvajal, Zapata and Vargas, his
most ancient and faithful counselors, who represented to him, that by
investing prince Ferdinand with the regency, he would infallibly entail a civil
war on the two brothers, and by bestowing on him the grand mastership of the
military orders would strip the crown of its noblest ornament and chief
strength, Is persuaded to alter that will, and dies.
he consented to alter his will in both these particulars. By a new deed he
left Charles the sole heir of all his dominions, and allotted to prince
Ferdinand, instead of that throne of which he thought himself almost secure, an
inconsiderable establishment of fifty thousand ducats a year Mar. Hist. lib.
30. c. ult. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argensola
Anales de Arag. lib. 1. p. 11.
. He died, a few hours after signing this will, on the twenty-third day of
January, one thousand five hundred and sixteen.

CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance descended by his death, was near the
full age of sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low Countries, Education of
Charles V.
his paternal dominions. Margaret of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York,
the sister of Edward IV. of England, and widow of Charles the Bold, two
princesses of great virtue and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, Philip, the Flemings committed the
government of the Low Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian,
with the name rather than the authority of regent Pontius Heuterus Rerum
Austriacarum, lib. xv. Lov. 1649. lib. 7, c. 2, p. 155.
. Maximilian made choice of William de Croy, lord of Chievres, to superintend
the education of the young prince his grandson The French historians, upon the
authority of M. de Bellay, Mem. p. 11. have unanimously asserted that Philip,
by his last will, having appointed the king of France to have the direction of
his son's education, Louis XII. with a disinterestedness, suitable to the
confidence reposed in him, named Chievres for that office. Even the president
Henault has adopted this opinion. Abrege Chron A. D. 1507. Varillas, in his
usual-manner, pretends to have seen Philip's testament. Pract de l'education
des Princes, p. 16. But the Spanish, German and Flemish historians concur in
contradicting this assertion of the French authors. It appears from Heuterus a
contemporary Flemish historian of great authority, that Louis XII. by
consenting to the marriage of German de Foix with Ferdinand, had lost much of
that confidence which Philip once placed in him; that this disgust was
increased by the French King's giving in marriage, to the count of Angouleme,
his eldest daughter, whom he had formerly betrothed to Charles. Heuter. Rer.
Austr. lib. v. 151. That the French, a short time before Philip's death, had
violated the peace, which subsisted between them and the Flemings, and Philip
had complained of this injury, and was ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All
these circumstances render it improbable that Philip, who made his will a few
days before he died, Heuter. p 152, should commit the education of his son to
Louis XII. In confirmation of these plausible conjectures, positive testimony
can be adduced. It appears from Heuterus, that Philip, when he set out for
Spain, had entrusted Chievres both with the care of his son's education, and
with the government of his dominions in the Low Countries. Heuter. lib. vii, p.
153. That an attempt was made, soon after Philip's death, to have the Emperor
Maximilian appointed regent, during the minority of his grandson, but that
being opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to discharge both the offices,
which Philip had committed to him, Heut. ibid. 153, 155. That in the beginning
of the year 1508, the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the regency, to
which he consented, and appointed his daughter Margaret, together with a
council of Flemings, to exercise the supreme authority, when he himself should,
at any time, be absent. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and Adrian of
Utrecht as preceptor to his son, Heut. ibid. 155, 157. What H^uterus relates
with respect to this matter is confirmed by Moringus, in Vita Adriani, apud
Analecta Casp. Bu^manni de Adriano, c. 10; by Barlandus, Chronic. Brabant.
ibid. p. 25; and by ^araeus Annal Brab. vol. ii. 520, etc.
. That nobleman possessed, in an eminent degree, the talents which fitted him
for such an important office, and discharged the duties of it with great
fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht acted as preceptor. This
preferment, which opened his way to the highest dignities an ecclesiastic can
attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was extremely mean; nor to his
interest, for he was a stranger to the arts of a court; but to the opinion
which his countrymen entertained of his learning. He was indeed no
inconsiderable proficient in those frivolous sciences which, during several
centuries, assumed the name of Philosophy, and published a commentary, which
was highly esteemed, upon The Book of Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus
Lombardus, and considered, at that time, as the standard system of metaphysical
theology. But whatever admiration these procured him in an illiterate age, it
was soon found that a man accustomed to the retirement of a college,
unacquainted with the world, and without any tincture of taste or elegance, was
by no means qualified for rendering science agreeable to a young prince.
Charles, accordingly, discovered an early aversion to learning, and an
excessive fondness for those violent and martial exercises, to excel in which
was at that time, the chief pride, and almost the only study of persons of
rank. Chievres encouraged this taste, either from desire of gaining his pupil
by indulgence, or from too slight an opinion of the advantage of literary
accomplishments Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hist. Ge m. ii. 9^7.
P. Heuter. Rer. Auster. lib. 7. c. 3, p. 157.
. He instructed him, however, with great care in the arts of government; he
made him study the history not only of his own kingdoms, but of those with
which they were connected; he accustomed him, from the time of his assuming the
government of Flanders, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, to
attend to business; he persuaded him to peruse all papers relating to public
affairs, The first openings of his character.
to be present at the deliberations of his privy counselors, and to propose to
them himself those matters concerning which he required their opinion Memoires
de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 1573. p. 11. P. Heuter. lib. viii. c. 1. p. 184.
. From such an education, Charles contracted habits of gravity and recollection
which scarce suited his time of life. The first openings of his genius did not
indicate that superiority which its maturer age displayed P. Mar: yr, Ep. 569,
655.
. He did not discover in his youth that impetuosity of spirit which commonly
ushers in an active and enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early obsequiousness
to Chievres, and his other favorites, promise that capacious and decisive
judgment, which afterward directed the affairs of one half of Europe. But his
subjects, dazzled with the external accomplishments of a graceful figure and
manly address, viewing his character with that partiality which is always shown
to princes during their youth, entertained sanguine hopes of his adding luster
to those crowns which descended to him by the death of Ferdinand.

THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from the view which I have given of their
political constitution, were, State of Spain requires a vigorous administration
at that time, in a situation, which required an administration* no less
vigorous than prudent. The feudal institutions, which had been introduced into
all its different provinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Vandals, subsisted
in great force. The nobles, who were powerful and warlike, had long possessed
all the exorbitant privileges, which these institutions vested in their order.
The cities in Spain were more numerous and more considerable than the genius of
feudal government, naturally an enemy to commerce, and to regular police,
seemed to admit. The personal rights, and political influence, which the
inhabitants of these cities had acquired, were extensive. The royal prerogative
circumscribed by the privileges of the nobility, and by the pretensions of the
people, was confined within very narrow limits. Under such a form of
government, the principles of discord were many; the bond of union was
extremely feeble; and Spain felt not only all the inconveniences occasioned by
the defects in the feudal system, but was exposed to disorders arising from the
peculiarities in its own constitution.

DURING the long administration of Ferdinand, no internal commotion, it is
true, had arisen in Spain. His superior abilities enabled him to restrain the
turbulence of the nobles, and to moderate the jealousy of the commons; and by
the wisdom of his domestic government, by the sagacity with which he conducted
his foreign operations, and by the high opinion that his subjects entertained
of both, he preserved among them a degree of tranquillity greater than was
natural to a constitution, in which the seeds of discord and disorder were so
copiously mingled. But, by the death of Ferdinand, these restraints were at
once withdrawn; and faction and discontent, from being long repressed, were
ready to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN order to prevent these evils, Ferdinand had appointed cardinal Ximenes
regent.
Ferdinand had in his last will taken a most prudent precaution, by appointing
cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Castile, till the
arrival of his grandson in Spain. The singular character of this man, and the
extraordinary qualities which marked him out for that office at such a
juncture, merit a particular description. He was descended of an honorable,
His rise and character.
not of a wealthy family; and the circumstances of his parents, as well as his
own inclinations, having determined him to enter into the church, he early
obtained benefices of great value, and which placed him in the way of the
highest preferment. All these however he renounced at once, and after
undergoing a very severe noviciate, assumed the habit of St. Francis in a
monastery of Observantine friars, one of the most rigid orders in the Romish
church. There he soon became eminent for his uncommon austerity of manners, and
for those excesses of superstitious devotion, which are the proper
characteristics of the monastic life. But notwithstanding these extravagancies,
to which weak and enthusiastic minds alone are usually prone, his
understanding, naturally penetrating and decisive, retained its full vigor,
and acquired him such great authority among his own order, as raised him to be
their provincial. His reputation for sanctity, soon procured him the office of
father confessor to the queen Isabella, which he accepted with the utmost
reluctance. He preserved in a court the same austerity of manners, which had
distinguished him in the cloister. He continued to make all his journies on
foot; he subsisted only upon alms; his acts of mortification were as severe as
ever; and his penances as rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her choice,
conferred on him, not long after, the Archbishopric of Toledo, which, next to
the Papacy, is the richest dignity in the church of Rome. This honor he
declined with a firmness, which nothing but the authoritative injunction of the
Pope was able to overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change his manners.
Though obliged to display in public that magnificence which became his station,
he himself retained his monastic severity. Under his pontifical robes he
constantly wore the coarse frock of St. Francis, the rents of which he used to
patch with his own hands. He at no time used linen; but was commonly clad in
hair-cloth. He slept always in his habit, most frequently on the ground, or on
boards, rarely in a bed. He did not taste any of the delicacies which appeared
at his table, but satisfied himself with that simple diet which the rule in his
order prescribed Histoire de l'administration du Card. Ximen. par Mich. Bauder,
4to. 1635 p. 13.
. Notwithstanding these peculiarities, so opposite to the manners of the world,
he possessed a thorough knowledge of its affairs; and no sooner was he called
by his station, and by the high opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella
entertained of him, to take a principal share in the administration, than he
displayed talents for business, which rendered the fame of his wisdom equal to
that of his sanctity. Bold and original in all his plans, his political conduct
flowed from his real character, and partook both of its virtues and its
defects. His extensive genius suggested to him schemes, vast and magnificent.
Conscious of the integrity of his intentions, he pursued these with unremitting
and undaunted firmness. Accustomed from his early youth to mortify his own
passions, he showed little indulgence toward those of other men. Taught by his
system of religion to check even his most innocent desires, he was the enemy of
every thing to which he could affix the name of elegance and pleasure; and,
though free from any suspicion of cruelty, he discovered, in all his commerce
with the world, a severe inflexibility of mind, and austerity of character,
peculiar to the monastic profession, and which can scarce be conceived in a
country where that is unknown.

SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand committed the regency of Castile, and
though he was then near fourscore, and perfectly acquainted with the labor and
difficulty of the office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal for the
public good, prompted him to accept of it without hesitation: And though Adrian
of Utrecht, Cardinal Adrian appointed regent by Charles.
who had been sent into Spain a few months before the death of Ferdinand,
produced full powers from the archduke to assume the name and authority of
regent, upon the demise of his grandfather, such was the aversion of the
Spaniards to the government of a stranger, and so unequal the abilities of the
two competitors, that Adrian's claim would at once have been rejected, if
Ximenes himself, from complaisance to his new master, had not consented to
acknowledge him as regent, and to carry on the government in conjunction with
him. By this, however, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal; Ximenes
obtains the sole direction of affairs.
and Ximenes, though he treated him with great decency, and even respect,
retained the whole power in his own hands Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p.
150, fol. Compl. 1569.
.

THE Cardinal's first care was to observe the motions of the Infant Don
Ferdinand, His precautions against the infant Don Ferdinand.
who, having been flattered with so near a prospect of the supreme power, bore
the disappointment of his hopes with greater impatience than could have been
expected of a prince so young. Ximenes, under pretense of providing more
effectually for his safety, removed him from Guadalupe, the place in which he
had been educated, to Madrid, where he fixed the residence of the court. There
he was under the cardinal's own eye, and his conduct, with that of his
domestics, were watched with the utmost attention Miniana Contin. Marianae,
lib. 1, c. 2. Baudier, Hist. de Ximenes, p. 118.
.

THE first intelligence he received from the Low Countries, gave greater
disquiet to the Cardinal, and convinced him how difficult a task it would be to
conduct the affairs of a young prince, under the influence of counselors
unacquainted with the laws and manners of Spain. No sooner did the account of
Ferdinand's death reach Brussels, Charles assumes the title of king.
than Charles, by the advice of his Flemish ministers, resolved to assume the
title of king. By the laws of Spain, the sole right to the crowns both of
Castile and of Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and though her infirmities
disqualified her from governing, this incapacity had not been declared by any
public act of the Cortes of either kingdom; so that the Spaniards considered
this resolution, not only as a direct violation of their privileges, but as an
unnatural usurpation in a son on the prerogatives of a mother, toward whom, in
her present unhappy situation, he manifested a less delicate regard than her
subjects had always expressed P. Mart. Ep. 568.
. The Flemish court, however, prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor, to
address letters to Charles, as king of Castile; the former of whom, it was
pretended, had a right, as head of the church, and the latter, as head of the
empire, to confer this title; and instructions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail
on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes, though he had earnestly
remonstrated against the measure, as equally unpopular and unnecessary,
resolved to exert all his authority and credit in carrying it into execution,
and immediately assembled such of the nobles as were then at court. What
Charles required was laid before them; and when, instead of complying with his
demands, they began to murmur against such an unprecedented encroachment on
their privileges, and to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their oath of
allegiance to her, Recognized through the influence of Ximenes. April 13.
Ximenes hastily interposed, and, with that firm and decisive tone which was
natural to him, told them, that they were not now called to deliberate, but to
obey, that their sovereign did not apply to them for advice, but expected
submission; and "This day, added he, Charles shall be proclaimed King of
Castile in Madrid, and the rest of the cities will follow its example." On the
spot he gave orders for that purpose Gometius, p. 152, etc. Baudier Hist. de
Ximen. p. 121.
; and, notwithstanding the novelty of the practice, and the secret discontents
of many persons of distinction, Charles's title was universally recognized. In
Aragon, where the privileges of the subject were more extensive, and the
abilities and authority of the archbishop of Saragossa, whom Ferdinand had
appointed regent, were far superior to those of Ximenes, the same
obsequiousness to the will of Charles did not appear, nor was he acknowledged
there under any other character but that of Prince, till his arrival in Spain
P. Mart Ep. 572.
.

XIMENES, though possessed only of delegated power, which, from his advanced
age, His schemes for extending the prerogative.
he could not expect long to enjoy, assumed, together with the character of
regent, all the ideas natural to a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending
the regal authority, which he pursued with as much intrepidity and ardour, as
if he himself had been to reap the advantages resulting from their success. The
exorbitant privileges of the Castilian nobles circumscribed the prerogative of
the prince within very narrow limits. These the cardinal considered as so many
unjust extortions from the crown, and determined to reduce them. Dangerous as
the attempt was, there were circumstances in his situation which promised him
greater success than any king of Castile could have expected. His strict and
prudent economy of his archiepiscopal revenues, furnished him with more ready
money, than the crown could at any time command; the sanctity of his manners,
his charity and munificence, rendered him the idol of the people; and the
nobles themselves, not suspecting any danger from him, did not observe his
motions, with the same jealous attention, as they would have watched those of
one of their monarchs.

IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the regency, several of the nobles, fancying
the reins of government would, By depressing the nobility.
of consequence, be somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their vassals, and to
prosecute, by force of arms, animosities and pretensions, which the authority
of Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to relinquish. But Ximenes, who
had taken into pay a good body of troops, opposed and defeated all their
designs with unexpected vigor and facility; and though he did not treat the
authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he forced them to acts of
submission, extremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of Castilian grandees.

BUT while the Cardinals attacks were confined to individuals, By forming a
body of troops depending on the crown.
and every act of rigor was justified by the appearance of necessity, founded
on the forms of justice, and tempered with a mixture of lenity, there was
scarce room for jealousy or complaint. It was not so with his next measure,
which, by striking at a privilege essential to the nobles, gave a general alarm
to the whole order. By the feudal constitution, the military power was lodged
in the hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior condition were called into
the field only as their vassals, and to follow their banners. A king, with
scanty revenues, and a limited prerogative, depended on these potent barons in
all his operations. It was with their forces he attacked his enemies, and with
them he defended his own kingdom; and while at the head of troops attached only
to their own lords, and accustomed to obey no other commands, his authority was
precarious, and his efforts feeble. From this state Ximenes resolved to deliver
the crown; and as mercenary standing armies were unknown, under the feudal
government, and would have been odious to a martial and generous people, he
issued a proclamation, commanding every city in Castile, to enrol a certain
number of its burgesses, in order that they might be trained to the use of
arms, on Sundays and holidays; he engaged to provide officers to command them
at the public expense; and, as an encouragement to the private men, promised
them an exemption from all taxes and impositions. The frequent incursions of
the Moors from Africa, and the necessity of having some force ready to oppose
them, furnished a plausible pretense for this innovation. The object really in
view was to secure the king a body of troops independent of his barons, and
which might serve to counterbalance their power Minianae Continuatio Marianae
fol. Hag. 1733, p. 3.
. The nobles were not ignorant of his intention, and saw how effectually the
scheme he had adopted would accomplish his end; but as a measure which had the
pious appearance of resisting the progress of the Infidels was extremely
popular, and as any opposition to it, arising from their order alone, would
have been imputed wholly to interested motives, they endeavored to excite the
cities themselves to refuse obedience, and to remonstrate against the
proclamation, as inconsistent with their charters and privileges. In
consequence of their instigations, Burgos, Valladolid, and several other
cities, rose in open mutiny. Some of the grandees declared themselves their
protectors. Violent remonstrances were presented to the king. His Flemish
counselors were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm and undaunted; and
partly by terror, partly by entreaty; by force in some instances, and by
forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the refractory cities to comply P.
Mar. Ep. 556, etc. Gometius, p 160, etc.
. During his administration, he continued to execute his plan with vigor, but
soon after his death it was entirely dropped.

HIS success in this scheme for reducing the exorbitant power of the nobility,
encouraged him to attempt a diminution of their possessions, By recalling the
grants of former monarchs to the nobility.
which were no less exorbitant. During the contests and disorders inseparable
from the feudal government, the nobles, ever attentive to their own interest,
and taking advantage of the weakness and distress of their monarchs, had seized
some parts of the royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, and gradually
wrested almost the whole out of the hands of the prince, and annexed them to
their own estates. The rights, by which most of the grandees held these lands,
were extremely defective; it was from some successful usurpation, which the
crown had been too feeble to dispute, that many derived their only title to
possession. An enquiry carried back to the origin of these encroachments, which
were almost coeval with the feudal system, was impracticable; and as it would
have stripped every nobleman in Spain of great part of his lands, it must have
excited a general revolt. Such a step was too bold, even for the enterprizing
genius of Ximenes. He confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning
with the pensions granted during that time, refused to make any farther
payment, because all right to them expired with his life. He then called to
account those who had acquired crown lands under the administration of that
monarch, and at once resumed whatever he had alienated. The effects of these
revocations extended to many persons of great rank; for though Ferdinand was a
prince of little generosity, yet he and Isabella, having been raised to the
throne of Castile by a powerful faction of the nobles, they were obliged to
reward the zeal of their adherents with great liberality, and the royal
demesnes were their only fund for that purpose. The addition made to the
revenue of the crown by these revocations, together with his own frugal
economy, enabled Ximenes not only to discharge all the debts which Ferdinand
had left, and to remit considerable sums to Flanders, but to pay the officers
of his new militia, and to establish magazines more numerous, and better
furnished with artillery, arms, and warlike stores, than Spain had ever
possessed in any former age Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 600.
. The prudent and disinterested application of these sums was a full apology to
the people for the rigor with which they were exacted.

THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks, thought it necessary to take
precautions for the safety of their order. Many cabals were formed, The nobles
oppose his measures.
loud complaints were uttered, and desperate resolutions taken; but before they
proceeded to extremities, they appointed some of their number to examine the
powers in consequence of which the Cardinal exercised acts of such high
authority. The admiral of Castile, the duke de Infantado, and the Conde de
Benevento, grandees of the first rank, were entrusted with this commission.
Ximenes received them with cold civility, and in answer to their demand
produced the testament of Ferdinand, by which he was appointed regent, together
with the ratification of that deed by Charles. To both these they objected; and
he endeavored to establish their validity. As the conversation grew warm, But
without success.
he led them insensibly toward a balcony, from which they had a view of a
large body of troops, under arms, and of a formidable train of artillery.
"Behold," says he, pointing to these, and raising his voice, "the powers which
I have received from his catholic majesty. With these I govern Castile; and
with these I will govern it, till the king, your master and mine, takes
possession of his kingdom Flech. ii. 551. Ferreras, Hist. viii. 433.
." A declaration so bold and haughty silenced them, and astonished their
associates. To take arms against a man aware of his danger, and prepared for
his defense, was what despair alone would dictate. All thoughts of a general
confederacy against the Cardinal's administration were laid aside; and, except
from some slight commotions excited by the private resentment of particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no interruption.

IT was not only from the opposition of the Spanish nobility that obstacles
arose to the execution of the Cardinal's schemes; Thwarted by Charles's Flemish
ministers.
he had a constant struggle to maintain with the Flemish ministers, who,
presuming upon their favor with the young king, aimed at directing the affairs
of Spain, as well as those of their own country. Jealous of his great
abilities, and independent spirit, they considered him rather as a rival, who
might circumscribe their power, than as a minister, who, by his prudence and
vigor was adding to the grandeur and authority of their master. Every
complaint against his administration was listened to with pleasure by the
courtiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary obstructions were thrown by their
means in the way of all his measures, and though they could not, either with
decency or safety, deprive him of the office of regent, they endeavored to
lessen his authority by dividing it. They soon discovered that Adrian of
Utrecht, already joined with him in office, had neither genius or spirit
sufficient to give the least check to his proceedings; and therefore Charles by
their advice added to the commission of regency La Chau, An additional number
of regents appointed.
a Flemish gentleman, and afterward Amerstorf, a nobleman of Holland; the
former distinguished for his address; the latter for his firmness. Ximenes,
though no stranger to the malevolent intention of the Flemish courtiers,
received them with all the external marks of distinction due to the office with
which they were invested; but when they came to enter upon business, he abated
nothing of that air of superiority with which he had treated Adrian, and still
retained the sole direction of affairs. The Spaniards, more averse, perhaps,
than any other people to the government of strangers, approved of all his
efforts to preserve his authority; Ximenes retains the direction of affairs.
and even the nobles, influenced by this national passion, and forgetting their
jealousies and discontents, chose rather to see the supreme power in the hands
of one of their countrymen, whom they feared, than in those of foreigners, whom
they hated.

THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INDEX TO THE PRELIMINARY WORK.
AFRICA, the shocking devastations, made there by the Vandals, 169. Alanus, his
character of the clergy in his time, 194. Alfred the Great, his complaint of
the ignorance of the clergy, 194. Allodial possession of land, explained, 179.
How such possession became subject to military service, ib. Distinguished from
beneficiary tenures, 180. How converted into feudal tenures, 184. Allodium, the
etymology of that word, 188. Ammianus, his character of the Huns, 169, 172.
Amurath, Sultan, the body of Janissaries formed by him, 152. Anathema, form of
that denounced against robbers during the middle ages, 277. Arabia, the ancient
Greek philosophy cultivated there, while lost in Europe, 270, Note xxviii. The
progress of philosophy from thence to Europe, 271. Aragon, rise of the kingdom
of, 116. Its union with Castile, ib. The constitution and form of its
government, 120. The privileges of its Cortes, ib. Office and jurisdiction of
the Justiza, 121. The regal power very confined, 122. Form of the allegiance
swore to the Kings of, ib. The power of the nobility to control the regal
power, 288. Their privilege of union taken away by Peter IV. ib. The
establishment of the inquisition opposed there, 292. Armies, standing, the rise
of, traced, 73. By what means they became more general in Europe, 89. Arms, the
profession of, the most honorable, in uncivilized nations, 58. Ass, an account
of the ancient Romish feast of, 198, Note xii. Assemblies, legislative, how
formed, 32. Assemblies, general, of France, their power under the first race of
Kings, 132. Under the second and third, 133. At what period they lost their
legislative authority, 135. Attila, King of the Huns, account of his reception
of the Roman ambassadors, 164, Note iii. Some account of his conquests, 168.
Avila, an assembly of Castilian nobles there, solemnly try and depose Henry IV.
their King, 119. Austria, the house of, by whom founded, 142.
B
Baillis, in the old French law, their office explained, 259. Balance of power,
the first rise of, in Europe, 88. The progress of, 89. Baltic, the first source
of wealth, to the towns situated on that sea, 202. Barcelona, its trade,
riches, and privileges at the close of the fifteenth century, ^95. Barons,
their independence, and mutual hostilities, under the feudal system, 13. How
affected by the franchisement of cities, 30. Acquire a participation in
legislative government, 34. Their private wars for redress of personal
injuries, 38. Methods employed to abolish these contentions, 40. Origin of
their supreme and independent jurisdiction, 49. The bad effects resulting from
these privileges, 50. The steps taken by Princes to reduce their courts, 52.
How obliged to relinquish their judicial prerogatives, 56. Of Italy subjected
to municipal laws, 206, Note xv. Their right of territorial jurisdiction
explained, 255. Their emoluments from causes decided in their courts, 256.
Benefices, under the feudal system, a history of, 182. When they became
hereditary, 184. Books, an enquiry into the materials of the ancient ones, 195.
The loss of old manuscripts accounted for, 196. The great prices they sold for
in ancient times, ib. Boroughs, representatives of, how introduced into
national councils, 33. Britons ancient, their distress and dejection when
deserted by the Romans, and harrassed by the Picts and Caledonians, 165, Note
i. Brotherhood of God, an account of that association for extinguishing private
wars, 235. Bruges, how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities during
the middle ages, 281. Burgundy, Mary heiress of, the importance with which her
choice in a husband was considered by all Europe, 82. The treacherous views of
Louis XI. of France toward her, 84. Is married to the Archduke Maximilian, ib.
The influence of this match on the state of Europe, 85.
C
Caesar, his account of the ancient Germans, compared with that of Tacitus,
173. Cambray, treaty of, its object, 93. The confederacy dissolved, 95. Canon
law, an inquiry into, 53. Progress of ecclesiastical usurpations, 54. The
maxims of, more equitable than the civil courts of the middle ages, 55. Castle,
rise of the kingdom of, 116. Its union with Aragon, ib. Its King Henry IV.
solemnly tried and deposed in an assembly of the nobles, 119. The constitution
and government of that kingdom, 125. A history of the Cortes of, and its
privileges, ib. The kingdom originally elective, 293, Note xxxii. Catalonia,
the spirited behavior of the people there in defense of their rights, against
their King John II. of Aragon, 119. Censuales, a species of the Oblati, or
voluntary slaves, the obligations they entered into described, 227. Centenarii,
or inferior judges in the middle ages, the extraordinary oath required from
them, 277. Champs de Mars, and de May, account of those assemblies of the
ancient Gauls, 300. Charlemagne, his law to prevent private wars for redress of
personal injuries, 39, 233. State of Germany under his descendants, 138.
Charles IV. Emperor, dissipates the Imperial domains, 318. Charles V. Emperor,
an emulator of the heroic conduct of his rival Francis I. 62. His future
grandeur founded on the marriage of the Archduke Maximilian with the heiress of
Burgundy, 85. Charles VII. of France, the first who introduced standing armies
in Europe, 76. His successful extension of the regal prerogative, 78. Charles
VIII. of France, his character, 85. How induced to invade Italy, ib. His
resources and preparations for this enterprise, 86. His rapid success, 87. A
combination of the Italian states formed against him, 88. Is forced to return
back to France, ib. The distressed state of his revenues by this expedition,
92. Charle voix, his account of the North American Indians, made use of in a
comparison between them and the ancient Germans, 175. Charters, of immunity or
franchise, an inquiry into the nature of those granted by the barons of France
to the towns under their jurisdictions, 210, Note xvi. Of communities, granted
by the Kings of France, how they tended to establish regular government, 28,
210. Chivalry, the origin of, 60. Its beneficial effects on human manners, 61.
The enthusiasm of, distinguished from its salutary consequences, 62.
Christianity, corrupted when first brought into Europe, 63. I^s influence in
freeing mankind from the bondage of the feudal policy, 224, Note xx. Circles of
Germany, the occasion of their being formed, 143. Cities, the ancient state of,
under the feudal policy, 27. The freedom of, where first established, 28.
Charters of community, why granted in France by Louis le Gross, ib. Obtain the
like all over Europe, 29. Acquire political consideration, 31. Clergy, the
progress of their usurpations, 54. Their plan of jurisprudence more perfect
than that of the civil courts in the middle ages, 55. The great ignorance of,
in the early feudal time of Europe, 194. Cleriza, slave to Willa, widow of Duke
Hugo, extract from the charter of manumission, granted to her, 225. Clermont,
council of, resolves on the holy war, 20. See Peter the hermit, and Crusades.
Clotaire I. instance of the small authority he had over his army, 299.
Clotharius II. his account of the popular assemblies among the ancient Gauls,
300. Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, unable to retain a sacred vase
taken by his army, from being distributed by lot among the rest of the plunder,
177, Note vii. Colleges, the first establishment of, in Europe, 271. Combat,
judicial, the prohibition of, an improvement in the administration of justice,
41. The foundation and universality of this mode of trial, 46. The pernicious
effects of, ib. Variousexpedients for abolishing this practice, 47. The ancient
Swedish law of, for words of reproach, 244. Positive evidence, or points of
proof, rendered ineffectual by it, 247. This mode of trial authorized by the
ecclesiastics, 248. The last instances of, in the histories of France and
England, 249. Commerce, the spirit of crusading how far favorable to, at that
early period, 25. The first establishment of free corporations, 27. Charters of
community, why granted by Louis le Gross, 28. The like practice obtains all
over Europe, 29. The salutary effects of these institutions, ib. The low state
of, during the middle ages, 66. Causes contributing to its revival, ib.
Promoted by the Hanseatic league, 68. Is cultivated in the Netherlands, 69. Is
introduced into England by Edward III. ib. The beneficial consequences
resulting from the revival of, 70. The early cultivation of, in Italy, 278.
Common law, the first compilation of, made in England by Lord Chief Justice
Glanville, 266. Communities; see Charters, Cities, Commerce, and Corporations.
Comnena, Anne, her character of the Crusaders, 204. Compass, mariner's when
invented, and its influence on the extension of commerce, 67. Composition for
personal injuries, the motives for establishing, 232. The custom of, deduced
from the practice of the ancient Germans, 250. Compurgators, introduced as
evidence in the jurisprudence of the middle ages, 42. Condottieri, in the
Italian policy, what, 106. Conrad, count of Franconia, how he obtained election
to the empire, 138. Conradin, the last rightful heir to the crown of Naples of
the house of Suabia, his unhappy fate, 110. Constance, treaty of, between the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and the free cities of Italy, 209.
Constantinople, its flourishing state at the time of the Crusades, 22. When
first taken by the Turks, 150. The Crusaders how looked upon there, 202. The
account given of this city by the Latin writers, 204. Constitutions, popular,
how formed, 32. Cordova, Gonsalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdinand
of Aragon, 112. Corporations, and bodies politic, the establishments of, how
far favorable to the improvement of manners, 26. The privileges of, where
first claimed, 27. Charters of community, why granted by Louis le Gross in
France, 28. The institution of, obtains all over Europe, 29. Their effects, ib.
Cortes of Aragon, its constitution and privileges, 120. 289. Cortes of Castile,
a history of, and an account of its constitution and privileges, 123. The
vigilance with which it guarded its privileges against the encroachments of the
regal power, 124. Crusades, the first motives of undertaking, 20. The
enthusiastic zeal with which they were undertaken, ib. First promoted by Peter
the hermit, ib. The success of them, 21. The consequences resulting from them,
ib. Their effects on manners, 22. On property, 23. How advantageous to the
enlargement of the regal power of the European Princes, 24. The commercial
effects of, 25, 67. The universal frenzy for engaging in these expeditions
accounted for, 198, Note xiii. The privileges granted to those who engaged in
them, 200. Stephen Earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of them, 202. The
expenses of conducting them, how raised, ib. Character given of the Crusaders
by the Greek writers, 204.
D
Debt, the first hint of attaching movables for the recovery of, derived from
the canon law, 265. Debtors, how considered in the rude and simple state of
society, 212. Diets of Germany, some account of, 321. Doctors, in the different
faculties, dispute precedence with knights, 272.
E
Ecclesiastical jurisprudence, more perfect in its plan than the civil courts
of the middle ages, 55. Ecclesiastics, when, and by what degrees they claimed
exemption from civil jurisdiction, 262. Military talents cultivated and
exercised by those of the middle ages, 268. Edward III. of England, his
endeavors to introduce commerce into his kingdom, 69. Electors of Germany, the
rise of their privileges, 147. Eloy, St. his definition or description of a
good christian, 197, Note xi. Emperors of Germany, an enquiry into their power,
jurisdiction and revenue, 315, Note xli. The ancient mode of electing them,
319. England, a summary view of the contests between, and France, 71. The
consequences of its losing its continental possessions, 72. The power of the
crown, how extended, 80. See Henry VII. Why so many marks of Saxon usages and
languages, in comparison with those of the Normans, to be found in, 165, Note
iv. When corporations began to be established in, 220. Instances of the long
continuance of personal servitude there, 228. Inquiry into the Saxon laws for
putting an end to private wars, 239. The causes of the speedy decline of
private wars there, proposed to the researches of Antiquarians, 240. The last
instances of, judicial combat recorded in the history of, 249. The territorial
jurisdiction of the barons, how abolished, 260. Cause of the slow progress of
commerce there, 283. The first commercial treaty entered into by, 284.
Evidence, the imperfect nature of that admitted in law proceedings during the
middle ages, 42. Rendered ineffectual by the judicial combat, 247. Europe, the
alterations in, by the conquests of the Romans, 2. The improvements the nations
of, received in exchange for their liberties, ib. Its disadvantages under this
change of circumstances, ib. Inquiry into the supposed populousness of the
ancient northern nations, 4. The savage desolation exercised by the Goths,
Vandals, and Huns, 8. The universal change occasioned by their irruptions and
conquests, 9. The first rudiments of the present policy of, to be deduced from
this period, 10. Origin of the feudal system, 11. See Feudal system. The
general barbarism introduced with this policy, 17. At what time government and
manners began to improve, 18. The causes and events which contributed to this
improvement, 20. See Crusales, Corporations, People. The miseries occasioned by
private wars in, 39. Methods taken to suppress them, ib. Judicial combats
prohibited, 41. The defects of judicial proceedings in the middle ages, ib. The
influence of superstition in these proceedings, 43. The origin of the
independent territorial jurisdictions of the barons, 50. The bad consequences
of their judicial power, 51. The steps taken by Princes to abolish their
courts, 52. An inquiry into the canon law, 53. Revival of the Roman law, 56.
Effects of the spirit of chivalry, 59. How improved by the progress of science
and cultivation of literature, 62. Christianity corrupted when first received
in, 63. Scholastic theology the first object of learning in, 64. Low state of
commerce in, during the middle ages, 66. Commerce revives in Italy, 67. Is
promoted by the Hanseatic league, 68. Is cultivated in the Netherlands, 69. The
effects of the progress of commerce on the polishing of manners, 70. The
effects of the marriage of the heiress of Burgundy with the Archduke
Maximilian, on the state of, 84. By what means standing forces became general
in, 89. Consequences of the league of Cambray to, 93. A view of the political
constitution, of the several states of, at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 97. Italy, 98. The papacy, ib. Venice, 105. Florence, 108. Naples,
109. Milan, 112. Spain, 115. France 131. Germany, 138. Turkey, 149. Instances
of the small intercourse among nations in the middle ages, 273.
F
Feodum, the etymology of that word, 188. Fiefs, under the feudal system, a
history of, 180. When they became hereditary, 184. Ferdinand, King of Aragon,
unites the Spanish monarchy, by his marriage with Isabella of Castile, 116. His
schemes to exalt the regal power, 127. Resumes former grants of land from his
barons, 128. Unites to the crown the grand masterships of the three military
orders, ib. Why he patronized the association called the Holy brotherhood,
against the barons, 131. Feudal system, the origin of, deduced, 10. The primary
object of this policy, 11. Its deficiencies for interior government, 13.
Tenures of land, how established under, ib. The rise of intestine discords
among the barons under, 14. The servile state of the people, ib. The weak
authority of the King, ib. Its influence on the external operations of war, 15.
The general extinction of all arts and sciences effected by, ib. Its operation
on religion, 16. Its influence on the character of the human mind, 17. At what
time government and manners began to be improved, 18. The causes and events
which contributed to this improvement, 19. See Crusades. The ancient state of
cities under, 27. The frame of national councils under this policy, 33. How
altered by the progress of civil liberty, 34. An inquiry into the
administration of justice under, 35. Private war, 37. Judicial combat, 41. The
independent jurisdictions of the barons, 49. The distinction between freemen
and vassals under, 180. How strangers were considered and treated under, 275.
Fuzstephens, observations on his account of the state of London, at the time of
Henry II. 220. Flanders. See Netherlands. Florence, a view of the constitution
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 108. The influence acquired
by Cosmo di Medici, ib. France, by what means the towns in, first obtained
charters of community, 28. Ordinances of Louis X. and his brother Philip in
favor of civil liberty, 35. Methods employed to suppress private wars, 39. St.
Louis attempts to discountenance judicial combat, 47. A view of the contests
between, and England, 71. The consequences of its recovering its provinces from
England, 72. The monarchy of, how strengthened by this event, ib. The rise of
standing forces in, 73. The regal prerogative strengthened by this measure, 74.
The extension of the regal prerogative vigorously pursued by Louis XI. 76. See
Louis XI. The effects of the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII. 85, See Charles
VIII. National infantry established in, 91. League of Cambray formed against
the Venetians, 93. Battle of Ghiarradadda, ib. An inquiry into its ancient
government and laws, 131. The power of the general assemblies under the first
race of Kings, ib. Under the second and third, 132. The regal power confined to
the King's own domains, 133. When the general assembly or states general, lost
their legislative authority, ib. When the Kings began to assert their
legislative power, 134. When the government of, became purely monarchial, 135.
The regal power nevertheless restrained by the privileges of the nobility, ib.
An inquiry into the jurisdiction of its parliaments, particularly that of
Paris, 136. How the allodial property of land there was altered into feudal,
214. The progress of liberty in that kingdom traced, 221, Note xix. The
attempts to establish liberty there unsuccessful, 223. The last instance of
judicial combat recorded in the history of, 249. The present government of,
compared with that of ancient Gaul, 298, Note xxxvii. The States general, when
first assembled, 301. Francis I. of France, his character influenced by the
spirited of chivalry, 62. Is emulated by the Emperor Charles V. ib. Frederick
Barbarossa, Emperor, the free cities of Italy unite against him, 209. Treaty of
Constance with them, ib. Was the first who granted privileges to the cities in
Germany, 218. Fredum, in the ancient German usages explained, 251. Freemen, how
distinguished from vassals, under the feudal policy, 180, 192. Why often
induced to surrender their freedom and become slaves, 193. Ful^herius
Carnotensis, his character of the city of Constantinople, 204.
G
Gaul, how allodial property of land was changed into feudal, there, 188. The
government of, compared with that of modern France, 299, Note xxxvii. The small
authority the Kings of, enjoyed over their armies, illustrated in an anecdote
of Clotaire I. ib. Account of the popular assemblies of, 300, The salic laws,
how enacted, 301. Were not subject to taxation, 302. See France. Geoffrey de
Villehardouin, his account of the magnificence of Constantinople, at the time
when taken by the Crusaders, 205. Germans, ancient, an account of their usages
and way of life, 172. Their method of engaging in war, 173. A comparison
between them and the North American Indians, 175. Why they had no cities, 217,
Note xvii. The practice of compounding for personal injuries by fines, deduced
from their usages, 250. Germany, little interested in foreign concerns at the
beginning of the fifteenth century, 66. National infantry established in, 91.
State of, under Charlemagne and his descendants, 138. Conrad, Count of
Franconia chosen Emperor, ib. His successors in the Imperial dignity, ib. How
the nobility of, acquired independent sovereign authority, 139. The fatal
effects of aggrandizing the clergy in, 140. The contests between the Emperor
Henry IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 141. Rise of the factions of Guelfs and
Ghibelines, 142. Decline of the Imperial authority, ib. The House of Austria,
by whom founded, ib. A total change in the political constitution of the
empire, ib. The state of anarchy in which it continued to the time of
Maximilian the immediate predecessor of Charles V. 143. Divided into circles,
ib. The Imperial chamber instituted, 145. The Aulic council reformed, ib. A
view of its political constitution at the commencement of the ensuing history,
ib. Its defects pointed out, 146. The Imperial dignity and power compared, ib.
Election of the Emperors, 147. The repugnant forms of civil policy in the
several states of, ib. The opposition between the secular and ecclesiastical
members of, 148. The united body hence incapable of acting with vigor, 149.
When cities first began to be built in, 217, Note xvii. When the cities of,
first acquired municipal privileges, 218. The artizans of, when infranchised,
219. Immediate cities in the German jurisprudence, what, ib. The great
calamities occasioned there by private wars, 241. Origin of the league of the
Rhine, ib. When private wars were finally abolished there, 242. Inquiry into
the power, jurisdiction and revenue of its Emperors, 315, Note xli. The ancient
mode of electing the Emperors, 319. Account of the Diets, 321. Ghibelines. See
Guelfs. Gh^arradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, 94. Glanville,
Lord Chief Justice, the first who compiled a body of common law, in all Europe,
216. Goths, Vandals and Huns, overrun the Roman empire, and precipitate its
downfall, 3. The state of the countries from whence they issued, 4. The motives
of their first excursions, ib. How they came to settle in the countries they
conquered, 5. A comparison drawn between them and the Romans, at the period of
their irruptions, 7. Compared with the native Americans, 8. The desolations
they occasioned in Europe, ib. The universal change made by them in the state
of Europe, 9. The principles on which they made their settlements, 10. Origin
of the feudal system, 11. See Feudal system. An inquiry into the administration
of justice among, 36. Their private wars, ib. Destroy the monuments of the
Roman arts, 56. Their contempt of the Romans, and hatred of their arts, 165,
Note ii. Their aversion to literature, ib. No authentic account of their
origin, or ancient history existing, ib. Government, how limited by the feudal
policy, 13. The effects of the Crusades on, 19. How affected by the
infranchisement of cities, 29. Legislative assemblies how formed, 31. Private
wars destructive to the authority of, 39. Methods employed to abolish this
hostile mode of redressing injuries, ib. How affected by the supreme
independent jurisdiction of the barons, 50. The steps toward abolishing them,
51. The origin and growth of royal courts of justice, ib. How influenced by the
revival of science and literature, 62. A view of, at the beginning of the
fifteenth century, 65. The power of Monarchs then very limited, 66. Their
revenues small, ib. Their armies unfit for conquest, ib. The Princes hence
incapable of extensive plans of operation, 68. The kingdoms very little
connected with each other, 69. How the efforts of, from this period became more
powerful and extensive, 71. The consequences of England losing its provinces in
France, ib. The schemes of Louis XI. of France to extend the regal power, 76.
See Louis XI. The power of the English crown enlarged, 80. See Henry VII. As
also that of Spain, 81. How the use of standing armies became general, 89. A
view of the political constitution of the several states of Europe, at the
commencement of the sixteenth century, 97. In what respects the charters of
communities granted by the Kings of France, tended to introduce a regular form
of, 211. Greece, the breeding of silk worms, when introduced there, 278. Greek
Emperors, their magnificence at Constantinople, 203. Gregory of Tours, remarks
on the state of Europe during the period of which he wrote the history, 17.
Gregory the Great, Pope, his reason for granting liberty to his slaves, 224.
Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation of his contests with Henry IV. Emperor of
Germany, 141. The mean submission he extorted from Henry, ib. His own account
of this affair, 315. Guelfs, and Ghibelines, rise of those factions in Germany,
141. Guicciardini, the historian, instance of his superstitious reverence for
Pope Clement VII. 105, Note. Guntherus, a monk, his character of
Constantinople, at the time when taken by the Crusaders, 205.
H
Hanseatic league, when formed, and its influence on the extension of commerce,
68, 282. Henry IV. of Castile, solemnly tried and deposed by an assembly of
Castilian nobles, 119. Henry IV. Emperor of Germany, the humiliating state to
which he was reduced by Pope Gregory VII. 141, 315. Note xl. Henry VII. ot
England, his situation at his accession to the crown, 81. Enables his barons to
break their entails and sell their estates, ib. Prohibits his barons keeping
retainers, ib. Encourages agriculture and commerce, ib. Herebanum, the nature
of this fine under the feudal policy, explained, 181. Hermandad, Santa, account
of that institution, 297. History, the most calamitous period of, pointed out,
8. Holy Brotherhood, an association in Spain under that name, on what occasion
formed, 130. Holy Land, the original inducements of the Christians to rescue it
from the hands of the Infidels, 19. See Crusades, and Peter the Hermit. Honor,
points of, the ancient Swedish law for determining, 244. Hospitality, enforced
by statutes during the middle ages, 274. Huns, instance of their enthusiastic
passion for war, 164, Note iii. Some account of their policy and manners, 169,
172. See Goths.
I
Janissaries, origin, and formidable nature of those troops, 152. Imperial
chamber of Germany, instituted, 144. The occasion of its institution, 322.
Indians, North American, a comparison drawn between them and the ancient
Germans, 175. Industry, the spirit of, how excited by the infranchisement of
cities, 31. Infantry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry, taught to the rest of
Europe by the Swiss, 91. National bodies of, established in Germany, ib. In
France and Spain, ib. Inheritance, and right of representation between orphan
grandsons and their uncles, how decided in the tenth century, 245. Interest of
money, the necessity of admitting in a commercial view, 279. Preposterously
condemned by the churchmen of the middle ages, 280. The cause hence of the
exorbitant exactions of the Lombard bankers, ib. Italy, when the cities of them
began to form themselves into bodies politic, 27. Commerce first improved
there, and the reasons of it, 67. The revolutions in Europe occasioned by the
invasion of, by Charles VIII. of France, 85. The state of, at the time of this
invasion, 87. The rapid success of Charles, 88. A combination of the states of,
drives Charles out of, and gives birth to the balance of power in Europe, ib.
The political situation of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 98.
The papacy, ib. Venice, 106. Florence, 108. Naples, 109. Milan, 112. Evidences
of the desolation made there by the northern invaders of the Roman empire, 170.
How the cities of, obtained their municipal privileges, 206, Note xv. State of,
under Frederick, I. 207. Treaty of Constance between the free cities of, and
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, 209. Judgment of God, modes of acquittal by,
in the law proceedings during the middle ages, 43, 242, Note xxii. Judicium
Crucis, method of trial by, ib. Julius II. Pope, forms a confederacy, against
the Venetians at Cambray, 94. Seizes part of the Venetian territories, ib. The
confederacy dissolved, ib. Turns his schemes against France and England, 95.
Jurisprudence, ecclesiastical, more perfect in its plan, than the civil courts
of the middle ages, 55. See Law. Justice, an inquiry into the administration
of, under the feudal policy, 36. The steps toward the improvement of, as civil
liberty advanced, 37. Redress chiefly pursued by private wars, 38. Methods
taken to suppress private wars, 39. Judicial combats prohibited, 41. The
defects of judicial proceedings in the middle ages, ib. Compurgators, the
nature of that kind of evidence, 42. Methods of trial by ordeal, or acquittal
by judgment of God, 43. Origin of the supreme independent jurisdictions of the
feudal barons, 49. The extent and bad effects of their privileges, 50. The
steps taken by Monarchs to reduce the barons courts, 52. The growth of royal
courts of justice, 53. Inquiry into the canon law, ib. How improved by the
revival of the Roman law, 56. When the administration of, became a distinct
profession, 59. Justiza, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privileges,
121. An Inquiry by whom this officer was elected, 289. Who was eligible to this
office, 286. Nature of the tribunal appointed to control his administration,
287. Instance of his extensive power, ib.
K
King, his power how circumscribed by the barons, under the feudal system, 14.
By what means the Crusades tended to enlarge the regal authority, 24. Koran,
its influence in checking the Sultans of the Ottoman empire, 151.
L
Land, how held at the establishment of the feudal system, 13. See Feudal
system. Land, the property of, how considered by the ancient barbarous nations,
178, Note viii. Allodial possession of, explained, 180. The proprietors how
subjected to military service, 182. Allodial and beneficiary possession
distinguished, ib. Allodial property why generally converted into feudal, 187.
Law, when the study of it, became a distinct employment, 58. Law, canon, an
inquiry into, 54. The maxims of, more equitable than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 56. When first compiled, 263. Law, Roman, how it sunk into
oblivion, 55. Circumstances which favored the revival of it, 56. Its effects
in improving the administration of justice, ib. Its rapid spread over Europe,
265, Note xxv. Lawburrows, in the Scottish law, explained, 212. Liberty, civil,
the rise and progress of, traced, 28. How favored by the ordonances of Louis
X. of France, and his brother Philip, 35. The spirit of, how excited in France,
221, Note xix. The particulars included in the charters of, granted to
husbandmen, 223, Note xx. The influence of the Christian religion in extending,
ib. The several opportunities of obtaining, 233. Limoges, council of, its
endeavors to extinguish private wars, 233. Literature, the cultivation of,
greatly instrumental in civilizing the nations of Europe, 62. Why the first
efforts of ill directed, 63. The good effects nevertheless of the spirit of
inquiry exerted, 65. How checked in its progress, ib. Its influence on manners
and government, ib. Liturgy, the preference between the Musarabic and Romish,
how ascertained in Spain, 246. Lombards, the first bankers in Europe, 279. The
motive of their exacting exorbitant interest, 280. London, its flourishing
state at the time of Henry II. 221. Louis, le Cross, of France, his inducements
to grant privileges to towns within his own dominions, 28. See Charters. Louis,
St. the great attention he paid to the administration of justice, in appeals
which came before him, 258. Louis X. of France, his ordonances in favor of
civil liberty, 35. Louis XI. of France, his character, 76. His schemes for
depressing the nobility, 77. Sows divisions among them, 78. Increases the
standing forces, ib. Enlarges the revenues of the crown, ib. His address in
overruling the assembly of states, 79. Extends the bounds of the French
monarchy, ib. The activity of his external operations, ib. His treacherous
baseness toward the heiress of Burgundy, 84. The effects of his conduct, 85.
Louis XII. his hesitation in carrying on war against the Pope, 105, Note.
Asserts his right to the duchy of Milan, and retains Ludovico Sforza in
prison, 114.
M
Manfred, his struggles for the crown of Naples, 110. Mankind, the most
calamitous period in the history of, pointed out, 8. Manners, the barbarity of,
under the feudal establishments, after the overthrow of the Roman empire, 15.
When they began to improve, 17. Effects of the Crusades on, 22. How improved by
the infranchisement of cities 27. How improved by the erection of royal courts
of justice, in opposition to the barons courts, 52. Effects of the revival of
the Roman law on, 56. The beneficial tendency of the spirit of chivalry on, 61.
How influenced by the progress of science, 62, 65. How polished by the revival
of commerce, 70. Manumission, particulars included in the charters of, granted
to husbandmen or slaves, 223, Note xx. The form of, 225. Maximilian, archduke
of Austria, married to Mary heiress of Burgundy, 84. The influence of this
match on the state of Europe, ib. Maximilian, Emperor, institutes the Imperial
chamber, 144. Reforms the Aulic council, ib. Medici, Cosmo di, the first of the
name, the influence he acquired in Florence, 108. Milan, the state of the
duchy of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 113. Rise and progress
of the disputes concerning the succession to, ib. Mind, the human, a view of,
under the first establishment of the feudal policy in Europe, 17. The era of
its ultimate depression, and commencement of its improvement, 18. The progress
of its operations, before the full exertion of it, 62. Ministeriales, a class
of the Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the pious motives of the obligations they
entered into, 226. Moors, make a conquest of Spain, 114. By what means weakened
during their establishment there, 115. Remarks on their conduct in Spain, 116.
Municipal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy, 206, Note xv.
Secured to them by the treaty of Constance, 209. The favorite state of, under
the Roman government, 216.
N
Naples, a view of the constitution of that kingdom, at the commencement of the
sixteenth century, 109. The turbulent unsettled state of that kingdom, ib.
State of the disputes concerning the succession to the crown of, 110. The
pretensions of the French and Spanish Monarchs to the crown of, 111. Narbonne,
community of, preamble to the writ of summons of Philip the Long to, 221, Note
xix. Navigation, proof of the imperfect state of during the middle ages, 281.
Netherlands, a vigorous prosecution of the manufactures of hemp and flax there,
on the revival of commerce in Europe, 69. Normans, why so few traces of their
usages and language, to be found in England, in comparison with those of the
Saxons, 165, Note iv.
O
Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the classes of, specified, 226. Ordeal, methods
of trial by, during the middle ages, 43, 44. The influence of superstition in
dictating these means, ib. Otto, Frisingensis, his account of the state of
Italy under Frederick I. 207. Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic nature
of, 150. Becomes formidable to the Christion powers, 153.
P
Papacy. See Popedom. Paper, when first made of the present materials, 196
Paris, an inquiry into the preeminent jurisdiction of its parliament over the
other parliaments of France, 137. Its origin traced, 311, Note xxxix. The royal
edicts registered by, before admitted to be laws, 313. Parliaments, or
legislative assemblies, how formed under the feudal policy, 32. How altered by
the progress of civil liberty, 33. People, their wretched servile state under
the feudal system, 14, 36. Released from their slavish state by the
infranchisement of cities, 29. How they obtained a representation in national
councils, 31. Those who lived in the country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the feudal policy, 189, Note ix. Persia,
murder, how punished there, 253. Peter the Hermit, excites the European Princes
to undertake the Holy war, 20. Peter IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders of
the Aragonese union, and destroys the privilege of these associations, 289.
Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of summons to the community of Narbonne,
221, Note xix. Philosophy, cultivated by the Arabians, when lost in Europe,
269, Note xxviii. Its progress from them into Europe, 270. Pilgrimages to the
Holy Land, when first undertaken, 19. See Crusades and Peter the Hermit.
Placentia, council of, the Holy war resolved on by, 20. See Peter the Hermit,
and Crusades. Plunder, how divided among the ancient northern nations, 11.
Illustrated in an anecdote of Clovis, 177, Note vii. Popedom, the highest
dignity in Europe at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 99. Origin and
progress of the papal power, ib. The territories of the Popes unequal to the
support of their spiritual jurisdiction, 100. Their authority in their own
territories extremely limited. ib. The check they received from the Roman
barons, ib. Nicolas Rienzo attempts to establish a democratical government in
Rome, and to destroy the papal jurisdiction, 102. The papal authority
considerably strengthened by the Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. ib. See
Julius II. The permanent nature of ecclesiastical dominion, ib. The civil
administration of, not uniform or consistent, 103. Rome the school of political
intrigue during the sixteenth century, 104. The advantages derived from the
union of spiritual and temporal authority, ib. A view of the contests between
the Popes and the Emperors of Germany, 141. Populousness of the ancient
northern nations, an inquiry into, 4. Priscus, extract from his account of the
Roman embassy to Attila King of the Huns, 164, Note iii. Procopius, his account
of the cruel devastations made by the irruption of the northern nations, 165,
Note v. 167, 168. Property, the possession of, how secured by the French
charters of communities, 212. Proveditori, in the Venetian policy, their
office, 106.
R
Religion, how corrupted by the northern nations established in Europe under
the feudal policy, 16. Its influence in freeing mankind from the feudal
servitude, 224. Repledging, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained,
256. Reproach, words of, the ancient Swedish law of satisfaction for, 244.
Revenues, royal, very small under the feudal policy, 67. By what means
increased, 92. Rhine, origin and intention of the league of, 241. Rienzo,
Nicholas, endeavors to rescue Rome from the papal authority, and establish a
democratical form of government there, 102. Robbers, the anathema, pronounced
against them, during the middle ages, 277. Rodulph, of Hapsburgh, how he
attained election to the empire of Germany, 142. Romans, an inquiry into those
advantages which enabled them to conquer the rest of Europe, 2. The
improvements they communicated in return for their conquests, ib. The
disadvantages the provinces labored under, from their dominion, ib. Their
empire overturned by the irruption of the barbarous nations, 3. The concurrent
causes of their ruin, 5. A comparison drawn between them and the northern
nations, 7. All the civil arts established by them obliterated, 15. The
monument of their arts industriously destroyed by their barbarous invaders, 62.
Rome, papal. See Popedom. Royal truce, an account of, 236.
S
Salic laws, the manner in which they were enacted, 301. Saxons, why so many
traces of their laws, language and customs to be found in England, 165, Note
iv. Inquiry into their laws for putting an end to private wars, 238. Science,
the revival and progress of, how far instrumental in civilizing the nations of
Europe, 62. A summary view of the revival and progress of, in Europe, 269, Note
xxviii. Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his pretensions, to the duchy of
Milan, 113. Is murdered by his uncle Ludovico, 114. Sforza, Ludovico, his
private views in engaging Charles VIII. of France to invade Italy, 85. See
Charles VIII. Murders his nephew Francis, and seizes Milan, 114. Is stripped of
his dominions by Louis XII. of France, and dies in prison, ib. Shipwrecks, the
right, lords of manors, claim to, whence derived, 275. Silk, the rarity of, and
the high price it bore in ancient Rome, remarked, 278. The breeding of silk
worms, when introduced into Greece, ib. Slanes, letters of, in the law of
Scotland, what, 252. Slaves under the feudal policy, their wretched state, 190.
Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the several classes of, 223. Society, civil, the
rude state of, under the feudal establishments after the downfall of the Roman
empire, 15. The influence of the Crusades on, 22. How improved by the
establishment of municipal communities, 26. The effects the infranchisements of
the people had on, 35. Private wars how destructive to, 38. These intestine
hostilities, how suppressed, 39. The administration of justice improved by the
prohibition of judicial combats, 41. The growth of royal courts of justice, in
opposition to the barons courts, 52. How advanced by the revival of the Roman
law, 56. The effects of the spirit of chivalry in improving, 59. The revival of
commerce and its influences, 66. Solomon, Sultan, his character, 153. Spain, a
summary view of its situation, at the commencement of the fifteenth century,
70. The power of the crown of, how extended by Ferdinand, 81. National infantry
established in, 91. Is conquered by the Vandals, 115, and after by the Moors,
ib. The empire of the Moors in, how weakened, ib. Rise of the kingdoms of
Castile and Aragon, 116. Their union into the Spanish monarchy, ib. The ancient
customs still retained amidst all its revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its
constitution and laws remarked, 118. See Aragon and Castile. Various causes
which contributed to limit the regal power in, 124. The cities of, how they
attained their consideration and power, 126. The schemes of Ferdinand and
Isabella, to exalt the regal power, 127. The grand masterships, of the three
orders, annexed to the crown, 128. The association of the Holy Brotherhood, on
what occasion formed, 130. The tendency of this association to abridge the
territorial jurisdictions of the barons, ib. The cruel devastations made by the
Vandals, in the invasion of that province, 166. When the cities of, acquired
municipal privileges, 219, Note xviii. The long continuance of the practice of
private wars there, 130. The total annual revenue of the nobility, in the time
of Charles V. 294. An inquiry into the origin, and of communities or free
cities in, 295. St. Jago, the military order of, when, and on what occasion
instituted, 296, Note xxxv. Standing armies. See Armies. States general of
France, causes which rendered their authority imperfect, 133. When they lost
their legislative authority, ib. When first assembled, 310. The form of
proceeding in them, ib. Stephen, Earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of ths
progress of the Crusaders, 202. Stie^nbook, his account of the ancient Swedish
law of satisfaction for words of reproach, 244. Strangers, in what light
considered, and how treated during the middle ages, and under the feudal
policy, 275. Sugar canes, when first brought from Asia into Europe, and thence
carried to America, 479. Sultans, Turkish, their despotic power, 150. How
nevertheless limited, 151. Superstition, its influence in the legal proceedings
during the middle ages, 44. Swiss, the superior discipline of their troops, in
the fifteenth century, 90. Teach other nations the advantages of infantry over
cavalry, ib.
T
Tacitus, his account of the ancient Germans compared with that of Caesar, 172.
Tenures, feudal, the origin of, 13. See Feudal system, and Land. Theology,
scholastic, the first literary pursuits at the revival of learning in Europe,
63. Truce of God, an account of, 234. Turkey, origin of, its government, 150.
The despotic genius of this government, ib. No hereditary nobility in, 151. The
authority of the Sultans, how checked, ib. Origin of the Janissaries, 152.
Becomes formidable to the Christian Princes, 153.
V
Vandals, their cruel devastations in the invasion of Spain, 166. The havoc
made by them in Africa, 167, See G^ths. Vassals, under the feudal system, a
view of their slavish condition, 14, 26. How they obtained infranchisement, 27.
How anciently disting^ished from freemen, 179. Their wretched state under their
feudal masters, 189, Note ix. Venice, the long duration of its civil
constitution, and its flourishing state at the time of the league of Cambray,
93. Its possessions dismembered by the confederates, 94. Dissolves the
confederacy, 95. Its rise and progress, 105. Defects in its constitution, 106.
The excellency of its naval institutions, 107. Its extensive commerce, ib.
Visconti, rise of the family of, in Milan, 113. Union of the Aragonese nobles
to control the undue exercise of regal power explained, 288. This privilege
abrogated by Peter IV. 289. Universities, the first establishment of in Europe,
271.
W
War, a comparison between the manner of carrying on, by barbarous and by
civilized nations, 7: How rendered feeble in its operations by the feudal
policy, 14. The profession of arms, the most honorable, in uncivilized
nations, 58. The rise of standing armies traced, 73. By what means standing
forces became general, 89. The superiority of infantry in, how taught, 90.
Wars, private, for redressing personal injuries, under the feudal policy, an
inquiry into, 38. Methods taken to abolish this hostile practice, 39. Judicial
combat prohibited, 41. Inquiry into the sources of these customs, 228, Note
xxi. Who entitled to the privileges of exercising, ib. On what occasions
undertaken, 229. Who included, or bound to engage in these disputes, 230. Who
excluded from undertaking, ib. The cruel manner of prosecuting them, 232. A
chronological account of the expedients made use of, to suppress them, 234.
Truce of God, an account of, ib. Brotherhood of God, an account of, 236. Royal
truce, what, ib. Saxon laws of England, for putting an end to them, 239. The
obstinate attachment of the Spaniards to this practice, 240. The calamities
occasioned in Germany by, 241. Welsh, ancient, strangers killed with impunity
by them, 275. Willa, widow of Duke Hugo, extract from her charter of
manumission, granted to Cleriza, one of her slaves, 225. Willermus, archbishop
of Tire, his account of Constantinople, 205.
END OF THE INDEX TO THE PRELIMINARY WORK.
THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF CHARLES THE FIFTH, EMPEROR OF GERMANY; And of all
the KINGDOMS and STATES in EUROPE, during his Age.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, From the
Subversion of the ROMAN EMPIRE, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

CONFIRMED BY Historical PROOFS and ILLUSTRATIONS.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH, and
HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND. Author of the late elegant History
of Scotland.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

AMERICA: PRINTED FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS. M,DCC,LXX.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME THE SECOND.
BOOK FIRST, PART SECOND. Containing Transactions from the Year 1515.
CARDINAL XIMENES carries on a successful war in Navarre -- His operations in
Africa less fortunate -- Corruption of the Flemish ministers, particularly of
Chievres -- Charles persuaded by Ximenes to visit Spain -- A peace concluded
with France -- The Flemings averse to Charles's visit to Spain -- Afraid of
Ximenes -- Charles embarks for Spain -- His Flemish ministers endeavor to
prevent an interview with Ximenes -- Charles's ingratitude to Ximenes --
Occasions his death -- The Cortes held at Valladolid -- Declare Charles King --
Discontent of the Castilians, and the cause of it -- Charles holds the Cortes
of Aragon -- The Aragonese more untractable than the Castilians -- Combination
of the Castilians against the Flemish ministers -- Death of the Emperor
Maximilian -- Maximilian had endeavored to secure the Imperial crown to his
grandson -- Charles and Francis I. competitors for the empire -- Pretensions
and hopes of Charles -- Of Francis -- Views and interest of other states -- Of
the ^iss -- Of the Venetians -- Of Henry VIII. -- Of Leo ^ -- The Diet
assembles June 17th -- Views of the electors -- Offer the Imperial crown to
Frederick of Saxony -- He rejects it -- And refuses any present from Charles's
ambassadors -- Further deliberations of the electors -- They choose Charles
Emperor -- They are apprehensive of his power, and take precautions against it
-- The election notified to Charles -- Its effect upon him -- The Spaniards
dissatisfied with this event -- Their discontent increases -- An insurrection
in Valencia -- Its progress -- The Cortes of Castile summoned to meet in
Galicia -- The proceedings of that assembly -- The disaffection of the
Castilians increases -- Charles appoints regents during his absence -- And
embarks for the Low Countries. From page 3, to page 28.

BOOK SECOND. Containing Transactions till the Year 1520.
CHARLES's presence in Germany necessary -- Rise and progress of the rivalship
between Charles and Francis I. -- Their deliberations previous to the
commencement of hostilities -- They negociate with the Pope -- With the
Venetians -- With Henry VIII. -- The great power of that Monarch -- His
character -- And of his minister Cardinal Wolsey -- The court paid to Wolsey by
Francis -- And by Charles -- Charles visits England -- Insinuates himself into
favor both with the King and Wolsey -- Interview between Henry and Francis --
Henry's ideas of his own importance -- Coronation of the Emperor -- Solomon the
Magnificent ascends the Ottoman throne -- Diet called to meet at Worms Rise of
the Reformation -- From inconsiderable beginnings -- A sale of indulgences
published by Leo X. -- So conducted as to give general offense -- First
appearance of Luther, and his character -- He opposes the sale of indulgences
-- He publishes his theses against them -- Supported by his own order -- Many
endeavor to confute him -- The court of Rome at first disregard Luther -- The
progress of Luther's opinions -- He is summoned to appear at Rome -- The Pope
empowers his legate to try him in Germany -- Luther appears before the legate
-- His intrepid behavior -- His appeal -- He is supported by the Elector of
Saxony -- Motives of the legate's conduct -- Luther's perilous situation -- He
appeals to a general council -- A new bull in favor of indulgences --
Maximilian's death an advantage to Luther -- Suspension of proceedings against
Luther -- He begins to call in question the papal authority -- Reformation in
Switzerland -- Luther's boldness and progress -- Bull of excommunication
published against him -- The effects of this in Germany -- And upon Luther --
State of the Reformation when Charles arrived in Germany -- Reflections upon
the conduct of the court of Rome -- And upon the conduct of Luther -- An
inquiry into the causes which contributed to the progress of the Reformation --
The long schism in the fourteenth century -- The pontificates of Alexander VI.
and of Julius II. -- The immoral lives of the clergy -- The facility with which
these immoralities were pardoned -- The exorbitant wealth of the church --
Particularly in Germany -- Where the clergy usurped a great part of the
property -- The vast personal immunities of ecclesiastics -- Their
encroachments on the jurisdiction of the laity -- The dreadful effect of
spiritual censures. -- The devices of ecclesiastics to secure their usurpations
-- The German ecclesiastics mostly foreigners -- Nominated by the Pope -- The
expedients for restraining this power of the Pope's ineffectual -- Venality of
the court of Rome -- It drained other countries of their wealth -- The united
effect of all these causes -- Men prepared to embrace Luther's opinions -- And
to tolerate his defects -- The effect of the invention of printing on the
Reformation -- And of the revival of learning -- Proceedings of the Diet at
Worms -- The Emperor's views with regard to Luther -- He is summoned to appear
-- His undaunted spirit -- His reception at Worms -- The manner of his
appearance -- Edict against him -- He is seized and concealed at Wartburgh --
Progress of his opinions -- Decree of the University of Paris condemning them
-- Henry VIII. writes against them -- Luther's reply to both -- State of
affairs between Charles and Francis -- Henry VIII. favors the Emperor -- Leo
hesitates between the rivals -- Concludes a treaty with Charles -- Death of
Chievres, the Emperor's favorite and minister -- Commencement of hostilities
in Navarre -- Progress of the French -- They enter Castile -- They are defeated
and driven out of Navarre -- Hostilities begun in the Low Countries -- Siege of
Mezieres by the Imperialists -- Congress at Calais, under the mediation of
England -- Without any effect -- League against France between the Emperor and
Henry VIII. -- Hostilities in Italy -- The Milanese disgusted with the French
government -- The Pope declares against Francis -- War in the Milanese --
Progress of the Imperialists -- Become masters of Milan -- Death of Leo X. --
Adrian elected Pope -- War renewed in the Milanese -- The French defeated in
the battle of Bicocca -- Dr^^en out of the Milanese -- Lose Genoa -- Henry
VIII. declares war against France -- Charles visits England -- The English
invade France -- With little success -- Solyman's conquest of Rhodes From page
29, to page 101.

BOOK THIRD. Containing Transactions till the Year 1524.
CIVIL war in Castile -- Insurrection of Toledo -- Of Segovia -- Measures of
Adrian, in order to punish them -- His troops repulsed at Segovia -- And at
Medino del Campo -- Adrian disbands his troops -- The views and pretensions of
the commons of Castile -- Their confederacy by the name of the Holy Junta --
They disclaim Adrian's authority -- And get possession of Queen Joanna -- Carry
on government in her name -- And deprive Adrian of all power -- The Emperor
alarmed -- His measures with respect to the malcontents -- The large
remonstrance of the junta concerning their grievances -- The spirit of liberty
which it breathed -- Irritates the nobles -- The deputies of the junta dare not
present their remonstrance -- Violent propositions of the junta -- They take
the field -- The regents and nobles arm against them -- Imprudence and ill
success of the general of the junta -- The junta adhere to their system --
Their expedients for raising money -- Lose time in negociations with the
nobility -- Elated with their success in some small rencounters -- Imprudence
of their conduct -- The nobles attack the army of the junta, and defeat it --
Padilla their general put to death -- Ruin of the party -- Padilla's wife
defends Toledo with great spirit -- Fatal effects of this civil war -- The
progress of the insurrection in Valencia -- Appearances of disaffection in
Aragon -- Formidable insurrection in Majorca -- Causes which prevented the
union of the malcontents -- The Emperor's prudent and generous behavior
toward the malcontents -- Adrian sets out for Rome, and his ill reception
there -- His endeavors to restore peace in Europe -- A new war against the
French King -- Francis's vigorous measures in opposition to it -- Suspended
upon the discovery of the constable Bourbon's conspiracy -- His character and
causes of his disaffection -- His secret negociations with the Emperor -- He
flies into Italy -- The French invade the Milanese -- Their ill conduct --
Death of Adrian VI. -- Election of Clement VII. -- Wolsey disappointed and
filled with resentment -- Henry's operations in France -- And those of the
Germans and Spaniards -- End of the campaign -- Sentiments of the new Pope --
Imperial army ready to take the field early -- Retarded by a mutiny of the
troops -- The French obliged to abandon the Milanese -- Death of the chevalier
Bayard, and ruin of the French army -- Progress of the Reformation in Germany
-- Luther translates the Bible -- Several cities abolish the rites of the
Popish church -- Measures employed by Adrian in order to check the progress of
the Reformation -- Diet of Nuremberg propose a general council as the proper
remedy -- Artifices of the nuncio to elude it -- The Diet present a list of an
hundred grievances to the Pope -- The recess of the Diet -- The Diet of great
benefit to the Reformation -- Adrian's conduct censured at Rome -- Clement's
measures against Luther, and his dread of a general council -- The negociations
of his nuncio in a second Diet at Nuremberg -- Attended with little effect.
From page 102, to page 150.

BOOK FOURTH Containing Transactions from the Year 1524, to the Year 1527.
VIEWS of the Italian States with respect to Charles and Francis -- Charles
resolves to invade France -- The Imperialists enter Provence -- Prudent
measures of Francis -- Imperialists forced to retreat -- Francis elated with
his success -- Resolves to invade the Milanese -- Appoints his mother Regent
during his absence -- Operations in the Milanese -- Embarassing state of the
Imperialists -- Francis besieges Pavia -- His vigorous efforts -- The town
gallantly defended -- The Pope concludes a treaty of neutrality -- Francis
invades Naples -- Efforts of Pescara and Bourbon -- They march to attack the
French -- The battle of Pavia -- The French army routed -- Francis taken
prisoner -- Effects of this victory upon Charles -- The schemes he began to
form -- The general consternation in France -- The prudent conduct of the
Regent -- Effects of the victory at Pavia on Henry VIII. -- On the Italian
powers -- Mutiny in the Imperial army -- The Emperor's deliberations concerning
the manner of improving his victory -- The rigorous terms he proposes to
Francis -- Francis carried prisoner to Spain -- Henry VIII. concludes a treaty
with France in order to procure his release -- Morone's intrigues in order to
overturn the Emperor's power in Italy -- His negociations with Pescara -- The
rigorous treatment of Francis in Spain -- Endangers his life -- The Emperor
visits him -- The constable Bourbon arrives at Madrid -- Appointed general of
the Imperial army in Italy -- Negociations for procuring Francis's liberty --
Francis in despair resolves to resign his crown -- Charles alarmed -- Treaty of
Madrid, 1526 -- Sentiments of that age with respect to it -- Francis secretly
protests against the validity of it -- Ratified in France -- Francis set at
liberty -- The Emperor's marriage with Isabella of Portugal -- Affairs of
Germany -- Grievances of the peasants -- Their insurrection in Suabia --
Quelled -- Their insurrection in Thuringia -- More formidable -- Their
fanatical spirit -- The peasants defeated -- Luther's moderate and prudent
conduct -- Prussia wrested from the Teutonic order -- First measures of the
French King upon his return to France -- A league formed against the Emperor --
The Pope absolves Francis from his oath to observe the treaty of Madrid -- The
Emperor alarmed -- Requires Francis to perform what he had stipulated -- His
answer -- The Emperor's preparations for war -- Disquietude of the Italian
powers -- Feeble operations of the confederates -- The Colonnas become, masters
of Rome -- Accommodation between the Pope and Emperor -- The Imperial army
reinforced -- The Emperor's finances deficient -- Bourbon sets Morone at
liberty -- His deliberations with respect to his motions -- Marches to invade
the Pope's territories -- Mutiny of his troops -- The Pope's irresolution and
imprudence -- Concludes a treaty with the viceroy of Naples -- Which Bourbon
disregards -- And advances toward Rome -- The Pope's preparations for defense
-- Bourbon assaults Rome -- Bourbon slain -- The city taken -- And plundered --
The Pope besieged in the castle of St. Angelo -- Surrenders himself a prisoner
-- The Emperor's behavior at this juncture -- Solomon invades Hungary --
Defeat of the Hungarians and death of their King -- Ferdinand elected King --
Progress of the Reformation. From page 151, to page 220.

BOOK FIFTH. Containing Transactions in and from the Year 1527, to the Year
1535.
GENERAL indignation excited against the Emperor -- Confederacy against him --
The Florentines recover their freedom -- The Imperial troops inactive -- The
French army marches into Italy -- Their operations -- The Emperor sets the Pope
at liberty -- Overtures of the Emperor to Francis and Henry -- They declare war
against the Emperor -- Francis challenges the Emperor to single combat -- The
effect of this in promoting the custom of dueling -- Retreat of the
Imperialists from Rome -- The French besiege Naples -- Circumstances which
retard the progress of it -- Revolt of Andrew Doria from France -- Wretched
situation of the French army before Naples -- Raise the siege -- Genoa recovers
its liberty -- Disinterested conduct of Doria -- Operations in the Milanese --
Negociations between Charles and Francis -- Separate treaty between the Pope
and Charles -- Peace of Cambray between Charles and Francis -- Advantageous to
the Emperor -- Dishonorable to Francis -- Henry VIII. acquiesces in it -- His
scheme of being divorced from his Queen -- The Emperor visits Italy -- His
moderation, and the motives of it -- Re-establishes the authority of the Medici
in Florence -- State of affairs, civil and religious in Germany -- Proceedings
of the Diet at Spires -- The followers of Luther protest against them --
Deliberations of the Pope and Emperor -- The Emperor present at the Diet of
Augsburgh, March 22d, 1530 -- The confession of Augsburgh Severe decree against
the Protestants -- They enter into a league at Smalkalde -- The Emperor
proposes to have his brother elected King of the Romans -- The Protestants
averse to it -- He is chosen -- Negociations of the Protestants with France --
With England -- Charles courts the Protestants -- Grants them favorable terms
-- The campaign in Hungary -- The Emperor's interview with the Pope in his way
to Spain -- Negociations concerning a general council -- And for preserving the
tranquillity of Italy -- Designs and negociations of the French King against
the Emperor -- Particularly with the Pope -- Interview between the Pope and
Francis -- Pope's conduct with regard to the King of England's divorce -- The
papal authority abolished in England -- Death of Clement VII. -- Election of
Paul III. -- Insurrection of the Anabaptists in Germany -- Origin and tenets of
that sect -- They settle in Munster -- And become masters of that city --
Establish a new form of government -- The Bishop of Munster takes arms against
him -- John of Leyden acquires great authority among the Anabaptists -- Elected
King -- His licentious tenets and conduct -- A confederacy against the
Anabaptists -- Their town besieged -- Distress and fanaticism of the besieged
-- The city taken -- Punishment of the King and his associates -- Character of
the sect since that period -- Proceedings and authority of the league of
Smalkalde -- The King of the Romans courts them -- Paul III. calls a general
council to meet at Mantua -- The Emperor's expedition to Africa, and state of
that country -- Rise of the piratical states, and of the Barbarossas -- Horuc,
the elder brother, becomes master of Algiers -- The progress of Hayraddin, the
second brother -- Puts his dominions under the protection of the Sultan -- His
scheme for conquering Tunis -- Its success -- Barbarossa's formidable power --
The exiled King of Tunis implores the Emperor's assistance -- His preparation
for the expedition -- Lands in Africa -- And lays siege to the Goletta -- Takes
it by storm -- And defeats Barbarossa's army -- Tunis surrenders -- Restores
the exiled King to his throne -- The glory which the Emperor acquired. From
page 221, to page 291.

BOOK SIXTH. Containing Transactions in and from the Year 1535, to the Year
1542.
THE causes of a new war between the Emperor and Francis -- Francis destitute
of allies -- His negociations with the German Protestants -- Irritates them --
And they refuse to join him -- The French army advances toward Italy -- Takes
possession of the Duke of Savoy's dominions -- The city of Geneva recovers its
liberty -- The Emperor unable to assist the Duke of Savoy -- Death of Sforza
Duke of Milan -- Francis's pretensions to that duchy -- Charles's preparations
for war -- The Emperor enters Rome -- His public invective against Francis --
Challenges him to single combat -- The motives of this rash measure -- Charles
invades France -- Recovers part of the Duke of Savoy's dominions -- Francis's
plan for the defense of his kingdom -- Entrusts Montmorency with the execution
of it -- He encamps at Avignon -- Charles enters Provence -- Besieges
Marseilles -- Montmorency's fortitude in adhering to his plan of defense -- The
retreat and wretched condition of the Imperial army -- Operations in Picardy --
Death of the Dauphin -- Imputed to poison -- Decrees of the parliament of Paris
against the Emperor -- Campaign opens in the Low Countries -- A suspension of
arms there -- And in Piedmont -- Motives of it -- Of which Francis's alliance
with the Turkish Emperor the most considerable -- Negociations of a peace
between Charles and Francis -- The Pope conducts these in person -- A truce for
ten years concluded at Nice -- Interview between Charles and Francis at
Aigues-Mortes -- The assassination of Alexander de Medici -- Cosmo de Medici
placed at the head of the Florentine state -- His government opposed by the
Florentine exiles -- The friendship between Francis and Henry VIII. begins to
abate -- The Emperor courts Henry -- Progress of the Reformation --
Negociations and intrigues with respect to a general council -- A partial
reformation of abuses by the Pope -- A league formed in opposition to that at
Smalkalde -- Alarms the Protestants -- The Reformation established in every
part of Saxony -- A mutiny of the Imperial troops -- Cortes of Castile held at
Toledo -- The complaints and dissatisfaction of that assembly -- The ancient
constitution of the Cortes subverted -- The Spanish grandees still possessed
high privileges -- Insurrection at Ghent -- Pretensions of the citizens --
Proceedings against them -- They take arms and offer to submit to France --
Francis declines their offer -- Communicates their intentions to the Emperor --
Charles's deliberation concerning his journey to the Netherlands -- Proposes to
pass through France -- To which Francis consents -- His reception in that
kingdom -- The Emperor^s solicitude and disingenuity -- Reduction of Ghent --
Punishment of the citizens -- Charles refuses to fulfill his engagements to
Francis -- The Pope authorizes the institution of the Jesuits -- Fanaticism of
Loyola its founder -- The Pope's motives for confirming the order -- Its
constitution and genius merit particular attention -- The object of the order
singular -- Peculiarities in the form of its policy, particularly with respect
to the power of the general -- Circumstances which enable him to exercise it
with the greatest advantage -- Progress of the power and influence of the order
-- Progress of its wealth -- Pernicious effects of these on civil society --
Some advantages resulting from the institution of this order -- Particularly to
literature -- More especially from the settlements of the Jesuits in Paraguay
-- Even here the ambition of the order discernible -- Reason for giving so full
a view of the government of the order -- Affairs of Germany -- A conference
between the Popish and Protestant divines -- Recess of the Diet of Ratisbon in
favor of a general council -- Gives offense both to Papists and Protestants --
Charles courts the Protestants -- Affairs of Hungary -- Death of the King of
Hungary -- Ferdinand's efforts to obtain the crown -- Character and power of
Martinuzzi -- Calls in the Turks -- Solyman's ungenerous conduct -- Ferdinand's
overtures to Solomon -- The Emperor Charles visits Italy -- His expedition
against Algiers, and the motives of it -- His preparations -- Lands in Africa
-- The disasters which befell his army and fleet -- Obliged to retreat -- His
fortitude of mind, and return to Europe. From page 292, to page 374.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I. (Part II.)
XIMENES, though engaged in such great schemes of domestic policy, and
embarrassed by the artifices and intrigues of the Flemish ministers, had the
burden of two foreign wars to support. The one was in Navarre, invaded by its
unfortunate monarch, John d'Albret. The death of Ferdinand, the absence of
Charles, and the discord and disaffection which reigned among the Spanish
nobles, seemed to present him with a favorable opportunity of recovering his
dominions. The Cardinal's vigilance, however, defeated a measure so well
concerted. Foreseeing the danger to which that kingdom might be exposed, one of
his first acts of administration was to order thither a considerable body of
troops. While the king was employed with one part of his army in the siege of
St. Jean Pied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great experience and courage,
attacked the other by surprise, and cut it to pieces. The king instantly
retreated with precipitation, and an end was put to the war P. Mart. Ep 570.
. But as Navarre was filled at that time with towns and castles, slightly
fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being unable to resist an enemy, served
only to furnish him with places of retreat; Ximenes, always bold and decisive
in his measures, ordered every one of these to be dismantled, except Pampeluna,
the fortifications of which he proposed to render very strong. To this uncommon
precaution Spain owes the possession of Navarre. The French, since that period,
have often entered, and have as often overrun the open country; but while they
were exposed to all the inconveniences attending an invading army, the
Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the neighboring provinces to oppose
them; and the French, being destitute of strong towns to which they could
retire, have been obliged to abandon their conquest with as much rapidity as
they gained it.

THE war which he carried on in Africa, against the famous adventurer Horuc
Barbarossa, who, from a private corsair, raised himself by his singular valor
and address, to be king of Algiers and Tunis, was far from being equally
successful. The ill conduct of the Spanish general, and the rash valor of his
troops, presented Barbarossa with an easy victory. Many perished in the battle,
more in the retreat, and the remainder returned into Spain covered with infamy.
The magnanimity, however, with which the Cardinal bore this disgrace, the only
one he experienced during his administration, added new luster to his character
Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.
. Great composure of temper under a disapointment, was not expected from a man
so remarkable for the eagerness and impatience with which he urged on the
execution of all his schemes.

THIS disaster was soon forgotten; while the conduct of the Flemish court
proved the cause of constant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal, but to the
whole Spanish nation. All the great qualities of Chievres, the prime minister
and favorite of the young king, were sullied with an ignoble and sordid
avarice. The accession of his master to the crown of Spain, opened a new and
copious source for the gratification of this passion. During the time of
Charles's residence in Flanders, the whole tribe of pretenders to offices or to
favor resorted thither. They soon discovered that, without the patronage of
Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment; nor did they want sagacity to
find out the proper method of securing him. Vast sums of money were drawn out
of Spain. Every thing was venal, and disposed of to the highest bidder. After
the example Chievres, the inferior Flemish ministers engaged in this traffic,
which became as general and avowed, as it was infamous Miniana. Contin. l. i.
c. 2.
. The Spaniards were filled with rage when they beheld offices of great
importance to the welfare of their country, set to sale by strangers,
unconcerned for its honor or its happiness. Ximenes; disinterested in his
whole administration, and a stranger, from his native grandeur of mind, to the
passion of avarice, inveighed with the utmost boldness against the venality of
the Flemings. He represented to the King in strong terms, the murmurs and
indignation which their behavior excited among a free and high-spirited
people, and besought him to set out without loss of time for Spain, that, by
his presence, he might dissipate the clouds which were gathering all over the
kingdom P. Mart. Ep. 576.
.

CHARLES was fully sensible that he had delayed too long to take possession of
his dominions in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however, stood in his way, and
detained him in the Low Countries. The war which the league of Cambray, had
kindled in Italy, still subsisted; though during its course, the armies of all
the parties engaged in it, (...) taken different directions. France was now in
alliance with Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy. Maximilian and
Ferdinand had for some years carried on hostilities against France, their
original ally, to the valor of whose troops the confederacy owed all its
success. Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted this war to his
grandson; and there was reason to expect that Maximilian, always fond of new
enterprises, would persuade the young monarch to enter into with ardour. But
the Flemings, who had long possessed an extensive commerce, which during the
league of Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the ruins of the Venetian
trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern the
true interest of his country, and not warped on this occasion by his love of
wealth, warmly declared for maintaining peace with the French nation. Francis
I. destitute of allies, and solicitous to secure his late conquests in Italy by
a treaty, listened with joy to the first overtures of accommodation. Chievres
himself conducted the negotiation in name of Charles. Gouffier appeared as
plenipotentiary for Francis. Each of them had presided over the education of
the prince whom he represented. They had both adapted the same pacific system;
and were equally persuaded that the union of the two monarchs was the happiest
event for themselves, as well as for their kingdoms. In such hands the
negotiation did not languish. A few days after opening their conferences at
Noyon, they concluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual defense between the
two monarchs; Aug. 13, 1516. the chief articles in which were, that Francis
should give in marriage to Charles his eldest daughter, the princess Louisa, an
infant of a year old, and as her dowry, should make over to him all his claims
and pretensions upon the kingdom of Naples; that in consideration of Charles's
being already in possession of Naples, he should till the accomplishment of the
marriage pay an hundred thousand crowns a year to the French king; and the half
of that sum annually, as long as the princess had no children; that when
Charles shall arrive in Spain, the heirs of the King of Navarre may represent
to him their right to that kingdom: and if he do not give them satisfaction,
Francis shall be at liberty to assist them with all his forces Leonard Recueil
des Traitez, tom. ii. 69.
. This alliance not only united Charles and Francis, but obliged Maximilian,
who was unable alone to cope with the French and Venetians, to enter into a
treaty with those powers, which put a final period to that bloody and tedious
war which the league of Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a few years of
universal tranquillity, and was indebted for that blessing to two princes,
whose rivalship and ambition kept it in perpetual discord and agitation during
the remainder of their reigns.

BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe passage into Spain. It was not,
however, the interest of his Flemish ministers, that he should visit that
kingdom soon. While he resided in Flanders, the revenues of the Spanish crown
were spent there, and they engrossed, without any competitors, all the effects
of their monarch's generosity; their country became the seat of government, and
all favors were dispensed by them. Of all these advantages, they ran the
risque of seeing themselves deprived, from the moment that their sovereign
entered Spain. The Spaniards would naturally assume the direction of their own
affairs; the Low Countries would be considered only as a province of that
mighty monarchy; and they who now distributed the favors of the prince to
others, must then be content to receive them from the hands of strangers. But
what Chievres chiefly wished to avoid was, an interview between the King and
Ximenes. On the other hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and the magnanimity of
that prelate, gave him a wonderful ascendant over the minds of men; and it was
extremely probable, these great qualities, added to the reverence due to his
age and office, would command the respect of a young prince, who, capable of
noble and generous sentiments himself, would, in proportion to his admiration
of the Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference toward persons of another
character. Or, on the other hand, if Charles should allow his Flemish
favorites to retain all the influence over his councils which they at present
possessed, it was easy to foresee that the Cardinal would remonstrate loudly
against such an indignity to the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of
his country with the same intrepidity and success, that he had asserted the
prerogatives of the crown. For these reasons, all his Flemish counselors
combined to retard his departure; and Charles, unsuspicious, from want of
experience, and fond of his native country, suffered himself to be
unnecessarily detained in the Netherlands a whole year after signing the treaty
of Noyon.

THE repeated entreaties of Ximenes, the advice of his grandfather Maximilian,
and the impatient murmurs of his Spanish subjects in 1517. prevailed on him at
last to embark, Sept. 13. He was attended not only by Chievres, his
prime-minister, but by a numerous and splendid train of the Flemish nobles,
fond of beholding the grandeur, or of sharing in the bounty of their prince.
After a dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa Viciosa, in the province of
Asturias, and was received with such loud acclamations of joy, as a new
monarch, whose arrival was so ardently desired, had reason to expect. The
Spanish nobility resorted to their sovereign from all parts of the kingdom, and
displayed a magnificence which the Flemings were unable to emulate P. Mart. Ep.
599. 601.
.

XIMENES, who considered the presence of the king as the greatest blessing to
his dominions, was advancing toward the coast, as fast as the infirm state of
his health would permit, in order to receive him. During his regency, and
notwithstanding his extreme old age, he abated, in no degree, the rigor or
frequency of his mortifications; and to these he added such laborious assiduity
in business, as would have worn out the most youthful and vigorous
constitution. Every day he employed several hours in devotion; he celebrated
mass in person; he even allotted some space for study. Notwithstanding these
occupations he regularly attended the council; he received and read all papers
presented to him; he dictated letters and instructions; and took under his
inspection all business, civil, ecclesiastical, or military. Every moment of
his time was filled up with some serious employment. The only amusement in
which he indulged himself by way of relaxation after business, was to canvass,
with a few friars and divines, some intricate article in scholastic theology.
Wasted by such a course of life, the infirmities of age daily grew upon him. On
his journey, a violent disorder seized him at Bos Equillos, attended with
uncommon symptoms; which his followers considered as the effects of poison
Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3
, but could not agree whether the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred of
the Spanish noble, or to the malice of the Flemish courtiers. This accident
obliging him to stop short, he wrote to Charles, and with his usual boldness
advised him to dismiss all the strangers in his train, whose numbers and credit
gave offense already to the Spaniards, and would ere long alienate the
affections of the whole people. At the same time he earnestly desired to have
an interview with the king, that he might inform him of the state of the
nation, and the temper of his subjects. To prevent this, not only the Flemings,
but the Spanish Grandees employed all their address, and industriously kept
Charles at a distance from Aranda, the place to which the Cardinal had removed.
Through their suggestions, every measure that he recommended was rejected; the
utmost care was taken to make him feel, and to point out to the whole nation,
that his power was on the decline; even in things purely trivial, such a choice
was always made, as was deemed most disagreeable to him. Ximenes did not bear
this treatment with his usual fortitude of spirit. Conscious of his own
integrity and merit, he expected a more grateful return from a prince, to whom
he delivered a kingdom more flourishing than it had been in any former age, and
authority more extensive and better established, than the most illustrious of
his ancestors had ever possessed. He could not, therefore, on many occasions,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and complaints. He lamented the
fate of his country, and foretold the calamities it would suffer from the
insolence, the rapaciousness, and ignorance of strangers. While his mind was
agitated by these passions, he received a letter from the king, in which, after
a few cold and formal expressions of regard, he was allowed to retire to his
diocese; that after a life of such continued labor, he might end his days in
tranquillity. This message proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is
probable, would not survive disgrace; perhaps his generous heart could not bear
the prospect of the misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Whichsoever of
these opinions we embrace, certain it is that he expired Nov. 8, a few hours
after reading the letter Marsallier Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gometius lib. vii.
p. 206, etc. Baudier Hist. de Ximen. p. 208.
. The variety, the grandeur, and the success of his schemes, during a regency
of only twenty months, leave it doubtful whether his sagacity in council, his
prudence in conduct, or his boldness in execution deserve the greatest praise.
His reputation is still high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but for sanctity;
and he is the only prime minister mentioned in history, whom his contemporaries
reverenced as a saint Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 746.
, and to whom the people under his government ascribed the power of working
miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made his public entry, with great
pomp, into Valladolid in 1518, whither he had summoned the Cortes of Castile,
though he assumed on all occasions the name of king, that title had never been
acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards considering Joanna as possessed of
the sole right to the crown, and no example of a son's having enjoyed the title
of king during the life of his parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous respect for ancient forms, and that aversion to
innovation, which are conspicuous in popular assemblies. The presence, however,
of their prince, the address, the artifices, and the threats of his ministers,
prevailed on them at last to declare him king, in conjunction with his mother,
whose name they appointed to be placed before that of her son in all public
acts; and declared that, if at any future period she should recover the
exercise of reason, the whole royal authority should return into her hands. At
the same time, they voted a free gift of six hundred thousand ducats to be paid
in three years, a sum more considerable than had ever been granted to any
former monarch Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 608. Sandov. p. 12.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of the Cortes to the will of the king, the
most violent symptoms of dissatisfaction with his government began to break out
in the kingdom. Chievres had acquired over the mind of the young monarch the
ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a parent. Charles seemed to have no
sentiments but those which his minister inspired, and scarce uttered a word but
what he put into his mouth. He was constantly surrounded by Flemings; no person
got access to him without their permission; nor was any admitted to audience
but in their presence. As he spoke the Spanish language very imperfectly, his
answers were always extremely short, and often delivered with hesitation. From
all these circumstances, many of the Spaniards were led to believe that he was
a prince of a slow and narrow genius; some pretended to discover a strong
resemblance between him and his mother, and began to whisper that his capacity
for government would never be far superior to hers; and though they who had the
best opportunity of judging concerning his character, maintained, that
notwithstanding such unpromising appearances, he possessed a large fund of
knowledge and sagacity Sandoval, p. 31. P. Mart. Ep. 655.
; yet all agreed in condemning his partiality toward his countrymen, and his
attachment to his favorites as unreasonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for
Charles, these favorites were unworthy of his confidence. To amass wealth
seems to have been their only aim; and as they had reason to fear, that either
their master's good sense, or the indignation of the Spaniards, might soon
abridge their power, they hastened to improve the present opportunity, and
their avarice was the more rapacious, because they expected their authority to
be of no long duration. All honors, offices and benefices, were either
engrossed by the Flemings, or publicly sold by them. Chievres, his wife, and
Sauvage, whom Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had imprudently raised to be
chancellor of Castile, vied with each other in all the refinements of extortion
and venality. Not only the Spanish historians, who, from resentment, may be
suspected of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, an Italian, who resided
at that time in the court of Spain, and who was under no temptation to deceive
the persons to whom his letters are addressed, give a description which is
almost incredible, of the insatiable and shameless covetousness of the
Flemings. According to Angleria's calculation, which he asserts to be extremely
moderate, they remitted into the Low Countries, in the space of ten months, no
less a sum than a million and one hundred thousand ducats. The nomination of
William de Croy, Chievres's nephew, a young man not of canonical age, to the
Archbishopric of Toledo, exasperated the Spaniards more than all these
exactions. They considered the elevation of a stranger to the head of their
church, and to the richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an injury, but
as an insult to the whole nation; and both clergy and laity, the former from
interest, the latter from indignation, joined in exclaiming against it
Sandoval, 2^ -- 31. P. Mart. Ep. 608, 611, 613, 614, 622, 623, 639. Miniana,
Contin, lib. i. c. 3. p 8.
.

CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with his administration, set out for
Saragossa, the capital of Aragon, that he might be present in the Cortes of
that kingdom. On his way thither, he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom
he sent into Germany on the pretense of visiting their grandfather, Maximilian,
in his old age. To this prudent precaution, Charles owed the preservation of
his Spanish dominions. During the violent commotions which arose there soon
after this period, the Spaniards would infallibly have offered the crown to a
prince, who was the darling of the whole nation; nor did Ferdinand want
ambition, or cousellors, that would have prompted him to accept of the offer P.
Martyr, Ep. 619. Ferreras, viii. 460.
.

THE Aragonese had not hitherto acknowledged Charles as King, nor would they
allow the Cortes to be assembled in his name, but in that of the Justiza, to
whom, during an interregnum, this privilege belonged P. Martyr, Ep. 605.
. The opposition Charles had to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more
violent and obstinate than that which he had overcome in Castile; after long
delays, however, and with much difficulty, he persuaded the members to confer
on him the title of king, in conjunction with his mother. At the same time he
bound himself by that solemn oath, which the Aragonese exacted of their king,
never to violate any of their rights or liberties. When a donative was
demanded, the members were still more intractable; many months elapsed before
they would agree to grant Charles two hundred thousand ducats, and that sum
they appropriated so strictly for paying debts of the crown, which had long
been forgotten, that a very small part of it came into the King's hands. What
had happened in Castile taught them caution, and determined them rather to
satisfy the claims of their fellow citizens, how obsolete soever, than to
furnish strangers the means of enriching themselves with the spoils of their
country P. Martyr, Ep. 615 -- 634.
.

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, ambassadors arrived at Saragossa from
Francis I. and the young king of Navarre, demanding the restitution of that
kingdom in terms of the treaty of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Castilian
nobles whom he consulted on this occasion, discovered any inclination to part
with this acquisition. A conference held soon after at Montpelier, in order to
bring this matter to an amicable issue, was altogether fruitless; and while the
French urged the injustice of the usurpation, the Spaniards were attentive only
to its importance P. Martyr. Ep. 605, 633. 640.
.

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia in 1519, where he wasted as much
time, encountered more difficulties, and gained less money. The Flemings were
now become so odious in every province of Spain by their exactions, that the
desire of mortifying them, and of disappointing their avarice, augmented the
jealousy with which a free people usually conduct their deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the weight and rigor of the
oppressive schemes, carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer to submit
with a tameness fatal to themselves, and which rendered them the objects of
scorn among the rest of the Spaniards. Segovia, Toledo, Seville, and several
other cities of the first rank, entered into a confederacy for the defense of
their rights and privileges; and notwithstanding the silence of the nobility,
who, on this occasion, discovered neither the public spirit, nor the
resolution which became their order, they laid before the king a full view of
the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-administration of his favorites. The
preferment of strangers; the exportation of the current coin; the increase of
taxes, were the grievances of which they chiefly complained; and of these they
demanded redress with that boldness, which is natural to a free people. These
remonstrances, presented at first at Saragossa, and renewed afterward at
Barcelona, Charles treated with great neglect. The confederacy, however, of
these cities at this juncture, was the beginning of that famous union among the
commons of Castile, which not long after threw the kingdom into such violent
convulsions, shook the throne, and almost overturned the constitution P.
Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.
.

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he received the account of an event
which interested him much more than the murmurs of the Castilians, or the
scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia. This was the death of the Emperor
Maximilian, January 12, an occurrence of small importance in itself, for he was
a prince conspicuous neither for his virtues, his power, nor his abilities; but
rendered by its consequences more memorable than any that had happened during
several ages. It broke that profound and universal peace which then reigned in
the Christian world; it excited a rivalship between two princes, which threw
all Europe into agitation, and kindled wars more general, and of longer
duration, than had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of the French king, Charles VIII.
into Italy, had inspired the European Princes with new ideas concerning the
importance of the Imperial dignity. The claims of the Empire upon some of the
Italian states were numerous; its jurisdiction over others was extensive; and
though the former had been almost abandoned, and the latter seldom exercised,
under princes of no abilities, and of little influence, it was obvious, that in
the hands of an Emperor possessed of power and genius, they would be employed
as engines for stretching his dominion over the greater part of that country.
Even Maximilian, feeble and unsteady as his conduct always was, had availed
himself of the infinite pretensions of the Empire, and had reaped advantage
from every war and every negotiation in Italy during his reign. These
considerations, added to the dignity of the station, confessedly the first
among Christian princes, and to the rights inherent in the office, which, if
exerted with vigor, were far from being inconsiderable, rendered the imperial
crown more than ever an object of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had discovered great solicitude to
preserve this dignity in the Austrian family, and to procure the king of Spain
to be chosen his successor. But he himself having never been crowned by the
Pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age, was considered only as Emperor
elect; and though historians did not attend to that distinction, neither the
Italian nor German chancery bestowed any other title upon him than that of King
of the Romans; and no example occurring in history of any person's being chosen
a successor to a king of the Romans, the Germans, always tenacious of their
forms, and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office for which their
constitution knew no name, obstinately refused to gratify Maximilian in that
point Guicciardini, lib. 13. p. 15. Hist. Gener. d'Allemagne, par P. Bar,
tom. vi, i. p. 1087. P. Heuter, Rer. Austr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c.
2, p. 183.
.

BY his death, this difficulty was at once removed, and Charles openly aspired
to that dignity which his grandfather had attempted, without success to secure
for him. At the same time Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the lists
against him; and the attention of all Europe was fixed upon this competition,
no less illustrious from the high rank of the candidates, than from the
importance of the prize for which they contended. Each of them urged his
pretensions with sanguine expectations, and with no unpromising prospect of
success. Charles considered the Imperial crown as belonging to him of right,
from its long continuance in the Austrian line; he knew that none of the German
princes possessed power or influence enough to appear as his antagonist; he
flattered himself, that no consideration would induce the natives of Germany to
exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which during so many ages had been
deemed peculiar to their own nation; and least of all, that they would confer
this honor upon Francis I. the sovereign of a people whose genius, and laws,
and manners differed so widely from those of the Germans, that it was scarcely
possible to establish any cordial union between them: he trusted not a little
to the effect of Maximilian's negociations, which though they did not attain
their end, had prepared the minds of the Germans for his elevation to the
imperial throne; but what he relied on as his chief recommendation, was the
fortunate situation of his hereditary dominions in Germany, which served as a
natural barrier to the Empire against the encroachments of the Turkish power.
The conquests, the abilities, and the ambition of Sultan Selim II. had spread
over Europe, at that time, a general and well founded alarm. By his victories
over the Marmalukes* and the extirpation of that gallant body of men, he had
not only added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but had secured to it such a
degree of internal tranquillity, that he was ready to turn against Christendom
the whole force of his arms, which nothing had hitherto been able to resist:
The most effectual expedient for stopping the progress of this torrent, seemed
to be the election of an Emperor, possessed of extensive territories in that
country, where its first impression would be felt, and who, besides, could
combat this formidable enemy with all the forces of a powerful monarchy, and
with all the wealth furnished by the mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low Countries. These were the arguments by which Charles publicly
supported his claim; and to men of integrity and reflection, they appeared to
be not only plausible, but convincing. He did not, however, trust the success
of his cause to these alone. Great sums of money were remitted from Spain; all
the refinements and artifice of negotiation were employed; and a considerable
body of troops kept on foot by the states of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly
taken into his pay. The venal were gained by presents; the objections of the
more scrupulous were answered or eluded; and some feeble princes were
threatened and overawed Guic. lib. 13. 159 Sleidan, Hist. of the Reformat. 14.
Stru. vii Corp. Hist. German. ii. 971. Not. 20.
.

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim with equal eagerness, and no
less confidence of its being well founded. His emissaries contended that it was
now high time to convince the Princes of the house of Austria that the Imperial
crown was elective, and not hereditary; and that other persons might aspire to
an honor which their arrogance had come to regard as the property of their
family; that it required a sovereign of mature judgment, and of approved
abilities, to hold the reins of government in a country where such unknown
opinions concerning religion had been published, as had thrown the minds of men
into an uncommon agitation, which threatened the most violent effects; that a
young prince, without experience, who had hitherto given no specimens of his
genius for command, was no equal match for Selim, a monarch, grown old in the
art of war, and in the course of victory; whereas a king, who, in his early
youth had triumphed over the valor and discipline of the Swiss, till then
reckoned invincible, would be an antagonist not unworthy of the conqueror of
the East; that the fire and impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the
discipline and stability of the German infantry, would form an army so
irresistible, that instead of waiting the approach of the Ottoman forces, it
might carry hostilities into the heart of their dominions; that the election of
Charles would be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution, by which the
person who holds the crown of Naples, is excluded from aspiring to the Imperial
dignity; that his elevation to that honor would soon kindle a war in Italy, on
account of his pretensions to the duchy of Milan, the effects of which could
not fail of reaching the Empire, and might prove fatal to it Guic. lib. 13.
160. Sleid. p. 16. Geor. Sabini de elect. Car. V. Historia apud. Scardii
Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.
. But while his ambassadors enlarged upon these and other topics of the same
kind, in all the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the prejudices
entertained against him as a foreigner, unacquainted with the German language
or manners, endeavored to overcome these, and to gain the favor of the
princes by immense gifts, and by infinite promises. As the expeditious method
of transmitting money, and the decent mode of conveying a bribe by bills of
exchange was then little known, the French ambassadors traveled with a train
of horses loaded with treasure, an equipage not very honorable for that prince
by whom they were employed, and infamous for those to whom they were sent
Memoires de Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296.
.

THE other European princes could not remain indifferent spectators of a
contest, the decision of which so nearly affected them. Their common interest
ought naturally to have formed a general combination, in order to disappoint
both competitors, and to prevent either of them from obtaining such
pre-eminence in power and dignity, as might prove dangerous to the liberties of
Europe. But the ideas with respect to a proper distribution and balance of
power were so lately introduced into the system of European policy, that they
were not hitherto objects of sufficient attention. The passions of some
princes, the want of foresight in others, and the fear of giving offense to the
candidates, hindered such a salutary union of the powers of Europe, and rendered
them either totally negligent of the public safety, or kept them from exerting
themselves with vigor in its behalf.

THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the elevation of either of the
contending monarchs, and though they wished to have seen some prince whose
dominions were less extensive, and whose power was more moderate, seated on the
Imperial throne, were prompted, however, by their hatred of the French nation,
to give an open preference to the pretensions of Charles, while they used their
utmost influence to frustrate those of Francis Sabinus, p. 6
.

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the interest of their republic to
have both the rivals set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Austria,
whose ambition and neighborhood had been fatal to their grandeur, would not
permit them to act up to their own ideas, and led them hastily to give the
sanction of their approbation to the claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interest, and more in the power of Henry VIII. of England,
to prevent either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dignity which would raise
them so far above other monarchs. But though Henry often boasted, that he held
the balance of Europe in his hand, he had neither the steady attention, the
accurate discernment, nor the dispassionate temper which that delicate function
required. On this occasion it mortified his vanity so much, to see himself
excluded from that noble competition which reflected such honor upon the two
antagonists, that he took the resolution of sending an ambassador into Germany,
and of declaring himself a candidate for the imperial throne. The ambassador,
though loaded with caresses by the German princes and the Pope's nuncio,
informed his master, that he could hope for no success in a claim which he had
been so late in preferring; and Henry, imputing his disappointment to that
circumstance alone, and soothed with this ostentatious display of his own
importance, seems to have taken no farther part in the matter, either by
contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to promote one of them Memoires de
Fleuranges, 314. Herbert, Hist. of Henry VIII.
.

LEO X, a pontiff no less renowned for his political abilities, than for his
love of the arts, was the only prince of the age who observed the motions of
the two contending monarchs with a prudent attention, or who discovered a
proper solicitude for the public safety. The imperial and papal jurisdiction
interfered in so many instances, the complaints of usurpation were so numerous
on both sides, and the territories of the church owed their safety so entirely
to the weakness of their neighbors, and so little to their, own force, that
nothing was so formidable to the court of Rome as an Emperor of extensive
power, or of enterprizing genius. Leo trembled at the prospect of beholding the
Imperial crown placed on the head of the king of Spain and of Naples, and the
master of the new world; nor was he less afraid of seeing a king of France, who
was duke of Milan, and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold that
the election of either of them would be fatal to the independence of the holy
see, to the peace of Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of Europe. To oppose
them, however, required address and caution in proportion to the greatness of
their power, and their opportunities of taking revenge. Leo was defective in
neither. He secretly exhorted the German Princes to place one of their own
number on the Imperial throne, which many of them were capable of filling with
honor; he put them in mind of the constitution by which the kings of Naples
were for ever excluded from that dignity Goldasti Constitutiones Imperiales.
Francof. 1673. vol. 1. 439.
; he warmly exhorted the French king to persist in his claim, not from any
desire that he should gain his end, but as he foresaw that the Germans would be
more disposed to favor the king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself, when
he discovered his own chance of success to be desperate, would be stimulated by
resentment and the spirit of rivalship, to concur with all his interest in
raising some third person to the head of the Empire; or on the other hand, if
Francis should make unexpected progress, he did not doubt but that Charles
would be induced by similar motives to act the same part; and thus by prudence
and attention, the mutual jealousy of the two rivals might be so dexterously
managed, as to disappoint both. But this scheme, the only one which a prince in
Leo's situation could adopt, though concerted with great wisdom, was executed
with little discretion. The French ambassadors in Germany fed their master with
vain hopes; the pope's nuncio being gained by them, altogether forgot the
instructions he had received; and Francis persevered so long and so obstinately
in urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's measures abortive
Guicciar. lib 13. 161.
.

SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and the views of the different princes,
when the diet was opened according to form at Frankfort, June 17th. The right
of choosing an Emperor had long been vested in seven great princes,
distinguished by the name of Electors, the origin of whose office, and the
nature and extent of their powers, have already been explained. These were, at
that time Albert of Brandenburgh, archbishop of Mentz; Herman count de Wied,
archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffenklau, archbishop of Treves; Lewis,
king of Bohemia; Lewis, count Palatin of the Rhine; Frederick, duke of Saxony;
and Joachim I. marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding the artful arguments
produced by the ambassadors of the two kings, in favor of their respective
masters, and in spite of all their solicitations, intrigues, and presents, the
Electors did not forget that maxim on which the liberty of the German
constitution was thought to be founded. Among the members of the Germanick
body, which is a great republic composed of states almost independent, the
first principle of patriotism is to depress and limit the power of the Emperor;
and of this idea, so natural under such a form of government, a German
politician seldom loses sight. No prince of considerable power, or extensive
dominions, had for some ages been raised to the Imperial throne; and to this
prudent precaution many of the great families in Germany owed the splendour and
independence which they had acquired during that period. To elect either of the
contending monarchs, would have been a gross violation of that salutary maxim;
would have given to the empire a master, instead of an head; and would have
reduced themselves from the rank of equals, to the condition of subjects.

FULL of these ideas, they all turned their eyes toward Frederick, duke of
Saxony, a prince of such eminent virtue, and abilities, as to be distinguished
by the name of the Sage, and with one voice offered him the Imperial crown. He
was not dazzled with that object, which monarchs so far superior to him in
power courted with such eagerness; and after deliberating upon the matter a
short time, he rejected it with a magnanimity and disinterestedness, no less
singular than admirable. Nothing, he observed, could be more impolitic, than an
obstinate adherence to a maxim which, though sound and just in many cases, was
not applicable to all. In times of tranquillity, said he, we wish for an
Emperor who has not power to invade our liberties; times of danger demand one
who is able to secure our safety. The Turkish armies, led by a gallant and
victorious monarch are now assembling. They are ready to pour in upon Germany
with a violence unknown in former ages. New conjunctures call for new
expedients. The imperial scepter must be committed to some hand more powerful
than mine, or that of any other German prince. We possess neither dominions,
nor revenues, nor authority which enable us to encounter such a formidable
enemy. Recourse must be had in this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each
of them can bring into the field forces sufficient for our defense. But as the
King of Spain is of German extraction, as he is a member and prince of the
empire by the territories which descend to him from his grandfather; as his
dominions stretch along that frontier which lies most exposed to the enemy; his
claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of a stranger to our language, to
our blood, and to our country; and therefore I give my vote to confer on him
the Imperial crown.

THIS opinion, dictated by such uncommon generosity, and supported by arguments
so plausible, made a deep impression on the Electors. The king of Spain's
ambassadors, sensible of the important service which Frederic had done their
master, sent him a considerable sum of money, as the first token of that
prince's gratitude. But he who had greatness of mind to refuse a crown,
disdained to receive a bribe; and upon their entreating that, at least, he
would permit them to distribute part of that sum among his courtiers, he
replied, that he could not prevent them from accepting what should be offered,
but whoever took a single florin should be dismissed next morning from his
service P. Daniel, an historian of considerable name, seems to call in question
the truth of this account of Frederick's behavior, because it is not mentioned
by Georgius Sabinus in his History of the election and coronation of Charles V.
tom. iii p. 63. But no great stress ought to be laid on an omission in an
superficial author, whose treatises, though dignified with the name of history,
contains only such an account of the ceremonial of Charles's election as is
usually published in Germany on like occasions. Sc^^d. Rer. Germ. Script. v. 2.
p. i. The testimony of Erasmus, lib. 12. epist. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 18.
are express. Seckendorf in his commentarius Historicus and apologeticus de
Lutheranismo, p. 121, has examined this fact with his usual industry, and has
established its truth by the most undoubted evidence. To these testimonies
which he has collected, I may add the decisive one of Cardinal Cajetan, the
pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July 5th, 1519. Epistres au princes,
etc. recuellies par Ruscelli, traduicts par Belforrest. Par. 1572. p. 60.
.

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dignity, which Frederick had
declined for reasons applicable to them all. It remained to make a choice
between the two great competitors. But besides the prejudice in Charles's
favor arising from his birth, and the situation of his German dominions, he
owed not a little to the abilities of the cardinal de Gurk, and the zeal of
Erard de la Mark, bishop of Liege, two of his ambassadors who had conducted
their negociations with more prudence and address, than those entrusted by the
French king. The former, who had long been the minister and favorite of
Maximilian, was well acquainted with the art of managing the Germans; and the
latter having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by Francis, employed all
the malicious ingenuity with which the desire of revenge inspires an ambitious
mind, in thwarting the measures of that monarch. The Spanish party among the
Electors daily gained ground; and the Pope's nuncio, being convinced that it
was vain to make any farther opposition, endeavored to acquire some merit with
the future Emperor, by offering voluntarily, in the name of his master, a
dispensation to hold the Imperial crown in conjunction with that of Naples
Freheri. Rer. German. Scriptores, vol. iii. 172. cur. Struvii Argent. 1717.
Gianone Hist. of Naples, 2. 498.
.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months and ten days after the death of
Maximilian, this important contest, which had held all Europe in suspense, was
decided. Six of the Electors had already declared for the king of Spain, and
the archbishop of Treves, the only firm adherent to the French interest, having
at last joined his brethren, Charles was by the unanimous voice of the
Electoral college raised to the Imperial throne Jac Aug. Thuan. Hist. sui
temporis. Edit. Bulkley, lib. 1. c. 9.
.

BUT though the Electors consented, from various motives, to promote Charles to
that high station, they discovered at the same time great jealousy of his
extraordinary power, and endeavored, with the utmost solicitude, to provide
against his encroaching on the prileges of the Germanick body. It had long been
the custom to demand of every new Emperor a confirmation of these privileges,
and to require a promise that he would never violate them in any instance.
While princes who were formidable neither from extent of territory, nor of
genius, possessed the imperial throne, a general and verbal engagement to this
purpose was deemed sufficient security. But under an Emperor so powerful as
Charles, other precautions seemed necessary. A Capitulation, or claim of rights
was formed, in which the privileges and immunities of the electors, of the
princes of the empire, of the cities, and of every other member of the
Germanick body are enumerated. This capitulation was immediately signed by
Charles's ambassadors in the name of their master, and he himself at his
coronation confirmed it in the most solemn manner. Since that period, the
Electors have continued to prescribe the same conditions to all his successors;
and in Germany the Capitulation or mutual contract between the emperor and his
subjects, is considered as a strong barrier against the progress of the
imperial power, and as the great charter of their liberties to which they often
appeal Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hist. de Droit Public d'Allemagne 590. Limnei
Capitulat. Imper. Epistres des Princes par Ruscelli, p. 60.
.

THE important intelligence of his election was conveyed in nine days from
Frankfort to Barcelona, where Charles was still detained by the obstinacy of
the Catalonian Cortes, which had not hitherto brought to an issue any of the
affairs that came before it. He received the account with the joy natural to a
young aspiring mind, on an accession of power and dignity which raised him so
far above the other princes of Europe. Then it was that those vast prospects
which allured him during his whole administration began to open, and from this
era we may date the formation, and are able to trace the gradual progress of a
grand system of enterprizing ambition which renders the history of his reign so
worthy of attention.

A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the effects of this great elevation
upon the mind of Charles. In all the public writs which he issued as king of
Spain, he assumed the title of Majesty, and required it from his subjects as a
mark of their respect. Before that time, all the monarchs of Europe were
satisfied with the appellation of Highness, or Grace; but the vanity of other
courts soon led them to imitate the example of the Spanish. The epithet of
Majesty is no longer a mark of pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable monarchs
in Europe enjoy it, and the arrogance of the greater potentates has invented no
higher denomination Minianae Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferreras viii. 475. Memoires
Hist. de la Houssaie, tom. i. p. 53, etc.
.

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of their King to the
Imperial throne with the same satisfaction which he himself felt. To be
deprived of the presence of their sovereign, and to be subjected to the
government of a viceroy and his council, a species of administration often
oppressive, and always disagreeable, were the immediate and necessary
consequences of this new dignity. To see the blood of their countrymen shed in
quarrels wherein the nation had no concern, to behold its treasures wasted in
supporting the splendor of a foreign title, and to be plunged in the chaos of
Italian and German politics, were effects of this event almost as unavoidable.
From all these considerations, they concluded, that nothing could have happened
more pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the fortitude and public spirit of
their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of Castile, prohibited Alfonzo the Wise
from leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the Imperial crown, were often
mentioned with the highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely worthy of
imitation at this juncture Sandoval, i p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. 14.
.

BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments or murmurs of his Spanish
subjects, accepted of the Imperial dignity which the count Palatine, at the
head of a solemn embassy, offered him in the name of the Electors; and declared
his intention of setting out soon for Germany, in order to take possession of
it. This was the more necessary, because, according to the forms of the German
constitution, he could not, before the ceremony of a public coronation,
exercise any act of jurisdiction or authority Sabinus. P. Bar, viii. 1085.
.

THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution augmented the disgust of the
Spaniards; and a sullen and refractory spirit prevailed among persons of all
ranks. The Pope having granted the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical
benefices in Castile to assist him in carrying on war with greater vigor
against the Turks, a convocation of the clergy unanimously refused to levy that
sum, upon pretense that it ought never to be exacted but at those times when
Christendom was actually invaded by the Infidels; and though Leo, in order to
support his authority, laid the kingdom under an interdict, so little regard
was paid to a censure which was universally deemed unjust, that Charles himself
applied to have it taken off; and thus the Spanish clergy, besides their merit
in opposing the usurpations of the pope, and disregarding the influence of the
crown, gained the exemption which they had claimed P. Martyr, Ep. 462. Ferreras
viii. 473.
.

THE commotions which arose in the kingdom of Valencia, annexed to the crown of
Arragon, were more formidable, and produced more dangerous and lasting effects.
A seditious monk having by his sermons excited the citizens of Valencia, the
capital city, to take arms, and to punish certain criminals in a tumultuary
manner, the people, pleased with this exercise of power, and with such a
discovery of their own importance, not only refused to lay down their arms, but
formed themselves into troops and companies that they might be regularly
trained to martial exercises. To obtain some security against the oppression of
the Grandees was the motive of this association, and proved a powerful bond of
union; for as the aristocratical privileges and independence were more complete
in Valencia than in any other of the Spanish kingdoms, the nobles, being fearce
accountable for their conduct to any superior, treated the people not only as
vassals but as slaves. They were alarmed, however, at the success of this
unexpected insurrection, as it might encourage the people to attempt shaking
off the yoke; but as they could not repress them without taking arms, it became
necessary to have recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his permission to
attack them, 1526. At the same time the people made choice of deputies to
represent their grievances, and to implore the protection of their sovereign.
Happily for the latter, they arrived at court when Charles was exasperated to
an high degree against the nobles. As he was eager to visit Germany, where his
presence became every day more necessary, and as his Flemish courtiers were
still more impatient to return into their native country, and to carry thither
the spoils they had amassed in Castile, it was impossible for him to hold the
Cortes of Valencia in person. He had for that reason empowered the cardinal
Adrian to represent him in that assembly, and in his name to receive their oath
of allegiance, to confirm their privileges with the usual solemnities, and to
demand of them a free gift. But the Valencian nobles, who considered this
measure as an indignity to their country, which was no less entitled, than his
other kingdoms, to the honor of their sovereign's presence, declared that by
the fundamental laws of the constitution they could neither acknowledge a
person who was absent as king, nor grant him any subsidy, and to this
declaration they adhered with an haughty and inflexible obstinacy. Charles
piqued by their behavior, decided in favor of the people, and rashly
authorized them to continue in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph, and
were received by their fellow-citizens as the deliverers of their country; and
the insolence of the multitude increasing with their success, they expelled all
the nobles out of the city, committed the government to magistrates of their
own election, and entered into an association distinguished by the name of
Germanada or Brotherhood, which proved the source not only of the wildest
disorders, but of the most fatal calamities in that kingdom P. Martyr. Ep. 651.
Ferreras viii. 476, 485.
.

MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was agitated with no less violence. No
sooner was the Emperor's intention to leave Spain made known, than several
cities of the first rank resolved to remonstrate against it, and to crave
redress once more of those grievances which they had formerly laid before him.
Charles artfully avoided admitting their deputies to audience; and as he saw
from this circumstance how difficult it would be at this juncture to restrain
the mutinous spirit of greater cities, he summoned the Cortes of Castile to
meet at Compostella in Galicia. His only reason for calling that assembly, was
the hope of obtaining another donative; for as his treasury had been exhausted
in the same proportion that the riches of his ministers increased, he could
not, without some additional aid, appear in Germany with splendor suited to
the Imperial dignity. To appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before the time for paying the former was
expired, were innovations of a most dangerous tendency; and among people
jealous of their liberties, and accustomed to supply the wants of their
sovereigns with a very frugal hand excited an universal alarm. The magistrates
of Toledo remonstrated against both these measures in a very high tone; the
inhabitants of Valladolid, who expected that the Cortes should have been held
in that city, were so enraged that they took arms in a tumultuary manner; and
if Charles with his foreign counselors had not fortunately made their escape
during a violent tempest, they would have massacred all the Flemings, and have
prevented him from continuing his journey toward Compostella.

EVERY city through which they passed, petitioned against holding a Cortes in
Galicia, a point with regard to which Charles was inflexible. But though the
utmost influence had been exerted by the minsters, in order to procure a choice
of representatives favorable to their designs, such was the temper of the
nation, that at the opening of the assembly, April 1, there appeared among many
of the members unusual symptoms of ill humor, which threatened a fierce
opposition to all the measures of the court. No representatives were sent by
Toledo, for the lot, according to which, by ancient custom, the election was
determined in that city, having fallen upon two persons, devoted to the Flemish
ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant them a commission in the
usual form, and in their stead made choice of two deputies, whom they empowered
to repair to Compostella, and to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes
assembled there The representatives of Salamanca refused to take the usual oath
of fidelity, unless Charles consented to change the place of meeting. Those of
Toro, Madrid, Cordova, and several other places, declared the demand of another
donative to be unprecedented, unconstitutional, and unnecessary. All the arts,
however, which influence popular assemblies, bribes, promises, threats, and
even force, were employed in order to gain the members. The nobles, soothed by
the respectful assiduity with which Chievres and the other Flemings paid court
to them, or instigated by a mean jealousy of that spirit of independence which
they saw rising among the commons, openly favored the pretensions of the
court, or at the utmost did not oppose them; and at last, in contempt both of
the sentiments of the nation, and of the ancient forms of the constitution, a
majority voted to grant the donative for which the Emperor had applied P.
Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, etc.
. Together with this grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a representation of
those grievances whereof his people craved redress; but he, having obtained
from them all he could expect, paid no attention to this ill-timed petition,
which it was no longer dangerous to disregard Sandoval, 84.
.

AS nothing now retarded his embarkation, he disclosed his intention with
regard to the regency of Castile during his absence, which he had hitherto kept
secret, and nominated Cardinal Adrian to that office, The vice-royalty of
Aragon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza; that of Valencia on Don Diego de
Mendoza Con de Melito. The choice of the two latter was universally acceptable;
but the advancement of Adrian, though the only Fleming who had preserved any
reputation among the Spaniards, animated the Castilians with new hatred against
foreigners; and even the nobles, who had so tamely suffered other inroads upon
the constitution, fel^ the indignity offered to their own order by his
promotion, and remonstrated against it as illegal. But Charles's desire of
visiting Germany, and the impatience of his ministers to leave Spain, were now
so much increased, that without regarding the murmurs of the Castilians, or
even taking time to provide any remedy against an insurrection in Toledo, which
at that time threatened, and afterward produced most formidable effects, he
sailed from Corogna on the twenty-second of May; and by setting out so abruptly
in quest of a new crown, he endangered a more important one of which he was
already in possession P. Martyr, Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.
.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK II.
MANY concurring circumstances, not only called Charles's thoughts toward the
affairs of Germany, but rendered his presence in that country necessary. The
Electors grew impatient of so long an interregnum; his hereditary dominions
were disturbed by intestine commotions; and the new opinions concerning
religion, made such rapid progress as required the most serious consideration.
But above all, the motions of the French king drew his attention, and convinced
him that it was necessary to take measures for his own defense, both with speed
and with vigor.

WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lists as candidates for the Imperial
dignity, they conducted their rivalship with many professions of regard for
each other, and with repeated declarations that they would not suffer any
tincture of enmity to mingle itself with this honorable emulation. "We both
court the same mistress," said Francis, with his usual vivacity, "each ought to
urge his suit with all the address of which he is master, the most fortunate
will prevail, and the other must rest contented Guic. lib. 13 p. 159.
." But though two young and high-spirited Princes, and each of them animated
with the hope of success, might be capable of forming such a generous
resolution, it was soon found that they promised upon a moderation too refined
and disinterested for human nature. The preference given to Charles in the
sight of all Europe, mortified Francis to the highest degree, and inspired him
with all the passions natural to disappointed ambition. To this was owing the
personal jealousy and rivalship which subsisted between the two monarchs during
their whole reign; and the rancour of these, added to a real opposition of
interest, and to many unavoidable causes of discord, involved them in almost
perpetual hostilities. Charles had paid no regard to the principal article in
the treaty of Noyon, by refusing oftener than once to do justice to John
d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was bound in honor,
and prompted by interest, to restore to his throne. The French king had
pretensions to the crown of Naples, of which Ferdinand had deprived his
predecessor by a most unjustifiable breach of faith. The Emperor might reclaim
the duchy of Milan as a fief of the empire, which Francis had seized, and
still kept in possession, without having received investiture. Charles
considered the duchy of Burgundy as the patrimonial domain of his ancestors
wrested from them by the unjust policy of Lewis XI, and observed with the
greatest jealousy the strict connections which Francis had formed with the duke
of Gueldres, the hereditary enemy of his family.

WHEN the sources of discord were so many and various, peace could be of no
long continuance even between Princes the most exempt from ambition or
emulation. But as the shock between two such mighty antagonists could not fail
of being both desperate and dangerous, they both discovered no small solicitude
about its consequences, and took time not only to collect, and to weigh their
own strength, and to compare it with that of their adversary, but to secure the
friendship or assistance of the other European powers.

THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two rivals, and saw that he who
prevailed, would become absolute master in Italy. If it had been in his power
to engage them in hostilities, without rendering Lombardy the theater of war,
nothing would have been more agreeable to him than to see them waste each
other's strength in endless quarrels; but this was impossible. Leo foresaw that
on the first rupture between the two monarchs, the armies of France and Spain
would take the field in the Milanese, and while the scene of their operations
was so near, and the subject for which they contended so interesting to him, he
could not long remain neuter. He was obliged therefore to adapt his plan of
conduct to his political situation. He courted and soothed both the Emperor and
King of France with equal industry and address; and though warmly solicited by
each of them, he assumed all the appearances of entire impartiality, and
attempted to conceal his real sentiments under that profound dissimulation
which seems to have been affected by most of the Italian politicians in that
age.

THE views and interest of the Venetians were not different from those of the
Pope; nor were they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becoming the seat of
war, and their own republic from being involved in the quarrel. But through all
Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high pretensions to a perfect
neutrality, it was visible that he leaned toward the Emperor, from whom he had
both more to fear and more to hope than from Francis; and it was equally
manifest, that if it became necessary to take a side, the Venetians would, from
motives of the same nature, declare for the King of France. No considerable
assistance, however, was to be expected from the Italian states, who were
jealous to an extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and careful to preserve
the balance between them, unless when they were seduced to violate this
favorite maxim of their policy, by the certain prospect of great advantage to
themselves.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of Francis was employed in order
to gain the king of England, from whom each of them expected assistance more
effectual, and afforded with less political caution. Henry VIII. had ascended
the throne of that kingdom in one thousand five hundred and nine, with such
circumstances of advantage, as promised a reign of distinguished felicity and
splendor. The union in his person of the two contending titles of York and
Lancaster, and the alacrity and emulation with which both factions obeyed him,
not only enabled him to exert in his domestic government a degree of vigor and
authority which none of his predecessors could have safely assumed; but
permited him to take a share in the affairs of the continent, from which the
attention of the English had long been diverted by their unhappy divisions. The
immense treasures which his father had amassed, rendered him the most wealthy
prince in Europe. The peace which had subsisted under the cautious
administration of that monarch, was of sufficient length to recruit the nation
after the desolation of the civil wars, but had not enervated its spirit; and
the English, ashamed of having so long rendered their own country a scene of
discord and bloodshed, were eager to display their valor in some foreign war,
and to revive the memory of the victories gained by their ancestors. Henry's
own temper perfectly suited the state of his kingdom, and the disposition of
his subjects. Ambitious, active, enterprizing and accomplished in all the
martial exercises which in that age formed a chief part in the education of
persons of noble birth, and inspired them with an early love of war, he longed
to engage in real action, and to signalize the beginning of his reign by some
remarkable exploit. An opportunity of this kind soon presented itself; and the
victory at Guinegate, and the successful sieges of Terouenne and Tournay,
though of little utility to England, reflected great luster on its monarch, and
confirmed the idea which foreign princes entertained of his power and
importance. So many concurring causes, added to the happy situation of his own
dominions, which secured them from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate
circumstance of his being in possession of Calais, which served not only as a
key to France, but opened an easy passage into the Netherlands, rendered the
king of England the natural guardian of the liberties of Europe, and the
arbiter between the Emperor and French monarch. Henry himself was sensible of
this singular advantage, and convinced, that in order to preserve the balance
even, it was his office to prevent either of the rivals from acquiring such
superiority of power as might be fatal to the other, and formidable to the rest
of Christendom. But he was destitute of the penetration, and still more of the
temper, which such a function required. Influenced by caprice, by vanity, by
resentment, by affection, he was incapable of forming any regular and extensive
system of policy, or of adhering to it with steadiness. His measures seldom
resulted from attention to the general welfare, or from a deliberate regard to
his own interest, but were dictated by passions which rendered him blind to
both, and prevented his gaining that ascendant in the affairs of Europe, or
from reaping such advantages to himself, as a prince of greater art, though
with inferior talents, might have easily secured.

ALL the impolitic steps in Henry's administration must not, however, be
imputed to defects in his own character; many of them were owing to the violent
passions and insatiable ambition of his prime minister and favorite cardinal
Wolsey. This man, from one of the lowest ranks in life, had risen to an height
of power and dignity, to which no English subject ever arrived; and governed
the haughty, presumptuous and untractable spirit of Henry with absolute
authority. Great talents, and of very different kinds, fitted him for the two
opposite stations of minister, and of favorite. His profound judgment, his
unwearied industry, his thorough acquaintance with the state of the kingdom,
and his extensive knowledge of the views and interests of foreign courts,
qualified him for that uncontrouled direction of affairs with which he was
entrusted. The elegance of his manners, the gaiety of his conversation, his
insinuating address, his love of magnificence, and his proficiency in those
parts or literature of which Henry was fond, gained him the affection and
confidence of the young monarch. Wolsey was far from employing this vast and
almost royal power, to promote either the true interest of the nation, or the
real grandeur of his master. Rapacious at the same time, and profuse, he was
insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundless ambition, he aspired after new
honors with an eagerness unabated by his former success; and being rendered
presumptuous by his uncommon elevation, and the ascendant he had gained over a
prince, who scarce brooked advice from any other person, he discovered in his
whole demeanor the most overbearing haughtiness and pride. To these passions
he himself sacrificed every consideration; and whoever endeavored to obtain
his favor, or that of his master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

AS all the states of Europe sought Henry's friendship at that time; all
courted his minister with incredible attention and obsequiousness, and strove
by presents, by promises, or by flattery to work upon his avarice, his
ambition, or his pride Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 166. Rymer's Foedera, xiii, 718.
. Francis had in the year one thousand five hundred and eighteen employed
Bonivet, admiral of France, one of his most accomplished and artful courtiers,
to gain the haughty prelate. He himself bestowed on him every mark of respect
and confidence. He consulted him with regard to his most important affairs, and
received his responses with implicit deference. By these arts, together with
the grant of a large pension, Francis secured the Cardinal, who persuaded his
master to surrender Tournay to France, to conclude a treaty of marriage between
his daughter the princess Mary, and to consent to a personal interview with the
French king Herbert's Hist. of Henry VIII. 30. Rymer, xiii. 624.
. From that time, the most familiar intercourse subsisted between the two
courts; Francis, sensible of the great value of Wolsey's friendship, labored
to secure the continuance of it by every possible expression of regard,
bestowing on him in all his letters the honorable appellation of Father Tutor,
and Governor.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union with the utmost jealousy and
concern. His near relation to the king of England gave him some title to his
friendship, and soon after his accession to the throne of Castile, he attempted
to ingratiate himself with Wolsey, by settling on him a pension of three
thousand livres. His chief solicitude at present was to prevent the intended
interview, the effects of which upon two young princes, whose hearts were no
less susceptible of friendship than their manners were of inspiring it, he
exremely dreaded. But after many delays occasioned by difficulties about the
ceremonial, and by the anxious precautions of both courts for the safety of
their respective sovereigns, the time and place of meeting were at last fixed.
Messengers had been sent to different courts inviting all comers, who were
gentlemen, to enter the lists at tilt and tournament, against the two monarchs
and their knights; and both Francis and Henry loved the splendor of these
spectacles too well, and were too much delighted with the graceful figure they
made on such occasions, to forego the pleasure or glory which they expected
from such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was the Cardinal less fond of
displaying his magnificence in the presence of two courts, and of discovering
to the two nations the extent of his influence over both their monarchs.
Charles finding it impossible to prevent the interview, endeavored to
disappoint its effects, and to pre-occupy the favor of the English monarch and
his minister by an act of complaisance still more flattering and more uncommon,
having failed from Corunna, as has already been related, he steered his course
directly toward England, and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his own
safety, landed at Dover (May 26th.) This unexpected visit surprised the nation.
Wolsey, however, was well acquainted with the Emperors intention. A
negotiation, unknown to the historians of that age, had been carried on between
him and the court of Spain, this visit had been concerted, and Charles granted
the Cardinal, whom he calls his most sincere friend, an additional pension of
seven thousand ducats Rymer, xiii. 714.
. Henry, who was then at Canterbury, in his way to France, immediately
dispatched Wolsey to Dover, and being highly pleased with an event so soothing
to his vanity, hastened to receive, with suitable respect, a guest who had
placed in him such unbounded confidence. Charles, to whom time was precious,
staid only four days in England: But during that short space, he had the
address not only to give Henry favorable impressions of his character and
intentions, but to detach Wolsey entirely from the interest of the French king.
All the grandeur, wealth and power, which the Cardinal possessed, did not
satisfy his ambitious mind while there was still one step higher to which an
ecclesiastic could ascend. The papal dignity had for some time been the object
of his wishes, and Francis as the most effectual method of securing his
friendship, had promised to favor his pretensions, on the first vacancy, with
all his interest. But as the Emperor's influence in the college of cardinals
was greatly superior to the French king's, Wolsey grasped eagerly at an offer
which that artful prince had made him of exerting it vigorously in his behalf;
and allured by this prospect, which under the pontificate of Leo, still in the
prime of his Life, was a very distant one, he entered with warmth into all the
Emperor's schemes. No treaty however, was concluded at that time, between the
two monarchs; but Henry, in return for the honor which Charles had done him,
promised to visit him in some place of the Low Countries, immediately after
taking leave of the French king.

HIS interview with that prince was in an open plain between Guisnes and Ardres
June 7th, where the two kings and their attendants displayed their magnificence
with such emulation and profuse expense, as procured it the name of the Field
of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gallantry, and such
excercises and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant, rather
than serious business, occupied both courts during eighteen days that they
continued together The French and English historians describe the pomp of this
interview, and the various spectacles with great minuteness. One circumstance
mentioned by the marechal de Fleuranges who was present, and which appears
singular in the present age, is commonly omitted. "After the tournaments" says
he, "the French and English wrestlers made their appearance, and wrestled in
the presence of the Kings, and the ladies; and as there were many stout
wrestlers there, it afforded excellent pastime; but as the King of France had
neglected to bring any wrestlers out of Bretagne, the English gained the prize.
-- After this, the Kings of France and England retired to a tent, where they
drank together, and the King of England seizing the King of France by the
collar, said, "My brother, I must wrestle with you," and endeavored once or
twice to trip up his heels; but the King of France, who is a dextrous wrestler,
twisted him round, and threw him on the ground with prodigious violence. The
King of England wanted to renew the combat, but was prevented." Memoires de
Fleuranges, 12. Paris, 1753. p. 329.
. Whatever impression the engaging manners of Francis, and the liberal and
unsuspicious confidence with which he treated Henry, made on the mind of that
monarch, was soon effaced by Wolsey's artifices, or by the interview which he
had with the Emperor at Gravelines, (July 10) which was conducted by Charles
with less pomp than that near Guisness, but with greater attention to his
political interest.

THIS assiduity with which the two greatest monarchs in Europe paid court to
Henry, appeared to him a plain acknowledgement that he held the balance in his
hands, and convinced him of the justness of the motto he had chosen, "That
whoever he favored would certainly prevail." In this opinion he was confirmed
by an offer which Charles made of submitting any difference that might arise
between him and Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing could have the
appearance of greater candor and moderation, than the choice of a judge who
was reckoned the common friend of both. But as the Emperor had now attached
Wolsey entirely to his interest, no proposal could be more insidious, nor, as
appeared by the sequel, more fatal to the French king Herbert, 37.
.

CHARLES, notwithstanding his partial fondness for the Netherlands, the place
of his nativity, made no long stay there; and after receiving the homage and
congratulations of his countrymen, hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the place
appointed by the golden bull for the coronation of the Emperor, (October 23.)
There, in presence of an assembly more numerous and splendid than had appeared
on any former occasions, the crown of Charlemagne was placed upon his head,
with all the pompous solemnity which the Germans affect in their public
ceremonies, and which they deem essential to the dignity of their empire
Hartman. Maurus Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldast Polit Imperial. Franc
1614. fol. p. 264.
.

ALMOST at the same time, Solomon the magnificent, one of the most
accomplished, enterprizing, and victorious of the Turkish princes, a constant
and formidable rival to the Emperor, ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the
peculiar glory of that period to produce monarchs the most illustrious, that
have at any one time appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, Henry and
Solomon were each of them possessed of talents which would (...) rendered any
age in which they happened to flourish, conspicuous. But such a constellation
of great princes shed uncommon luster on the sixteenth century. In every
contest, great power and great abilities were set in opposition; and the
efforts of valor and conduct on one side, counterbalanced by an equal exertion
of the same qualities on the other, not only occasioned such a variety of
events as renders the history of that period interesting, but served to check
the exorbitant progress of any of those princes, and to prevent their attaining
such pre-eminence in power as would have been fatal to the liberty and
happiness of mankind.

THE first act of the Emperor's administration was to appoint a Diet of the
empire to be held at Worms on the sixth of January, one thousand five hundred
and twenty-one; and in his circular letters to the different princes, he
informed them that he had called this assembly in order to concert with them
the most proper measures for checking the progress of those new and dangerous
opinions, which threatened to disturb the peace of Germany, and to overturn the
religion of their ancestors.

CHARLES had in view the opinions propagated by Luther and his disciples since
the year one thousand five hundred and seventeen; and as these led to that
happy reformation in religion which rescued one part of Europe from the papal
yoke, mitigated its rigor in the other, and produced a revolution in the
sentiments of mankind, the greatest as well as the most beneficial that has
happened since the publication of Christianity, the events which at first gave
birth to these opinions, and the causes which rendered their progress so rapid
and successful, deserve to be considered with minute attention.

TO overturn a system of religious belief founded on ancient and deep-rooted
prejudices, supported by power, and defended with art and industry; to
establish in its room doctrines of the most contrary genius and tendency; and
to accomplish all this, not by external violence or the force of arms, are
operations which historians the least prone to credulity and superstition, must
ascribe to that Divine Providence which can, with infinite ease, bring about
events that to human sagacity appear impossible. The interposition of Heaven in
favor of the Christian religion at its first publication, was manifested by
miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered in confirmation of it: And though
none of the reformers possessed, or pretended to possess, these supernatural
gifts, yet that wonderful preparation of circumstances which disposed the minds
of men for receiving their doctrines, that singular combination of causes which
secured their success, and enabled men destitute of power and of policy to
triumph over those who employed both against them, may be considered as no
slight proof that the same hand which planted the Christian religion, protected
the reformed faith, and reared it, from beginnings extremely feeble, to an
amazing degree of strength and maturity.

IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and from a source very
inconsiderable, that all the mighty effects of the reformation flowed. Leo X.
when raised to the papal throne, found the revenues of the church exhausted by
the vast projects of his two ambitious predecessors, Alexander VI. and Julius
II; and his own temper, naturally liberal and enterprizing, rendered him
incapable of that severe and patient economy which the situation of his
finances required. On the contrary, his schemes for aggrandizing the family of
Medici, his love of splendor, his taste for pleasure, and his magnificence in
rewarding men of genius, involved him daily in new expenses, in order to
provide a fund for which, every device, that the fertile invention of priests
had fallen upon to drain the credulous multitude, was tried. Among others, he
had recourse to a sale of Indulgences. According to the doctrine of the Romish
church; all the good works of the Saints, over and above those which were
necessary toward their own justification, together with the infinite merits of
Jesus Christ, are deposited in one inexhaustible treasury. The keys of this
were committed to St. Peter and to his successors the Popes, who may open it at
pleasure, and by transferring a portion of this super abundant merit to any
particular person, for a sum of money, may convey to him either the pardon of
his own sins, or a release for any one in whom he is interested, from the pains
of purgatory. Such indulgences were first invented in the eleventh century by
Urban II. as a recompense for those who went in person upon the wild enterprise
of conquering the Holy Land. They were afterward granted to those who hired a
soldier for that purpose; and in process of time were bestowed on such as gave
money for accomplishing any pious work enjoined by the Pope History of the
Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
. Julius II. had bestowed indulgences on all who contributed toward building
the church of St. Peter at Rome; and as Leo was carrying on that magnificent
and expensive fabric, his grant was founded on the same pretense Palavic. Hist.
Conc. Trident. p. 4.
.

THE promulgating of these Indulgences in Germamany, together with a share of
the profits arising from the sale of them, was assigned to Albert elector of
Mentz and archbishop of Magdeburg, who, as his chief agent for retailing them
in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar, of licentious morals, but of an
active spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and popular eloquence. He, assisted
by the monks of his order, executed the commission with great zeal and success,
but with little discretion or decency; and though by magnifying excessively the
benefit of their indulgences As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits
which they were supposed to convey are unknown in protestant countries, and
little understood, at present, in several places where the Roman catholic
religion is established, I have for the information of my readers, translated
the form of absolution used by T^tzel. "May our Lord Jesus Christ have mercy
upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits of his most holy passion. And I by
his authority, that of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul, and of the most
holy Pope, granted and committed to me in these parts, do absolve thee, first
from all ecclesiastical censures in whatever manner they have been incurred,
and then from all thy sins, transgressions and excesses, how enormous soever
they may be, even from such as are reserved for the cognizance of the holy see,
and as far as the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to you all
punishment, which you deserve in Purgatory on their account, and I restore you
to the holy sacraments of the church, to the unity of the faithful, and to that
innocence and purity which you possessed at baptism, so that when you die the
gates of punishment shall be shut, and the gates of the paradise of delight
shall be opened, and if you shall not die at present, this grace shall remain
in full force when you are at the point of death. In the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Seckend. Comment. lib. 1. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates described the benefits of
Indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing them are so extravagant, that they
appear to be almost incredible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of
indulgence, his soul may rest secure with respect to its salvation. The souls
confined in purgatory, for whose redemption indulgences are purchased, as soon
as the money tinkles in the chest, instantly escape from that place of torment,
and ascend into heaven. That the efficacy of indulgences was so great, that the
most heinous sins, even if one should violate (which was impossible) the Mother
of God, would be remitted and expiated by them, and the person be freed both
from punishment and guilt. That this was the unspeakable gift of God, in order
to reconcile men to himself. That the cross erected by the preachers of
indulgences, was as efficacious as the cross of Christ itself. Lo! the heavens
are open; if you enter not now, when will you enter? For twelve-pence you may
redeem the soul of your Father out of purgatory; and are you so ungrateful,
that you will not rescue your parent from torment? If you had but one coat, you
ought to strip yourself instantly, and sell it, in order to purchase such
benefits, etc. These, and many such extravagant expressions, are selected out
of Luther's works by Chemnitius in his Examen Concilii Tridentini apud Herm.
Vonder Hardt. Hist. Liter. Reform. pars iv. p. 6. The same author has published
several of Tetzel's Discourses, which prove that these expressions were neither
singular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.


, and by disposing of them at a very low price, they carried on for some time
an extensive and lucrative traffic among the credulous multitude, the
extravagance of their ^^^ns, and the irregularities in their conduct, came at
last (...) give general offense. The princes and nobles were irritated at
seeing their vassals drained of so much wealth, in order to replenish the
treasury of a profuse pontiff. Men of piety regretted the delusion of the
people, who being taught to rely for the pardon of their sins on the
Indulgences, which they purchased, did not think it incumbent on them either to
abound in faith, or to practice holiness. Even the most unthinking were shocked
at the scandalous behavior of Tetzel and his associates, who often squandered
in drunkenness, gaming, and low debauchery, those sums which were piously
bestowed in hopes of obtaining eternal happiness; and all began to wish that
some check were given to this commerce, no less detrimental to society than
destructive to religion.

SUCH was the favorable juncture, and so disposed were the minds of his
countrymen to listen to his discourses, when Martin Luther first began to call
in question the efficacy of Indulgences, and to declaim against the vicious
lives and false doctrines of those who promulgated them. He was a native of
Eisleben in Saxony, and though born of poor parents, had received a learned
education, during the progress of which he gave many indications of uncommon
vigor and acuteness of genius. As his mind was naturally susceptible of
serious impressions, and tinctured with somewhat of that religious melancholy
which delights in the solitude and devotion of a monastic life, he retired into
a convent of Augustinian friars, and without suffering the entreaties of his
parents to divert him from what he thought his duty to God, he assumed the
habit of that order. There he acquired great reputation, not only for piety,
but for his love of knowledge, and unwearied application to study. He had been
taught the scholastic philosophy and theology which were then in vogue by very
able masters, and wanted not penetration to comprehend all the niceties and
distinctions with which they abound; but his understanding, naturally sound,
and superior to every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted with these subtle
and uninstructive sciences, and sought for some more solid foundation of
knowledge and of piety in the holy scriptures. Having found a copy of the
Bible, which lay neglected in the library of his monastery, he abandoned all
other pursuits, and devoted himself to the study of it, with such eagerness and
assiduity, as astonished the monks, who were little accustomed to derive their
theological notions from that source. The great progress which he made in this
uncommon course of study, augmented so much the same both of his sanctity and
of his learning, that Frederick, Elector of Saxony, having founded an
university at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his residence, Luther was
chosen first to teach philosophy, and afterward theology there, and discharged
both offices in such a manner, that he was deemed the chief ornament of that
society.

WHILE Luther was at the height of his reputation and authority, Tetzel began
to publish Indulgences in the neighborhood of Wittemberg, and to ascribe to
them the same imaginary virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on the
credulity of the people. As Saxony was not more enlightened than the other
provinces of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious success there. It was with the
utmost concern, that Luther beheld the artifices of those who sold, and the
simplicity of those who bought, Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas and
the other schoolmen, on which the doctrine of Indulgences was founded, had
already lost much of their authority with him; and the scriptures, which he
began to consider as the great standard of theological truth, afforded no
countenance to a practice, equally subversive of faith and of morals. His warm
and impetuous temper did not suffer him long to conceal such important
discoveries, or to continue a silent spectator of the delusion of his
countrymen. From the pulpit in the great church of Wittemberg he inveighed
bitterly against the irregularities and vices of those who published
Indulgences; he ventured to examine the doctrines which they taught, and
pointed out to the people the danger of relying for salvation upon any other
means than those appointed by God in his word. The boldness and novelty of
these opinions drew great attention, and being recommended by the authority of
Luther's personal character, and delivered with a popular and persuasive
eloquence, they made a deep impression on his hearers. Encouraged by the
favorable reception of his doctrines among the people, he wrote to Albert,
elector of Mentz, and archbishop of Magdeburg, to whose jurisdiction that part
of Saxony was subject, and remonstrated warmly against the false opinions and
wicked lives of the preachers of Indulgences; but he found that prelate too
deeply interested in their success to correct their abuses. His next attempt
was to gain the suffrage of men of learning. For this purpose he published
ninety-five theses, containing his sentiments with regard to indulgences. These
he proposed, not as points fully established, or of undoubted certainty, but as
subjects of inquiry and disputation; he appointed a day, on which the learned
were invited to impugn them either in person, or by writing; and subjoined to
the whole, solemn protestations of his high respect for the apostolic see, and
of his implicit submission to its authority. No opponent appeared at the time
prefixed; the theses spread over Germany with astonishing rapidity; they were
read with the greatest eagerness; and all admired the boldness of the man who
had ventured to call in question the plenitude of papal power, and to attack
the Dominicans, armed with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority Lutheri
Opera Jenae, 1612. vol. i. praesat. 3. p. 2. 66. Hist. of Counc. of Trent by F.
Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Com. Apol. p. 16.
.

THE Friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own order, though addicted with no less
obseqiousness than the other monastic fraternities to the papal see, gave no
check to the publication of these uncommon opinions. Luther had by his piety
and learning acquired extraordinary authority among his brethren; he professed
the highest regard for the authority of the Pope; his professions were at that
time sincere; and as a secret enmity excited by interest and emulation,
subsists among all the monastic orders in the Romish church, the Augustinians
were highly pleased with his invectives against the Dominicans, and hoped to
see them exposed to the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was his sovereign
the Elector of Saxony, the wisest prince at that time in Germany, dissatisfied
with this obstruction which Luther threw in the way of the publication of
indulgences. He secretly encouraged the attempt, and flattered himself that
this dispute among the Ecclesiastics themselves, might give some check to the
exactions of the court of Rome, which the secular princes had long though
without success, been endeavoring to oppose.

MANY zealous champions immediately arose to defend opinions on which the
wealth and power of the church were founded, against Luther's attacks. In
opposition to his theses, Tetzel published counter-theses at Francfort on the
Oder; Eccius, a celebrated Divine of Augsburg, endeavored to refute his
notions; and Prierias, a Dominican friar, master of the secret palace and
Inquisitor general, wrote against him with all the virulence of a scholastic
disputant. But the manner in which they conducted the controversy, did little
service to their cause. Luther attempted to overturn Indulgences by arguments
founded in reason, or derived from scripture; they produced nothing in support
of them but the sentiments of schoolmen, the conclusions of the canon law, and
the decrees of Popes F. Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.
. The decision of judges so partial and interested, did not satisfy the people,
who began to call in question the authority even of these venerable guides,
when they found them standing in direct opposition to the distates of reason,
and the determinations of the divine law. Seckend. p. 30.
Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the first promulgation of
indulgences; 1. That Leo bestowed a gift of the profits arising from the sale
of indulgences in Saxony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany, upon his
sister Magdalen the wife of Francescetto Cibo. Guic. lib. 13. 168. 2. That
Arcemboldo, a Genoese ecclesiastic, who had been bred a merchant, and still
retained all the arts of that profession, was appointed by her to collect the
money which should be raised. F. Paul has followed him in both these
particulars, and adds that the Augustinians in Saxony had been immemorially
employed in preaching indulgences, but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping
to gain more by committing this trust to the Dominicans, had made their bargain
with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted at first to oppose Tetzel and his
associates, by a desire of taking revenge for this injury offered to his order.
F. Paul, p. 5. Almost all the historians since their time, popish as well as
protestant, have, without examination, admitted these assertions to be true
upon their authority. But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of two
authors so eminent both for exactness and veracity, we may observe, 1. That
Felix Contolori who searched the pontifical archives on purpose could not find
this pretended grant in any of those registers where it must necessarily have
been recorded, Palav. p. 5. -- 2. That the profits arising from Indulgences in
Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been granted not to Magdalen, but to
Albert archbishop of Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who published
them. Seck. p. 12. Luth Oper. 1. praef. p. 1. Palav. p. 6. -- 3. That
Arcemboldo never had concern in the publication of Indulgences in Saxony his
district was Flanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seck. p. 14. Palav. p. 6.
-- 4. That Luther and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's to his
sister, though a circumstance of which they could scarce have been ignorant,
and which they would have been careful not to suppress. -- 5. The publication
of indulgences in Germany was not usually committed to the Augustinians. The
promalgation of them at three different periods under Julius II. was granted to
the Franciscans; the Dominicans had been employed in the same office a short
time before the present period. Palav. p. 46. 6. The promulgation of those
Indulgences which first excited Luther's indignation was entrusted to the
archbishop of Mentz in conjunction with the guardian of the Franciscans; but
the latter having declined accepting of that trust, the sole right became
vested in the archbishop. Palav. 6. Seck 16, 17. -- 7. Luther was not
instigated by his superiors among the Augustinians to attack the Dominicans
their rivals, or to depreciate indulgences because they were promulgated by
them; his opposition to their opinions and vices proceeded from more laudable
motives. Seck. p. 15, 32. Lutheri Opera 1. p. 64. 6. 8. -- A diploma of
indulgences is published by Herm. Vonder Hardt, from which it appears that the
name of the guardian of the Franciscans is retained together with that of the
archbishop, although the former did not act. The limits of the country to which
their commissions extended, viz. the dioceses of Mentz Magdeburg, Halberstadt,
and the territories of the marquis of Brandenburg, are mentioned in that
diploma. Hist. Literaria Reformat. pars iv. p. 14.


MEANWHILE, these novelties in Luther's doctrines which interested all Germany,
excited little attention and no alarm in the court of Rome. Leo, fond of
elegant and refined pleasures, intent upon great schemes of policy, a stranger
to theological controversies, and apt to despise them, regarded with the utmost
indifference the operations of an obscure Friar, who in the heart of Germany,
carried on a scholastic disputation in a barbarous style. Little did he
apprehend, or Luther himself dream, that the effects of this quarrel would be
so fatal to the papal see. Leo imputed the whole to monastic enmity an
emulation, and seemed inclined not to interpose in the contest, but to allow
the Augustinians and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with their usual
animosity.

THE solicitations, however, of Luther's adversaries, exasperated to an high
degree by the boldness and severity with which he animadverted on their
writings, together with the surprising progress which his opinions made in
different parts of Germany, rouzed at last the attention of the court of Rome,
and obliged Leo to take measures for the security of the church against an
attack that appeared now too serious to be despised. For this end, he summoned
Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty days, before the auditor of the chamber,
and the same Prierias who had written against him, whom he empowred to examine
his doctrines, and to decide concerning them. He wrote at the same time, to the
Elector of Saxony, beseeching him not to protect a man whose heretical and
profane tenets were so shocking to pious ears; and enjoined the Provincial of
the Augustinians to check by his authority the rashness of an arrogant monk,
which brought disgrace upon the order of St. Augustine, and gave offense and
disturbance to the whole church.

FROM the strain of these letters as well as from the nomination of a judge so
prejudiced and partial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what sentence he might
expect at Rome. He discovered, for that reason, the utmost solicitude, to have
his cause tried in Germany, and before a less suspected tribunal. The
university of Wittemberg, anxious for the safety of a man who did so much
honor to their society, wrote to the Pope, and after employing several
pretexts to excuse Luther from appearing at Rome, entreated Leo to commit the
examination of his doctrines to some persons of learning and authority in
Germany. The Elector requested the same thing of the Pope's legate at the diet
of Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that time, was so far from having
any intention to disclaim the papal authority, that he did not even entertain
the smallest suspicion concerning its divine original, had written to Leo a
most submissive letter, promising an unreserved compliance with his will, the
Pope gratified them so far as to empower his legate in Germany, cardinal
Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for scholastic learning, and passionately devoted
to the Roman see, to hear and determine the cause.

LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline a judge chosen among his avowed
adversaries, did not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan, and having
obtained the Emperor's safe conduct, immediately repaired to Augsburg. The
Cardinal received him with decent respect, and endeavored at first to gain
upon him by gentle treatment: But thinking it beneath the dignity of his
station to enter into any formal dispute, he required him, by virtue of the
apostolic powers with which he was clothed, to retract the errors he had
uttered with regard to Indulgences, and the nature of faith; and to abstain,
for the future, from the publication of new and dangerous opinions. Luther
fully persuaded of the truth of his own tenets, and confirmed in the belief of
them by the approbation they had met with among persons conspicuous both for
their learning and piety, was surprised at this abrupt mention of a recantation
before any endeavors were used to convince him that he was mistaken. He had
flattered himself, that in a conference concerning the points in dispute, with
a prelate of such distinguished abilities, he would be able to remove many of
those imputations with which the ignorance or malice of his antagonists had
loaded him; but the high tone of authority which the Cardinal assumed,
extinguished at once all hopes of this kind, and cut off every prospect of
advantage from the interview. His native intrepidity of mind, however, did not
desert him. He declared, with the utmost firmness, that he could not, with a
safe conscience, renounce opinions which he believed to be true; nor should any
consideration ever induce him to do what would be so base in itself, and so
offensive to God. At the same time he continued to express no less reverence
than formerly for the authority of the apostolic see Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164.
; he signified his willingness to submit the whole controversy to certain
universities which he named, and promised neither to write nor to preach for
the future concerning Indulgences, provided his adversaries were likewise
enjoined to be silent with respect to them Ibid. p. 169.
. All these offers Cajetan disregarded or rejected, and still insisted
peremptorily on a simple recantation, threatening him with ecclesiastical
censures, and forbidding him to appear again in his presence, unless he
resolved instantly to comply with what he required. This haughty and violent
manner of proceeding, as well as other circumstances, gave Luther's friends
such strong reasons to suspect, that even the Imperial safe conduct would not
be able to protect him from the legate's power and resentment, that they
prevailed on him to withdraw secretly from Augsburg, and to return to his own
country. But before his departure, according to a form of which there had been
some examples, he prepared a solemn appeal, from the Pope ill-informed at that
time concerning his cause, to the Pope when he should receive more full
information with respect to it Sleid. Hist. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45.
Luth Oper i. 163.
.

CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, and the publication of his
appeal, wrote to the Elector of Saxony, complaining of both; and requiring him,
as he regarded the peace of the church, or the authority of its head, either to
send that seditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or to banish him out of his
territories. It was not from theological considerations that Frederick had
hitherto countenanced Luther, he seems to have been much a stranger to
controversies of that kind, and to have been little interested in them. His
protection flowed almost entirely, as has been already observed, from
political motives, and was afforded with great secrecy and caution. He had
neither heard any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of his books; and though
all Germany resounded with his fame, he had never once admitted him into his
presence Seckend. p. 27. Sleid. Hist. p. 12.
. But upon this demand which the Cardinal made, it became necessary to throw
off somewhat of his former reserve. He had been at great expense, and had
bestowed much attention on founding a new university, an object of considerable
importance to every German prince; and foreseeing how fatal a blow the removal
of Luther would be to its reputation Seckend. p. 59.
, he, under various pretexts, and with many professions of esteem for the
Cardinal, and of reverence for the Pope, declined complying with either of his
requests, and openly discovered great concern for Luther's safety Sleid. Hist.
p. 10. Luth. Oper. i. 172.
.

THE inflexible rigor with which Cajetan insisted on a simple recantation,
gave great offense to Luther's followers in that age, and has since been
censured as imprudent, b^ several popish writers. But it was impossible for the
legate to act another part. The judges before whom Luther had been required to
appear at Rome, were so eager to display their zeal against his errors, that,
without waiting the expiration of the sixty days allowed him in the citation,
they had already condemned him as an heretic Luth. Oper. i. 161.
. Leo had in several of his brieves and letters, stigmatized him as a child of
iniquity, and a man given up to a reprobate sense. Nothing less, therefore than
a recantation could save the honor of the church, whose maxim it is never to
abandon the smallest point it has established, and which is even precluded, by
its pretensions to infallibility, from having it in its power to do so.

LUTHER's situation, meanwhile, was such as would have filled any other person
with the most disquieting apprehensions. He could not expect that a prince so
prudent and cautious as Frederick would, on his account, set at defiance the
thunders of the church, and brave the papal power which had crushed some of the
most powerful of the German Emperors. He knew what veneration was paid, at that
time, to ecclesiastical decisions; what terror ecclesiastical censures carried
along with them, and how easily these might intimidate and shake a prince, who
was rather his protector from policy, than his disciple from conviction. If he
should be obliged to quit Saxony, he had no prospect of any other asylum, and
must stand exposed to whatever punishment the rage or bigotry of his enemies
could inflict though sensibe of his danger, he discovered no symptoms of
timidity, or remissness, but continued to vindicate his own conduct and
opinions, and to inveigh against those of his adversaries with more vehemence
than ever Seckend. p. 59.
.

BUT as every step taken by the court of Rome, particularly the irregular
sentence by which he had been so precipitately declared an heretic, convinced
Luther that Leo would soon proceed to the most violent measures against him, he
had recourse to the only expedient in his power, in order to prevent the effect
of the Papal censures. He appealed to a general council, which he affirmed to
be the representative of the catholic church, and superior in power to the
Pope, who being a fallible man, might err, as St. Peter, the most perfect of
his predecessors had erred Sleid. Hist. 12. Luth. Oper. i. 179.
.

IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed rash conjectures concerning the
intentions of the Romish church. A bull of a date prior to his appeal, was
issued by the Pope, in which he magnifies the virtue and efficacy of
Indulgences in terms as extravagant as any of his predecessors had ventured to
use in the darkest ages; and without applying such palliatives, or mentioning
such concessions as the juncture seemed to call for, he required all Christians
to assent to what he delivered as the doctrine of the catholic church, and
subjected those who should hold or teach any contrary opinion to the heaviest
ecclesiastical censures.

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which they considered as an unjustifiable
effort of the Pope in order to preserve that rich branch of his revenue which
arose from Indulgences, produced little effect. But among the rest of his
countrymen, such a clear decision of the sovereign Pontiff against him, and
enforced by such dreadful penalties, must have been attended with consequences
very fatal to his cause; if these had not been prevented in a great measure by
the death of the Emperor Maximilian, whom both his principles and his interest
prompted to support the authority of the holy see. In consequence of this
event, the vicariat of that part of Germany which is governed by the Saxon
laws, was committed to the Elector of Saxony; and under the shelter of his
friendly administration, Luther not only enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions
were suffered, during the inter-regnum which preceded Charles's election, to
take root in different places, and to grow up to some degree of strength and
firmness. Leo too, to whom the election of an Emperor was a point more
interesting than a theological controversy, which he did not understand, and of
which he could not foresee the consequences, being extremely solicitous not to
irritate a Prince of such considerable influence in the electoral college as
Frederick, discovered a great unwillingness to pronounce the sentence of
excommunication against Luther, which his adversaries continually demanded with
the most clamorous importunity.

TO these political views of the Pope, as well as to his natural aversion from
severe measures, was owing the suspension of any further proceedings against
Luther for eighteen months. Perpetual negociations, however, in order to bring
the matter to some amicable issue, were carried on during that space. The
manner in which these were conducted having given Luther many opportunities of
observing the corruption of the court of Rome; its obstinacy in adhering to
established errors; and its indifference about truth, however clearly proposed,
or strongly proved, he began to utter some doubts with regard to the divine
original of the Papal authority. A public disputation was held upon this
important question at Leipsic, between Luther and Eccius, one of his most
learned and formidable antagonists; but it was as fruitless and indecisive as
such scholastic combats usually prove. Both parties boasted of having obtained
the victory; both were confirmed in their own opinions; and no progress was
made toward deciding the point in controversy Luth. Oper. i. 199.
.

NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doctrines and usurpations of the
Romish church, break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less fierce, and
occasioned by the same causes, was made upon them about this time in
Switzerland. The Franciscans being entrusted with the promulgation of
Indulgences in that country, executed their commission with the same
indiscretion and rapaciousness, which had rendered the Dominicans so odious in
Germany. They proceeded, nevertheless with unterrupted success till they
arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius, a man not inferior to Luther himself in
zeal and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them; and being animated with a
republican boldness, and free from those restraints which subjection to the
will of a Prince imposed on the German reformer, he advanced with more daring
and rapid steps to overturn the whole fabric of the established religion Sleid.
Hist. 22. Seckend. 59.
. The appearance of such a vigorous auxiliary, and the progress which he made,
was at first, matter of great joy to Luther, though on the other hand, the
decrees of the universities of Cologne and Louvain, which pronounced his
opinions to be erroneous, afforded great cause of triumph to his adversaries.

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired fresh vigor from every instance
of opposition; and pushing on his inquiries and attacks from one doctrine to
another he began to shake the firmest foundations on which the wealth or power
of the church were established. Leo came at last to be convinced, that all
hopes of reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; several prelates of great
wisdom exclaimed no less than Luther's personal adversaries against the Pope's
unprecedented lenity in permitting an incorrigible heretic, who during three
years had been endeavoring to subvert every thing sacred and venerable, still
to remain within the bosom of the church, the dignity of the papal see rendered
the most vigorous proceedings necessary; the new Emperor, it was hoped, would
support its authority; nor did it seem probable that the Elector of Saxony
would so far forget his usual caution, as to set himself in opposition to their
united power. The college of cardinals was often assembled, in order to prepare
the sentence with due deliberation, and the most able canons were consulted how
it might be expressed with most unexceptionable formality. At last, on the
fifteenth of June, one thousand five hundred and twenty, the bull so fatal to
the church of Rome, was issued. Forty-one propositions, extracted out of
Luther's works, are therein condemned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive
to pious ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writings, upon pain of
excommunication; such as had any of them in their custody, are commanded to
commit them to the flames; and he himself, if he did not, within sixty days
publicly recant his errors, and burn his books, is pronounced an obstinate
heretic; is excommunicated, and delivered unto Satan for the destruction of
his flesh; and all secular Princes are required, under pain of incurring the
same censure, to seize his person, that he might be punished as his crimes
deserved Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper, i. 423.


THE publication of this bull in Germany excited various passions in different
places. Luther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and opinions had been
crushed at once by such a decisive blow. His followers, whose reverence for the
papal authority daily diminished, read Leo's anathemas with more indignation
than terror. In some cities, the people violently obstructed the promulgation
of the bull; in others, those who attempted to publish it were insulted, and
the bull itself torn in pieces, and trodden under foot Seck. p. 116.
.

THIS sentence, which he had for some time expected, did not disconcert or
intimidate Luther. After renewing his appeal to a general council, he published
remarks upon the bull of excommunication; and being now persuaded that Leo had
been guilty both of impiety and injustice in his proceedings against him, he
boldly declared the Pope to be that man of sin, or Antichrist, whose appearance
is foretold in the New Testament; he declaimed against his tyranny and
usurpations with greater violence than ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes
to shake of such an ignominious yoke; and boasted of his own happiness in being
marked out as the object of ecclesiastical indignation, because he had ventured
to assert the liberty of mankind. Nor did he confine his expressions of
contempt for the papal power to words alone; Leo having, in execution of the
bull, appointed Luther's books to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of retaliation,
assembled all the professors and students in the university of Wittemberg, and
with great pomp, and before a vast multitude of spectators, cast the volumes of
the canon law together with the bull of excommunication into the flames; and
his example was imitated in several cities of Germany. The manner in which he
justified this action was still more provoking than the action itself. He
collected from the canon law some of the most extravagant propositions with
regard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the Pope's power, and subordination
of all secular jurisdiction to his authority, and published these with a
commentary, pointing out the impiety of such tenets, and their evident tendency
to subvert all civil government Luth Oper. ii. 316.
.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, and such the state of his party,
when Charles arrived in Germany. No secular Prince had hitherto embraced
Luther's opinions, no change in the established forms of worship had been
introduced; and no encroachments made upon the possessions or jurisdiction of
the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to action; and the controversy,
though conducted with great heat and passion on both sides, was still carried
on with its proper weapons, with theses, disputations, and replies. A deep
impression, however, was made upon the minds of the people; their reverence for
ancient institutions and doctrines was shaken; and the materials were already
scattered which produced the combustion that soon spread all over Germany.
Students crowded from every province of the Empire to Wittemberg; and under
Luther himself, Melancthon, Carlostadius, and other masters, then reckoned
eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on their return, they propagated among their
countrymen, who listened to them with that fond attention, which truth, when
accompanied with novelty, naturally commands Seckend. 59.
.

DURING the course of these transactions, the court of Rome, though under the
direction of one of its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its schemes with that
profound sagacity, nor executed them with that steady perseverance, which had
long rendered it the most perfect model of political wisdom to the rest of
Europe. When Luther began to declaim against Indulgences, two different methods
of treating him lay before the Pope; by adopting one of which the attempt, it
is probable, might have been crushed, and by the other it might have been
rendered innocent. If Luther's first departure from the doctrines of the church
had instantly drawn upon him the weight of its censures, the dread of these
might have restrained the Elector of Saxony from protecting him, might have
deterred the people from listening to his discourses, or have overawed Luther
himself; and his name, like that of many good men before his time, would now
have been known to the world only for his honest but ill-timed effort to
correct the corruptions of the Romish church. Or on the other hand, if the Pope
had early testified some displeasure with the vices and excesses of those who
had been employed to publish Indulgences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses, addressed to the people; if he had enjoined
the disputants on both sides to be silent; if he had been careful not to risque
the credit of the church by defining articles which had hitherto been left
undetermined, Luther would, probably, have stopped short at his first
discoveries: He would not have been forced in self-defence to venture upon new
ground, and the whole controversy might possibly have died away insensibly; or
being confined entirely to the schools, might have been carried on with as
little detriment to the peace and unity of the Romish church, as that which the
Franciscans maintain with the Dominicans, concerning the immaculate conception,
or that between the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the operations of grace:
But Leo, by fluctuating between these opposite systems, and by embracing them
alternately, defeated the effects of both. By an improper exertion of
authority, Luther was exasperated, not restrained. By a mistaken exercise of
lenity, time was given for his opinions to spread, but no progress made toward
reconciling him to the church; and even the sentence of excommunication, which
at another juncture might have been decisive, was delayed so long, that it
became at last scarce an object of terror.

SUCH a series of errors in the measure of a court, seldom chargeable with
mistaking its own true interest, is not more astonishing than the wisdom which
appeared in Luther's conduct. Though a perfect stranger to the maxims of human
prudence, and incapable, from the impetuosity of his temper, of observing them,
he was led naturally by the method in which he made his discoveries, to carry
on his operations in a manner which contributed more to their success, than if
every step he took had been prescribed by the most artful policy. At the time
when he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he was far from intending that
reformation, which he afterward effected; and would have trembled with horror
at the thoughts of what at last he gloried in accomplishing. The knowledge of
truth was not poured into his mind, all at once, by any special revelation; he
acquired it by industry and meditation, and his progress, of consequence, was
gradual. The doctrines of Popery are so closely connected, that the exposing of
one error conducted him naturally to the detection of others; and all the parts
of that artificial fabric were so linked together, that the pulling down of
one loosened the foundation of the rest, and rendered it more easy to overturn
them. In confuting the extravagant tenets concerning Indulgences, he was
obliged to inquire into the true cause of our justification and acceptance with
God. The knowledge of that discovered to him by degrees the inutility of
pilgrimages and penances; the vanity of relying on the intercession of saints;
the impiety of worshipping them; the abuses of auricular confession; and the
imaginary existence of purgatory. The detection of so many errors, led him of
course to consider the character of the clergy who taught them; and their
exorbitant wealth, the severe injunction of celibacy, and the intolerable
rigor of monastic vows appeared to him the great sources of their corruption.
From thence, it was but one step to call in question the divine original of the
papal power, which authorized and supported such a system of errors. As the
unavoidable result of the whole, he disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope,
the decisions of schoolmen, or any other human authority, and appealed to the
word of God as the only standard of theological truth. To this gradual progress
Luther owed his success. His hearers were not shocked at first by any
proposition too repugnant to their ancient prejudices, or too remote from
established opinions. They were conducted insensibly from one doctrine to
another. Their faith and conviction were able to keep pace with his
discoveries. To the same cause was owing the inattention, and even
indifference, with which Leo viewed Luther's first proceedings. A direct or
violent attack upon the authority of the church, would have drawn upon him at
once the whole weight of its vengeance; but as this was far from his thoughts,
as he continued long to profess great respect for the Pope, and made repeated
offers of submission to his decisions, there seemed to be no reason for
apprehending that he would prove the author of any desperate revolt; and he was
suffered to proceed step by step, in undermining the constitution of the
church, till the remedy applied at last came too late to produce any effect.

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause derived either from the mistakes of his
adversaries, or from his own good conduct, the sudden progress and firm
establishment of his doctrines, must not be ascribed to these alone. The same
corruptions in the church of Rome which he condemned, had been attacked long
before his appearance, and the same opinions which he now propagated, had been
published in different places, and were supported by the same arguments. Waldus
in the twelfth century, Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of Popery with great boldness, and confuted
them with more ingenuity and learning than could have been expected in those
illiterate ages in which they flourished. But all these premature attempts
toward a reformation proved abortive. Such feeble lights, incapable of
dispelling the darkness which then covered the church, were soon extinguished;
and though the doctrines of these pious men produced some effects, and left
some traces in the countries where they were taught, they were neither
extensive nor considerable. Many powerful causes contributed to facilitate
Luther's progress, which either did not exist or did not operate with full
force in their days; and at the critical and mature juncture when he appeared,
circumstances of every kind concurred in rendering each step he took successful.

THE long and scandalous schism which divided the church, during the latter
part of the fourteenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth centuries, had a
great effect in diminishing the veneration with which the world had been
accustomed to view the papal dignity. Two or three contending Pontiffs roaming
about Europe at a time; fawning on the Princes whom they wanted to gain;
squeezing the countries which acknowledged their authority; excommunicating
their rivals, and cursing those who adhered to them, discredited their
pretensions to infallibility, and exposed both their persons and their office
to contempt. The laity, to whom all parties appealed, came to learn that some
right of private judgment belonged to them, and acquired the exercise of it so
far as to choose, among these infallible guides, whom they would please to
follow. The proceedings of the councils of Constance and Basil, spread still
wider this disrespect for the Romish see, and by their bold exertion of
authority in deposing and electing Popes, taught the world that there was in
the church a jurisdiction superior even to the papal power, which they had long
believed to be supreme.

THE wound given on that occasion to the papal authority was scarce healed up,
when the pontificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. both able princes, but
detestable ecclesiastics, raised new scandal in Christendom. The profligate
morals of the former in private life; the fraud, the injustice and cruelty of
his public administration, placed him on a level with those tyrants, whose
deeds are the greatest reproach to human nature. The latter, though a stranger
to these odious passions which prompted his predecessor to commit so many
unnatural crimes, was under the dominion of a restless and ungovernable
ambition, which scorned all considerations of gratitude, of decency, or of
justice, when they obstructed the execution of his schemes. It was scarce
possible to be firmly persuaded that the infallible knowledge of a religion,
whose chief precepts are purity and humility, was deposited in the breasts of
the impious Alexander, or the overbearing Julius. The opinion of those who
exalted the authority of a council above that of the Pope spread wonderfully
under their pontificates: And as the Emperor and French Kings, who were
alternately engaged in hostilities with these active pontiffs, permitted, and
even encouraged their subjects to expose their vices with all the violence of
invective, and all the petulance of ridicule, men's ears being accustomed to
these, were not shocked with the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther and his
followers concerning the papal dignity.

NOR were such excesses confined to the head of the church alone. Many of the
dignified clergy, both secular and regular, being the younger sons of noble
families, who had assumed the ecclesiastical character for no other reason, but
that they found in the church stations of great dignity and affluence, were
accustomed totally to neglect the duties of their office, and indulged
themselves without reserve in all the vices to which great wealth and idleness
naturally give birth. Though the inferior clergy were prevented by their
poverty from imitating the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them as contemptible as the others were
odious The corupt state of the church prior to the Reformation, is ackowledged
by an author, who was both abundantly able to judge concerning this matter, and
who was not over forward to confess it. "For some years (says he) before the
Lutheran and Calvinistic heresies were published, there was not (as
contemporary authors testify) any severity in ecclesiastical judicatories, any
discipline with regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred literature, any
reverence for divine things, there was not almost any religion remaining."
Bellarminus Concio. xxviii. Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. apud
Gerdesii Hist. Evang. Renovati. vol. i. p. 25.
. The severe and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were equally subject,
occasioned such irregularities, that in several parts of Europe the concubinage
of priests was not only permitted, but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so
contrary to the genius of the Christian religion, is the strongest proof that
the crimes it was intended to prevent were both numerous and flagrant. Long
before the sixteenth century, many authors of great name and authority give
such descriptions of the dissolute morals of the clergy, as seem almost
incredible in the present age Centum Gravamina. Not. German. in Fasciculo Rer.
Expentend. and Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i. 361. See innumerable
passages to the same purpose in the appendix, or second volume, published by
Edw. Brown. See also Herm. Von der Hardt, Hist. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and the
vast collections of Walchius in his four volumes of Monumenta medii aevi.
Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the clergy. When they
ventured upon crimes, they would not be scrupulous with respect to the decorum
of behavior. Accordingly their neglect of the decent conduct suitable to their
profession, seems to have given great offense. In order to illustrate this I
shall transcribe one passage, because it is taken not from any author whose
professed purpose it was to describe the improper conduct of the clergy; and
who from prejudice or artifice may be supposed to aggravate the charge against
them. The Emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbishop of Mentz, A. D.
1359. exhorting him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thus expresses
himself; "De Christi patrimonio, ludos, hastiludia and torneamenta exercent;
habitum militarem cum praetextis aureis and argenteis gestant, and calceos
militares; comam and barbam nutriunt, and nihil quod ad vitam and ordinem
ecclesiasticum spectat, ostendunt. Militaribus se duntaxat and secularibus
actibus, vita and moribus, in suae salutis dispendium, and generale populi
scandalum, immiscent. Codex Diplomaticus Anecdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudenum.
4to. vol. iii. p. 438.


. The voluptuous lives of ecclesiastics occasioned great scandal, not only
because their manners were inconsistent with their sacred character; but the
laity being accustomed to see several of them raised from the lowest stations
to the greatest affluence, did not show the same indulgence to their excesses,
as to those of persons possessed of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing
their condition with more envy, they censured their crimes with greater
severity. Nothing, therefore, could be more acceptable to Luther's hearers,
than the violence with which he exclaimed against the immoralities of
churchmen, and every person in his audience could, from his own own
observation, confirm the truth of his invectives.

THE scandal of these crimes was greatly increased by the facility with which
those who committed them, obtained pardon. In all the European kingdoms, the
impotence of the civil magistrate, under forms of government extremely
irregular and turbulent, made it necessary to relax the rigor of justice, and
upon payment of a certain fine or composition prescribed by law, to remit
farther punishment, even of the most atrocious crimes. The court of Rome,
always attentive to the means of augmenting its revenues, imitated this
practice, and by a preposterous accommodation of it to religious concerns,
granted its pardons to such transgressors as gave a sum of money in order to
purchase them. As the idea of a composition for crimes was then familiar, this
strange traffic was so far from shocking mankind, that it soon became general;
and to prevent any imposition in carrying it on, the officers, of the Roman
chancery published a book, containing the precise sum to be exacted for the
pardon of every particular sin. A deacon guilty of murder was absolved for
twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot might assassinate for three hundred livres.
Any ecclesiastic might commit uncleanness, though with the most aggravating
circumstances, for the third part of that sum. Even such shocking crimes, as
occur seldom in human life, and perhaps exist only in the impure imagination of
a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate. When a more regular and perfect
mode of dispensing justice came to be introduced into civil courts, the
practice of paying a composition for crimes went gradually into disuse; and
mankind having acquired more accurate notions concerning religion and morality,
the conditions on which the court of Rome bestowed its pardons appeared
impious, and were considered as one great source of ecclesiastical corruption
Fascicul. Rer. Expet. and Fug. 1. 355. J. G. Schelhornii Amoenit. L terar.
Francof. 1725. vol. ii. 369. Diction. de Bail. Artic. Banck and Tuppius, Taxa
Cancellar. Romanae, Edit. Francf. 1651. passim.
.

THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy might, perhaps, have been
tolerated with greater indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power had not
enabled them at the same time, to oppress all other orders of men. It is the
genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pompous or grand, to set no bounds
to its liberality toward persons whom it esteems sacred, and to think its
expressions of regard defective, unless it has raised them to the height of
wealth and authority. Hence flowed the extensive revenues and jurisdiction
possessed by the church in every country of Europe, and which were become
intolerable to the laity from whose undiscerning bounty they were at first
derived.

THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical oppression had fallen with such
peculiar weight on the Germans, as rendered them, though naturally exempt from
levity, and tenacious of their ancient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Europe to listen to those who called on them to assert their liberty. During
the long contest between the Popes and Emperors concerning the right of
investiture, and the wars which these occasioned most of the considerable
German ecclesiastics joined the papal faction; and while engaged in rebellion
against the head of the Empire, they seized the Imperial revenues, and usurped
the Imperial jurisdiction within their own dioceses. Upon the re-establishment
of tranquillity, they still retained these usurpations, as if by the length of
an unjust possession they had acquired a legal right to them. The Emperors, too
feeble to wrest them out of their hands, were obliged to grant them fiefs of
these vast territories, and they enjoyed all the immunities and honors which
belonged to feudal barons. By means of these, many bishops and abbots in
Germany were not only ecclesiastics, but princes, and their character and
manners partook more of the license, too frequent among the latter, than of the
sanctity which became the former F Paul, History of Ecclesiast. Benefices, p.
107.
.

THE unsettled state of government in Germany, and the frequent wars to which
that country was exposed, contributed in another manner toward aggrandizing
Ecclesiastics. The only property during these times of anarchy which enjoyed
security from the oppression of the great, or the ravages of war, was that
which belonged to the church. This was owing, not only to the great reverence
for the sacred character prevalent in those ages, but to a superstitious dread
of the sentence of excommunication, which the clergy were ready to denounce
against all who invaded their possessions. Many observing this, made a
surrender of their lands to the ecclesiastics, and consenting to hold them in
fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a degree of safety, which without
this device they were unable to procure. By such an increase of the number of
their vassals, the power of ecclesiastics received a real and permanent
augmentation; and as lands, held in fee by the limited tenures common in those
ages, often returned to the persons on whom the fief depended, considerable
additions were made in this way to the property of the clergy F. Paul, Hist. of
Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers, Etat de France, tom. i. 169. Land. 1737.
.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the safety of their own persons,
was still greater than that which they displayed in securing their possessions;
and their efforts to attain it were still more successful. As they were
consecrated to the priestly office with much outward solemnity; were
distinguished from the rest of mankind by a peculiar dress and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges which do not belong to other
Christians, they naturally became the objects of excessive veneration. As a
superstitious spirit spread, they were regarded as beings of a superior species
to the profane laity, whom it would be impious to try by the same laws, or to
subject to the same punishments. This exemption from civil jurisdiction,
granted at first to ecclesiastics, as a mark of respect, they soon claimed as a
point of right. This valuable immunity of the priesthood is asserted, not only
in the decrees of Popes and councils, but was confirmed in the most ample form
by many of the greatest Emperors Goldasti Constitut. Imperial. Franc of. 1673.
vol. ii. 92. 107.
. As long as the clerical character remained, the person of an ecclesiastic was
sacred: and unless he were degraded from his office, the unhallowed hand of the
civil judge durst not touch him. But as the power of degradation was lodged in
the spiritual courts, the difficulty and expense of obtaining such a sentence,
too often secured offenders of absolute impunity. Many assumed the clerical
character for no other reason, than that it might screen them from the
punishment which their actions deserved Rymer's Foedera, vol. xiii. 532.
. The German nobles complained loudly, that these anointed malefactors, as they
call them Centum Gravam. 31.
, seldom suffered capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes; and their
independance on the civil magistrate is often mentioned in their remonstrances,
as a privilege equally pernicious to society, and to the morals of the clergy.

WHILE the clergy asserted de privileges of their own order with such zeal,
they made continual encroachments upon those of the laity. All causes relative
to matrimony, to testaments, to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were thought to be so connected with
religion, that they could be tried only in the spiritual courts. Not satisfied
with this ample jurisdiction, which extended to one half of the subjects which
give rise to litigation among men, the clergy, with wonderful industry, and by
a thousand inventions, endeavored to draw all other causes into their own
courts Giannone Hist. of ^aples, book xix. 3.
; and as they had engrossed the whole learning known in the dark ages, the
spiritual judges were commonly so far superior in knowledge and abilities to
those employed in the secular courts, that the people at first favored any
stretch that was made to bring their affairs under the cognizance of a
judicature, on the decisions of which they could rely with superior confidence.
Thus the interest of the church, and the inclination of the people, concurring
to elude the jurisdiction of the lay-magistrate, soon reduced it almost to
nothing Cetum Gravam. 9. 56. 64.
. By means of this, vast power accrued to ecclesiastics, and no inconsiderable
addition was made to their revenue by the sums paid in those ages to such as
administered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts enforced their sentences, added to
them great weight and terror. The censure of excommunication was instituted
originally for preserving the purity of the church, that obstinate offenders,
whose impious tenets or profane lives were a reproach to christianity, might be
cut off from the society of the faithful: This, ecclesiastics did not scruple
to convert into an engine for promoting their own power, and inflicted it on
the most frivolous occasions. Whoever despised any of their decisions, even
concerning civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful censure, which not
only excluded them from all the privileges of a Christian, but deprived them of
their rights as men and citizens Centum Gravam 34.
; and the dread of this rendered even the most fierce and turbulent spirits
obsequious to the authority of the church.

NOR did the clergy neglect the proper methods of preserving the wealth and
power which they had acquired with such industry and address. The possessions
of the church, being consecrated to God, were declared to be unalienable; so
that the funds of a society which was daily gaining, and could never lose, grew
to be immense. In Germany, it was computed that the ecclesiastics had got into
their hands more than one half of the national property Centum Gravam. 28.
. In other nations, the proportion varied; but the share belonging to the
church was every where prodigious. These vast possessions were not subject to
the burdens imposed on the lands of the laity. The German clergy were exempted
by law from all taxes Centum Gravam. Ibid. Golda^^, Constable. Imper. ii. 79, 108.
Pfeffel Hist. du Droit Publ. 350, 374.
; and if, on any extraordinary emergence, Ecclesiastics were pleased to grant
any aid toward supplying the public exigencies, this was considered as a free
gift flowing from their own generosity, which the civil magistrate had no title
to demand, far less to exact. In consequence of this strange solecism in
government, the laity in Germany had the mortification to find themselves
loaded with excessive impositions, because those who possessed the greatest
property were freed from any obligation to support, or to defend the state.

GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth and numerous privileges of the
clerical order were to the other members of the Germanick body, they would have
reckoned it some mitigation of the evil, if these had been possessed only by
ecclesiastics residing among themselves, who would have been less apt to make
an improper use of their riches, or to exercise their rights with unbecoming
rigor. But the bishops of Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest that
ever human ambition suggested, of being supreme and infallible heads of the
Christian church; they by their profound policy and unwearied perseverance, by
their address in availing themselves of every circumstance, which occurred, by
taking advantage of the superstition of some Princes, of the necessities of
others, and of the credulity of the people, at length established their
pretensions in opposition both to the interest and common sense of mankind.
Germany was the country which these ecclesiastical sovereigns governed with
most absolute authority. They excommunicated and deposed some of its most
illustrious Emperors, and excited their subjects, their ministers, and even
their children to take arms against them. Amidst these contests, the Popes
continually extended their own immunities, and spoiled the secular Princes of
their most valuable prerogatives, and the German church felt all the rigor of
that oppression which flows from subjection to foreign dominion, and foreign
exactions.

THE right of conferring benefices, which the Popes usurped during that period
of confusion, was an acquisition of great importance, and exalted the
ecclesiastical power upon the ruins of the temporal. The Emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in possession of this right, and it served to
increase both their authority and their revenue. But by wresting it out of
their hands, the Popes were enabled to fill the Empire with their own
creatures; they accustomed a great body of every prince's sujects to depend not
upon him but upon the Roman see; they bestowed the richest benefices in every
country upon strangers, and drained their wealth to supply the luxury of a
foreign court. Even the patience of the most superstitious ages mutin^ed under
such oppression; and so loud and frequent were the complaints and murmurs of
the Germans, that the Popes, afraid of irritating them too far, consented,
contrary to their usual practice, to abate somewhat of their pretensions, and
to rest satisfied with the right of nomination to those benefices which
happened to fall vacant during six months in the year, leaving the disposal of
the remainder to the princes and other legal patrons F. Paul, Hist. of Eccl.
Benef. 204. Gold. Constable. Imper. i. 408.


BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients for eluding an agreement which
put such restraints on its power. The practice of reserving certain benefices
in every country to the Pope's immediate nomination, which had been long known,
and often complained of, was extended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the
benefices possessed by Cardinals, or any of the numerous officers in the Roman
court; those held by persons who happened to die at Rome, or within forty miles
of that city, on their journey to or from it; those which became vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in that number; and Julius II. and
Leo stretching the matter to the utmost, often collated to benefices where the
right of reservation had not been declared, on pretense of having mentally
reserved this privilege to themselves. The right of reservation, however, even
with this extension, had certain limits, as it could be exercised only where
the benefice was actually vacant; and therefore, in order to render the
exertion of papal power unbounded, expectative graces, or mandates nominating a
person to succeed to a benefice upon the first vacancy that should happen, were
brought into use. By means of these, Germany was filled with persons depending
on the court of Rome, from which it received these reversionary grants; princes
were defrauded, in a great degree, of their prerogatives, and the rights of
lay-patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered almost entirely vain Centum Gravam.
31. Fascic. Rer. Expet. etc. 334. Gold. Constable. Imper. i. 391. 404, 405. F.
Paul, Hist. of Eccl. Benef. 167, 199.
.

THE manner in which these extraordinary powers were exercised, rendered them
still more odious and intolerable. The avarice and extortion of the court of
Rome were become excessive almost to a proverb. The sale of benefices was so
notorious that no pains were taken to conceal, or to disguise it. Companies of
merchants openly purchased the benefices of different districts in Germany from
the Pope's ministers, and retailed them at an advanced price Fascic. Rer.
Expet. i. 359.
. Pious men beheld with deep regret these simoniacal transactions, so unworthy
the ministers of a christian church; while politicians complained of the loss
sustained by the exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious traffic.

THE sums, indeed, which the court of Rome drew by its stated and legal
impositions from all the countries that acknowledged its authority, were so
considerable, that it is not strange that they murmured at the smallest
addition made to them by unnecessary or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical
person, upon his admission to his benefice, paid annats, or one year's rent of
his living to the Pope, and as that tax was exacted with great rigor, its
amount was prodigious. To this must be added the frequent demands made by the
Popes of free gifts from the clergy, together with the extraordinary levies of
tenths upon ecclesiastical benefices, on pretense of expeditions against the
Turks, seldom intended, or carried into execution; and from the whole, the vast
proportion of the revenues of the church which flowed continually to Rome, may
be estimated.

SUCH were the dissolute manners, the exorbitant wealth, and power, and
privileges of the clergy before the reformation; such the oppressive rigor of
that dominion which the Popes had established over the christian world; and
such the sentiments concerning them that prevailed in Germany, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century. Nor has this sketch been copied from the
controversial writers of that age, who, in the heat of disputation, may be
suspected of having exaggerated the errors, or of having misrepresented the
conduct of that church which they labored to overturn; it is formed upon more
authentic evidence, upon the memorials and remonstrances of the Imperial
diets, cooly enumerating the grievances under which the Empire groaned, in
order to obtain the redress of them. Dissatisfaction must have arisen to a
great height among the people, when these grave assemblies expressed themselves
with such acrimony; and if they demanded the abolition of these enormities with
so much vehemence, the people, we may be assured, uttered their sentiments and
desires in bolder and more virulent language.

TO men thus prepared for shaking off the yoke, Luther addressed himself with
certainty of success. As they had long felt its weight, and borne it with
impatience, they listened with joy to the first proposal for procuring
deliverance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager reception that his doctrines
met with, and the rapidity with which they spread over all the provinces of
Germany. Even the impetuosity and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence
in asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance and contempt wherewith he
treated all who differed from him, which, in ages of greater moderation and
refinement, have been reckoned defects in the character of that reformer, did
not appear excessive to his contemporaries, whose minds were strongly agitated
by those interesting controversies which he carried on, and who had themselves
endured the rigor of papal tyranny, and seen the curruptions in the church
against which he exclaimed.

NOR were they greatly offended at that gross scurrility with which his
polemical writings are filled, or at the low buffoonery he sometimes introduces
into his gravest discourses. No dispute was managed in those rude times without
a large portion of the former, and the latter was common, even on the most
solemn occasions, and in treating the most sacred subjects. So far were either
of them from doing hurt to his cause, that invective and ridicule had some
effect, as well as more laudable arguments, in exposing the errors of popery,
and in determining mankind to abandon them.

BESIDES all these causes of Luther's rapid progress, arising from the nature
of his enterpri^e, and the juncture at which he undertook it, he reaped
advantage from some foreign and adventitious circumstances, the beneficial
influence of which none of his forerunners in the same course had enjoyed.
Among these may be reckoned the invention of the art of printing, about half a
century before his time. By this fortunate discovery, the facility of acquiring
and of propagating knowledge, was wonderfully increased, and Luther's books,
which must otherwise have made their way slowly, and with uncertainty into
distant countries, spread at once all over Europe. Nor were they read only by
the rich and the learned, who alone had access to books before that invention;
they got into the hands of the people, who, upon this appeal to them as judges,
ventured to examine and to reject many doctrines, which they had formerly been
required to believe, without being taught to understand them.

THE revival of learning at the same period was a circumstance extremely
friendly to the reformation. The study of the ancient Greek and Roman authors,
and the discovery of that liberal and found knowledge which they contain,
rouzed the human mind from the profound lethargy in which it had been sunk
during several centuries. Mankind seem, at that period, to have recovered the
powers of inquiring and of thinking, faculties of which they had long lost the
use; and fond of the acquisition, they exercised them with great boldness upon
all subjects. They were not now afraid of entering an uncommon path, or of
embracing a new opinion. Novelty appeals, at this time, rather to have been a
recommendation to a doctrine; and instead of being startled when the daring
hand of Luther drew aside, or tore the veil which covered established errors,
the genius of the age applauded and aided the attempt. Luther, though a
stranger to elegance in taste or composition, zealously promoted the
cultivation of ancient literature; and sensible or its being necessary in
studying the scriptures, he himself had acquired considerable knowledge both in
the Hebrew and Greek tongues. Melancthon, and some other of his disciples, were
eminent proficients in the polite arts; and as the same barbarous monks who
opposed the introduction of learning into Germany, set themselves with equal
fierceness against Luther's opinions, and declared the good reception of the
one to be the effect of the progress which the other had made, the cause of
learning and of the reformation came to be considered as closely connected,
and, in every country, had the same friends, and the same enemies. This enabled
the reformers to carry on the contest at first with great superiority.
Erudition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity of composition, and even wit
and raillery, were wholly on their side, and triumphed with ease over
illiterate monks, whose rude arguments, expressed in a perplexed and barbarous
style, were found insufficient for the defense of a system, the errors of
which, all the art and ingenuity of its later and more learned advocates have
not been able to palliate.

THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival of learning excited in Europe,
was so favorable to the Reformation, that Luther was aided in his progress,
and mankind were prepared to embrace his doctrines, by persons who did not wish
success to his undertaking. The greater part of the ingenious men who applied
to the study of ancient literature, toward the close of the fifteenth century,
and the beginning of the sixteenth, though they had no intention, and perhaps
no wish to overturn the established system of religion, had discovered the
absurdity of many tenets and practices authorized by the church, and perceived
the futility of those arguments, by which illiterate monks endeavored to
defend them. Their contempt of these advocates for the received errors, led
them frequently to expose the ignorance which they supported, and to ridicule
their opinions with the utmost freedom and severity. By this men were prepared
for the more serious attacks made upon them by Luther, and their reverence both
for the doctrines and persons against whom he inveighed, was considerably
abated. This was particularly the case in Germany. When the first attempts were
made to revive a taste for ancient learning in that country, the Ecclesiastics
there, who were still more ignorant than their brethren on the other side of
the Alps, set themselves to oppose its progress with more active zeal; and the
patrons of the new studies, in return, attacked them with great violence. In
the writings of Reuchlin, Hutten, and the other revivers of learning in
Germany, the corruptions of the church of Rome are censured with an acrimony of
style, little inferior to that of Luther himself Gerdesius Hist. Evang. renov.
vol. i. p. 141, 157. Seckend. lib. i. p. 103. Vonder Hardt. Hist. Literar.
Reform. pars ii.
.

FROM the same cause proceeded the frequent strictures of Erasmus upon the
errors of the church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices of the clergy.
His reputation and authority were so high in Europe at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with such universal admiration, that
the effect of these deserves to be mentioned as one of the circumstances, which
contributed toward Luther's success. Erasmus having been destined for the
church, and trained up in the knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature, applied
himself more to theological inquiries than any of the revivers of learning in
that age. His acute judgment and vast erudition, enabled him to discover many
errors, both in the doctrine and worship of the Romish church. Some of these he
confuted with great solidity of reasoning, and force of eloquence. Others he
treated as objects of ridicule, and turned against them that irresistible
torrent of popular and satirical wit, of which he had the command. There was
scarce any opinion or practice of the Romish church which Luther endeavored to
reform, but what had been previously animadverted upon by Erasmus, and had
afforded him subject either of censure or of raillery. When Luther first began
his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to applaud his conduct; he courted
the friendship of several of his disciples and patrons; and condemned the
behavior and spirit of his adversaries Seckend. lib. i. p. 40, 96.
. He concurred openly with him in inveighing against the school divines, as the
teachers of a system equally unedifying and obscure. He joined him in
endeavoring to turn the attention of men to the study of the holy scriptures,
as the only standard of religious truth Vonder Hardt. Histor. Literar. Reform.
pars i. Gerdes. Hist. Evang. Renov. i. 147.
.

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented Erasmus from holding the same course
with Luther. The natural timidity of his temper; his want of that force of mind
which alone can prompt a man to assume the character of a reformer Erasmus
himself is candid enough to acknowledge this: "Luther, says he, has given us
many a wholesome doctrine, and many a good counsel. I wish he had not defeated
the effect of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every thing in
the most unexceptionable manner, I had no inclination to die for the sake of
truth. Every man has not the courage requisite to make a martyr; and I am
afraid, that if I were put to the trial, I should imitate St. Peter." Epist.
Erasmi in Jortin's Life of Erasm. vol i. p. 273.
; his excessive deference for persons in high station; his dread of loosing the
pensions and other emoluments which their liberality had conferred upon him;
his extreme love of peace, and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and by
gentle methods; all concurred in determining him to repress and to moderate the
zeal, with which he had once been animated against the errors of the church
Jortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. 2 8.
; and to assume the character of a mediator between Luther and his opponents.
But though Erasmus soon began to censure Luther as too daring and impetuous,
and was at last prevailed upon to write against him, he must, nevertheless, be
considered as his forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the church. He
first scattered the seeds, which Luther cherished and brought to maturity. His
raillery and oblique censures, prepared the way for Luther's invectives and
more direct attacks. In this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous defenders of
the Romish church in his own times Vonder Hardt. Hist. Literar. Reform. pars i.
p. 2.
. In this light he must be considered by every person conversant in the history
of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumstances which combined in favoring the
progress of Luther's opinions, or in weakening the resistance of his
adversaries, I have avoided entering into any discussion of the theological
doctrines of popery, and have not attempted to show how repugnant they are to
the spirit of Christianity, and how destistute of any foundation in reason, in
the word of God, or in the practice of the primitive church, leaving these
topics entirely to ecclesiastical historians, to whose province they peculiarly
belong. But when we add the effect of these religious considerations to the
influence of political causes, it is obvious that the united operation of both
on the human mind, must have been sudden and irresistible. And though, to
Luther's contemporaries, who were too near perhaps to the scene, or too deeply
interested in it, to trace causes with accuracy, or to examine them with
coolness, the rapidity with which his opinions spread appeared to be so
unaccountable, that some of them imputed it to a certain uncommon and malignant
position of the stars, which scattered the spirit of giddiness and innovation
over the world Jovii Historia, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134.
, it is evident, that their success was the natural effect of many powerful
causes prepared by peculiar providence, and happily conspiring to that end.
This attempt to investigate the causes, and to throw light on an event so
singular and important, will not, perhaps, be deemed an unnecessary digression.
-- I return from it to the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worms conducted its deliberations with that slow formality
peculiar to such assemblies. Much time was spent in establishing some
regulations with regard to the internal police of the Empire. The jurisdiction
of the Imperial chamber was confirmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered
more fixed and regular. A council of regency was appointed to assist Ferdinand
in the government of the Empire during his brother's absence; which, from the
extent of the Emperor's dominions, and the multiplicity of his affairs, was an
event that might be frequently expected Pont. Heuter. Rer. Austr. Lib. viii. c.
11. p. 195. Psessel Abrege Chronol. p. 598.
. The state of religion was then taken into consideration. There were not
wanting some plausible reasons which might have induced Charles to have
declared himself the protector of Luther's cause, or at least to have connived
at its progress. If he had possessed no other dominions but those which
belonged to him in Germany, and no other crown beside the Imperial, he might
have been disposed perhaps to favor a man, who asserted so boldly the
privileges and immunities for which the Empire had struggled so long with the
Popes. But the vast and dangerous schemes which Francis I. was forming against
him, made it necessary for him to regulate his conduct by views more extensive
than those which would have suited a German prince; and it being of the utmost
importance to secure the Pope's friendship, this determined him to treat Luther
with great severity, as the most effectual method of soothing Leo into a
concurrence with his measures. His eagerness to accomplish this, rendered him
not unwilling to gratify the papal legates in Germany, who insisted that,
without any delay or formal deliberation, the diet ought to condemn a man whom
the Pope had already excommunicated as an incorrigible heretic. Such an abrupt
manner of proceeding, however, being deemed unprecedented and unjust by by the
members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's appearing in person, and
declaring whether he adhered or not to those opinions, which had drawn upon him
the censures of the church P. Mart. Bp. 722.
. Not only the Emperor, but all the Princes through whose territories he had to
pass, granted him a safe conduct; and Charles wrote to him at the same time,
requiring his immediate attendance on the diet, and renewing his promises of
protection from any injury or violence Luth. Oper. ii. 412.
. Luther did not hesitate one moment about yielding obedience, and set out for
Worms, attended by the herald who had bro't the Emperor's letter and
safe conduct. While on his journey, many of his friends, whom the fate of Huss,
under similar circumstances, and notwithstanding the same security of an
Imperial safe conduct, filled with solicitude, advised and entreated him not to
rush wantonly into the midst of danger. But Luther, superior to such terrors,
silenced them with this reply, "I am lawfully called," said he, "to appear in
that city, and thither will I go in the name of the Lord, though as many devils
as there are tiles on the houses, were there combined against me Luth. Oper.
ii. 411.
.

THE reception he met with at Worms, was such as he might have reckoned a full
reward of all his labors, if vanity and the love of applause had been the
principles by which he was influenced. Greater crowds assembled to behold him,
than had appeared at the Emperor's public entry; his apartments were daily
filled with princes and personages of the highest rank Seckend. 156. Luth.
Oper. ii. 414.
, and he was treated with all the respect paid to those who possess the power
of directing the understanding and sentiments of other men; an homage, more
sincere, as well as more flattering, than any which pre-eminence in birth or
condition can command. At his appearance before the diet, he behaved with great
decency, and with equal firmness. He readily acknowledged an excess of
vehemence and acrimony in his controversial writings, but refused to retract
his opinions unless he were convinced of their falsehood; or to consent to their
being tried by any other rule than the word of God. When neither threats nor
entreaties could prevail on him to depart from this resolution, some of the
ecclesiastics proposed to imitate the example of the council of Constance, and
by punishing the author of this pestilent heresy, who was now in their power,
to deliver the church at once from such an evil. But the members of the diet
refusing to expose the German integrity to fresh reproach by a second violation
of public faith; and Charles being no less unwilling to bring a stain upon the
beginning of his administration by such an ignominious action, Luther was
permitted to depart in safety F. Paul. Hist. of Counc. p. 13. Seckend. 160.
. A few days after he left the city, a severe edict was published in the
Emperor's name, and by authority of the diet, depriving him as an obstinate and
excommunicated criminal of all the privileges he enjoyed as a subject of the
Empire, forbidding any prince to harbor or protect him, and requiring all to
concur in seizing his person as soon as the term specified in his safe conduct
was expired Gold. Constable. Imperial. ii. 408.
.

BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable effect, the execution of it being
prevented partly by the multiplicity of occupations which the commotions in
Spain, and the wars in Italy and the Low Countries, created to the Emperor; and
partly by a prudent precaution employed by the elector of Saxony, Luther's
faithful patron. As Luther, on his return from Worms, was passing near
Altenstein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in masks rushed suddenly out of a
wood, where the Elector had appointed them to lie in wait for him, and
surrounding his company, carried him, after dismissing all his attendants, to
Wartburg, a strong castle not far distant. There the Elector ordered him to be
supplied with every thing necessary or agreeable, but the place of his retreat
was carefully concealed, until upon a change in the political situation of
Europe, the fury of the present storm against him began to abate. In this
solitude, where he remained nine months, and which he frequently called his
Patmos, after the name of that island to which the apostle John was banished,
he exerted his usual vigor and industry in defense of his doctrines, or in
confutation of his adversaries, publishing several treatises, which revived the
spirit of his followers, astonished to a great degree, and disheartened at the
sudden disappearance of their leader.

DURING his confinement, his opinions continued to gain ground, acquiring the
ascendant in almost every city of Saxony. At this time, the Augustinians of
Wittemberg, with the approbation of the university, and the connivance of the
Elector, ventured upon the first step toward an alteration in the established
forms of public worship, by abolishing the celebration of private masses, and
by giving the cup as well as the bread to the laity in administering the
sacrament of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER consolation the courage and success of his disciples, or the progress
of his doctrines in his own country afforded Luther in his retreat, he there
received information of two events which considerably damped his joy, as they
seemed to lay insuperable obstacles in the way of propagating his principles in
the two most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was, a solemn decree, condemning
his opinions, published by the university of Paris, the most ancient, and at
that time the most respectable of the learned societies in Europe. The other
was, the answer written to his book concerning the Babylonish captivity by
Henry VIII. of England. That young monarch, having been educated under the eye
of a suspicious father, who, in order to prevent his attending to business,
kept him occupied in the study of literature, still retained a greater love of
learning, and stronger habits of application to it, than are common among
Princes of so active a disposition, and such violent passions; and being
ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well as zealously attached to
the Romish church, and highly exasperated against Luther, who had treated
Thomas Aquinas, his favorite author, with great contempt, he did not think it
enough to exert his royal authority in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with scholastic weapons. With this view he
published his treatise on the Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten at
present, as books of controversy always are, when the occasion that produced
them is past, is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acuteness, and was
represented by the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of such wonderful
science and learning, as exalted him no less above other authors in merit, than
he was distinguished among them by his rank. The Pope, to whom it was presented
with the greatest formality in full consistory, spoke of it in such terms, as
if it had been dictated by immediate inspiration; and as a testimony of the
gratitude of the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him the title
of Defender of the Faith, an appellation which Henry soon forfeited in the
opinion of those from whom he derived it, and which is still the title of his
successors, though the avowed enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honorable distinction. Luther, who was not, overawed
either by the authority of the University, or the dignity of the monarch, soon
published his animadversions on both, in a style no less vehement and severe
than he would have used in confuting his meanest antagonist. This indecent
boldness, instead of shocking his contemporaries, was considered by them as a
new proof of his undaunted spirit; a controversy managed by disputants so
illustrious, drew more general attention; and such was the contagion of the
spirit of innovation diffused through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the doctrines of the reformers on their first
publication, that, in spite both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers
combined against them, they daily gained converts both in France and in England.

HOWEVER desirous the Emperor might be to put a stop to Luther's progress, he
was often obliged, during the diet at Worms, to turn his thoughts to matters
still more interesting, and which demanded more immediate attention. A war was
ready to break out between him and Francis in Navarre, in the Low Countries,
and in Italy; and it required either great address to avert the danger or
timely and wise precautions to resist it. Every circumstance, at that juncture,
inclined Charles to prefer the former measure. Spain was torn with intestine
commotions. In Italy, he had not hitherto secured the assistance of any one
ally. In the Low Countries, his subjects trembled at the thoughts of a rupture
with France, the fatal effects of which on their commerce they had often
experienced. From these considerations, as well as from the solicitude of
Chievres during his whole administration to maintain peace between the two
monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's backwardness to commence hostilities. But
Francis and his ministers did not breathe the same pracific spirit. He easily
foresaw that concord could not long subsist, where interest, emulation, and
ambition conspired to dissolve it; and he possessed several advantages which
flattered him with the hopes of surprising his rival, and of overpowering him
before he could put himself in a posture of defense. The French King's
dominions, from their compact situation, from their subjection to the royal
authority, from the genius of the people, fond of war, and attached to their
sovereign by every tie of duty and affection, were more capable of a great or
sudden effort, than the larger but disunited territories of the Emperor, in one
part of which the people were in arms against his ministers, and in all his
prerogative was more limited than that of his rival.

THE only princes, in whose power it was to have kept down, or to have
extinguished this flame on its first aapearance, either neglected to exert
themselves, or were active in kindling and spreading it. Henry VIII. though he
affected to assume the name of mediator, and both parties made frequent appeals
to him, had laid aside the impartiality which suited that character. Wolsey, by
his artifices, had estranged him so entirely from the French King, that he
secretly fomented the discord which he ought to have composed, and waited only
for some decent pretext to join his arms to the Emperor's Herbert. Fiddes's
Life of Wolsey, 258.
.

LEO'S endeavors to excite discord between the Emperor and Francis were more
avowed, and had greater influence. Not only his duty, as the common father of
Christendom, but his interest as an Italian potentate, called upon the Pope to
act as the guardian of the public tranquillity, and to avoid any measure that
might overturn the system, which after much bloodshed, and many negociations,
was now established in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who instantly discerned the
propriety of this conduct, had formed a scheme upon Charles's promotion to the
Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the umpire between the rivals, by
soothing them alternately, while he entered into no close confederacy with
either; and a Pontiff less ambitious and enterprisizing, might have saved
Europe from many calamities by adhering to this plan. But this high spirited
prelate, who was still in the prime of life, longed passionately to distinguish
his pontificate by some splendid action. He was impatient to wash away the
infamy of having lost Parma and Placentia, the acquisition of which reflected
so much luster on the administration of his predecessor Julius. He beheld, with
the indignation natural to Italians in that age, the dominion which the
Transalpine, or as they in imitation of the Roman arrogance denominated them,
the barbarous nations, had attained in Italy. He flattered himself, that after
assisting the one monarch to strip the other of his possessions in that
country, he might find means of driving out the victor in his turn, and acquire
the glory of restoring Italy to the liberty and happiness it enjoyed before the
invasion of Charles VIII. when every state was governed by its native princes,
or its own laws, and unacquainted with a foreign yoke. Extravagant and
chimerical as this project may seem, it was the favorite object of almost
every Italian eminent for genius or enterprise during great part of the
sixteenth century; they vainly hoped, that by superior skill in the artifices
and refinements of negotiation, they would be able to baffle the efforts of
nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but much more powerful and warlike. So
alluring was the prospect of this to Leo, that notwithstanding the gentleness
of his disposition, and his fondness for the pleasures of a refined and
luxurious ease, he hastened to disturb the peace of Europe, and to plunge
himself in a dangerous war, with an impetuosity scarce inferior to that of the
turbulent and martial Julius Guic. l. 14. p. 173.
.

IT was in Leo's power, however, to choose which of the monarchs he would take
for his confederate against the other. Both of them courted his friendship; he
wavered for some time between them, and at first concluded an alliance with
Francis. The object of this treaty was the conquest of Naples, which the
confederates agreed to divide between them. The Pope, it is probable, flattered
himself that the brisk and active spirit of Francis, seconded by the same
qualities in his subjects, would get the start of the slow and wary councils of
the Emperor, and that they might overrun with ease this detached portion of
his dominions, ill provided for defense, and always the prey of every invader.
But whether the French King, by discovering too openly his suspicions of Leo's
sincerity, disappointed these hopes; whether the treaty was only an artifice of
the Pope's, to cover the more serious negociations he was carrying on with
Charles; whether he was enticed by the prospect of reaping greater advantages
from an union with that prince; or whether he was soothed by the zeal which
Charles had manifested for the honor of the church in condemning Luther;
certain it is, that he soon deserted his new ally, and made overtures of
friendship, though with great secrecy, to the Emperor Guic. lib. 14. p. 175.
Mem. de Bellay, Par. 15. 3. p. 24.
. Don John Manuel, the same man who had been the favorite of Philip, and whose
address had disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes, having been delivered, upon
the death of that monarch, from the prison to which he was confined was now the
Imperial ambassador at Rome, and fully capable of improving this favorable
disposition in the Pope to his master's advantage Jovii Vita Leonis, lib iv p.
89.
. To him the conduct of this negotiation was entirely committed, and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion from a war with France would
have prompted him to retard or defeat it, an alliance between the Pope and
Emperor was quickly concluded Guic. l. 14. 181. Mem. de Bellay, p. 24. Du Mor
Corpse Diplom. tom. iv. suppl p. 96.
. The chief articles in this treaty, which proved the foundation of Charles's
grandeur in Italy, were, that the Pope and Emperor should join their forces to
expel the French out of the Milanese, the possession of which should be granted
to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor, and who had resided at Trent
since the time his brother Maximilian had been dispossessed of his dominions by
the French King; that Parma and Placentia should be restored to the church;
that the Emperor should assist the Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual
tribute paid by the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See should be increased; that
the Emperor should take the family of Medici under his protection; that he
should grant to the Cardinal of that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon
the archbishopric of Toledo; and settle lands in the kingdom of Naples to the
same value upon Alexander the natural son of Lorenzo de Medici.

THE transacting an affair of such moment without his participation, appeared
to Chievres so decisive a proof of his having lost the ascendant which he had
hitherto maintained over the mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this
account, added to the melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on taking a view
of the many and unavoidable calamities attending a war against France, is said
to have shortened his days Belcarii Comment. de reb Gallic. 483.
. But though this, perhaps, may be only the conjecture of historians, fond of
attributing every thing that befalls illustrious personages to extraordinary
causes, and of ascribing even their diseases and death to the effect of
political passions, which oftener disturb the enjoyment than they abridge the
period of life, it is certain that his death at this critical juncture
extinguished all hopes of avoiding a rupture with France P. Heuter. Rer.
Austriac. lib. viii. c 11. p. 197.
. This event, too, delivered Charles from a minister, to whose authority he had
been accustomed from his infancy to submit with such implicit deference, as
checked and depressed his genius, and retained him in a state of pupilage,
unbecoming both his years and his rank; but this restraint being removed, the
native powers of his mind were allowed to unfold themselves, and he displayed
such great talents, both in council and in execution, as exceeded the hopes of
his contemporaries P. Mart. Ep. 735.
, and command the admiration of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, in consequence of their secret
alliance, to attack Milan, hostilities commenced in another quarter. The
children of John d'Albret King of Navarre having often demanded the restitution
of their hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noyon, and Charles
having as often eluded their request upon very frivolous pretexts, Francis
thought himself authorized by that treaty to assist the exiled family. The
juncture appeared extremely favorable for such an enterprise. Charles was at a
distance from that part of his dominions; the troops usually stationed there
had been called away to quell the commotions in Spain; the Spanish malcontents
warmly solicited him to invade Navarre P. Mart. Ep. 721.
, in which a considerable faction was ready to declare for the descendants of
their ancient monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much (...) possible, giving
offense to the Emperor, or King of England, Francis directed forces to be
levied, and the war to be carried on, not in his own name, but in that of Henry
d'Albret. The conduct of these troops was committed to Andrew de Foix, de
l'Esparre, a young nobleman, whom his nea^ alliance to the unfortunate king,
whose battles he was to fight, and what was still more powerful, the interest
of his sister, Madame de Chateaubriand, Francis's favorite mistress,
recommended to that important trust, for which he had neither talents nor
experience. But as there was no army in the field to oppose him, he became
master, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with
any obstruction but from the citadel of Pampeluna. The additional works to this
fortress begun by Ximenes, were still unfinished; nor would its slight
resistance have deserved notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Biscayan gentleman, had
not been dangerously wounded in its defense. During the progress of a lingering
cure, Loyola happened to have no other amusement than what he found in reading
the lives of the saints: The effect of this on his mind, naturally
enthusiastic, but ambitious and daring, was to inspire him with such a desire
of emulating the glory of these fabulous worthies of the Romish church, as led
him into the wildest and most extravagant adventures; which terminated at last
in instituting the society of Jesuits, the most political and best regulated of
all the monastic orders, and from which mankind have derived more advantages,
and received greater hurt, than from any other of these religious fraternities.

IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Esparre had been satisfied with taking
proper precautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom of Navarre might
still have remained annexed to the crown of France, in reality as well as in
title. But, pushed on by youthful ardour, and encouraged by Francis, who was
too apt to be dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the confines of
Navarre, and to lay siege to Logrogno, a small city in Castile. This rouzed the
Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid progress of his arms with great
unconcern; and the dissensions in that kingdom being almost composed, both
parties exerted themselves with emulation in defense of their country; the one
that it might efface the memory of past misconduct by their present zeal; the
other that it might add to the merit of having subdued the Emperor's rebellious
subjects, that of repulsing his foreign enemies. The sudden advance of their
troops, together with the gallant defense made by the inhabitants of Logrogno,
obliged the French general to abandon his rash enterprise. The Spanish army,
which increased every day, harassing him during his retreat, he, instead of
taking shelter under the cannon of Pampeluna, or waiting the arrival of some
troops who were marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards, though far
superior to him in number, with great impetuosity, but with so little conduct,
that his forces were totally routed, he himself, together with his principal
officers, were taken prisoners, and Spain recovered possession of Navarre in
still shorter time than the French had spent in the conquest of it Mem. de
Bellay, p. 21. P. Mart. Ep. 726.
.

WHILE Francis endeavored to justify his invasion of Navarre, by carrying it
on in the name of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse to an artifice much of the
same kind, in attacking another part of the Emperor's territories. Robert de la
Marck, lord of the small but independent territory of Bouillon, situated on the
frontiers of Luxemburg and Champagne, having abandoned Charles's service on
account of an encroachment which the Aulic council made on his jurisdiction,
and having thrown himself upon France for protection, was easily persuaded, in
the heat of his resentment, to send a herald to Worms, and to declare war in
form against the Emperor. Such extravagant insolence in a petty prince
surprised Charles, and appeared to him a certain proof of his having received
promises of powerful support from the French King. The justness of this
conclusion soon became evident. Robert with troops levied in France, by the
King's connivance, though semingly in contradiction to his orders, entered
Luxemburg, and after ravaging the open country, laid siege to Vireton. Of this
Charles complained loudly, as a direct violation of the peace subsisting
between the two crowns, and summoned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty
concluded at London in the year one thousand five hundred and eighteen, to turn
his arms against France as the first aggressor; and though Francis pretended
that he was not answerable for Robert's conduct, whose army fought under his
own standards, and in his own quarrel, and who, contrary to an express
prohibition, had seduced some subjects of France into his service; Henry paid
so little regard to this evasion, that the French King, rather than irritate a
prince whom he still hoped to gain, commanded de la Marck to disband his troops
Mem. de Bellay, p. 22. etc. Mem. de Fleuranges, p. 335, etc.
.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was assembling an army to chastise Robert's insolence.
Twenty thousand men under the Count of Nassau invaded his little territories,
and in a few days became masters of every place in them but Sedan. After making
him feel so sensibly the weight of his master's indignation. Nassau advanced
toward the frontiers of France; and Charles knowing that he might presume so
far on Henry's partiality in his favor, as not to be overawed by the same
fears which had restrained Francis, ordered his general to besiege Mouson. The
cowardice of the garrison having obliged the governor to surrender almost
without resistance. Nassau invested Mezieres, a place at that time of no
considerable strength, but so advantageously situated, that by getting
possession of it, the Imperial army might have penetrated into the heart of
Champagne, in which there was scarce any other town capable of obstructing its
progress. Happily for France, its monarch, sensible of the importance of this
fortress, and of the danger to which it was exposed, committed the defense of
it to the Chevalier Bayard, distinguished among his contemporaries by the
appellation of The Knight without fear, and without reproach Oeuvres de
Brantome, tom. vi. 114.
. This man, whose prowess in combat, whose punctilious honor, and formal
gallantry, bear a nearer resemblance, than any thing recorded in history, to
the character ascribed to the heroes of chivalry, possessed all the talents
which form a great general. These he had many occasions of exerting in the
defense of Mezieres; partly by his valor, partly by his conduct, he protracted
the siege to a great length, and in the end obliged the Imperialists to raise
it, with infamy and loss Mem. de Bellay, p. 25, etc.
. Francis at the head of a numerous army soon retook Mouson, and entering the
Low Countries, made several conquests of small importance. In the neighborhood
of Valenciennes, through an excess of caution, an error with which he cannot be
often charged, he lost an opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial army P.
Mart. Ep. 747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.
; and what was still of more consequence, he disgusted the constable Bourbon,
by giving the command of the van to the duke D'Alencon, though this post of
honor belonged to Bourbon, as a prerogative of his office.

DURING these operations in the field, a congress was held at Calais under the
mediation of Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to an amicable
issue; and if the intentions of the mediator had corresponded in any degree to
his professions, it could scarce have failed of producing some good effect.
Henry committed the sole management of the negotiation, with unlimited powers,
to Wolsey; and this choice alone was sufficient to have rendered it abortive.
That prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the great object of his
ambition, and ready to sacrifice every thing in order to gain the Emperor's
interest, was so little able to conceal his partiality, that if Francis had not
been well acquainted with his haughty and vindictive temper, he would have
declined his mediation. Much time was spent in inquiring who had begun
hostilities, which Wolsey affected to represent as the principal point; and by
throwing the blame of that on Francis, he hoped to justify by the treaty of
London, any alliance into which his master should enter with Charles. The
conditions on which hostilities might be terminated, came next to be
considered; but with regard to these, the Emperor's proposals were such as
discovered either that he was utterly averse from peace, or that he knew Wolsey
would approve of whatever should be offered in his name. He demanded the
restitution of the duchy of Burgundy, a (...) possession of which would have
given him access into the heart of the kingdom; and required a discharge of the
homage due to the crown of France for the counties of Flanders and Artois,
which none of his ancestors had ever refused, and which he had bound himself by
the treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to which an high-spirited prince
would scarce have listened, after the disasters of the most unfortunate war,
Francis rejected with great disdain; and Charles showing no inclination to
comply with the more equal and moderate propositions of the French monarch,
that he should restore Navarre to its lawful prince, and withdraw his troops
from the siege of Tournay, the congress broke up without any other effect, than
that which attends unsuccessful negociations, the exasperating of the parties,
whom it was intended to reconcile P. Mart Ep. 759. Herbert.
.

DURING the continuance of the congress, Wolsey, on pretense that the Emperor
himself would be more willing to make reasonable concessions than his
ministers, made an excursion to Bruges, to meet that monarch. He was received
by Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much respect and magnificence as if he
had been King of England. But instead of advancing the treaty of peace by this
interview, Wolsey, in his master's name, concluded a league with the Emperor
against Francis; in which it was stipulated, that Charles should invade France
on the side of Spain, and Henry in Picardy, each with an army of forty thousand
men; and that, in order to strengthen their union, Charles should espouse the
Princess Mary, Henry's only child, and the apparent heir of his dominions
Rymer, Foeder. xiii. Herbert.
. Henry produced no better reasons for this measure, equally unjust and
impolitic, than the article in the treaty of London, by which he pretended that
he was bound to take arms against the French King as the first aggressor; and
the injury which he alleged Francis had done him, in permitting the duke of
Albany, the head of a faction in Scotland which opposed his interest, to return
into that kingdom. He was influenced, however, by other considerations. The
advantages which accrued to his subjects from maintaining an exact neutrality,
or the ho^^^ resulted to himself from acting as the arbiter between contending
princes, appeared to his youthful imagination so inconsiderable, when compared
with the glory which Charles and Francis reaped from leading armies or
conquering provinces, that he determined to remain no longer in a state of
inactivity. Having once taken this resolution, his inducements to prefer an
alliance with Charles were obvious. He had no claim upon any part of that
Prince's dominions, most of which were so situated, that he could not attack
them without great difficulty and disadvantage; whereas several maritime
provinces of France had been long in the hands of the English monarchs, whose
pretensions, even to the crown of that kingdom, were not altogether forgotten;
and the possession of Calais not only gave him easy access into some of these
provinces, but afforded him, in case of any disaster, a secure retreat. While
Charles attacked France upon one frontier, Henry flattered himself that he
would find little resistance on the other, and that the glory of re-annexing to
the crown of England the ancient inheritance of its monarchs on the continent,
was reserved for his reign. Wolsey artfully encouraged these vain hopes, which
led his master into such measures as were most subservient to his own secret
schemes; and the English, whose hereditary animosity against the French was apt
to rekindle on every occasion, did not disapprove of the martial spirit of
their sovereign.

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope and the Emperor produced great effects
in Italy, and rendered Lombardy the chief theater of war. There was, at that
time, such contrariety between the character of the French and Italians, that
the latter submitted to the government of the former with greater impatience,
than they expressed under the dominion of other foreigners. The phlegm of the
Germans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their jealous temper and
ceremonious manners better than the French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and
too little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII. however, by the equity and
gentleness of his administration, and by granting the Milanese more extensive
privileges than they had enjoyed under their native princes, had overcome, in a
great measure, their prejudices, and reconciled them to the French government.
Francis on recovering that duchy, did not imitate the example of his
predecessor; and though too generous himself to oppress his people, his
confidence in his favorites, and his negligence in examining into the conduct
of those whom he entrusted with power, emboldened them to venture upon many
acts of oppression. The government of Milan was committed by him to Odet de
Foix, Marechal de Lautrec, another brother of Madame de Chateaubriand, an
officer of great experience and reputation, but haughty, imperious, rapacious
and incapable either of listening to advice, or bearing contradiction. His
insolence and exactions totally alienated the affections of the Milanese from
France, drove many of the considerable citizens into banishment, and forced
others to retire for their own safety. Among the last was Jerome Merone,
vice chancellor of Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue and enterprise
distinguished him in an age and country, where violent factions, as well as
frequent revolutions, affording great scope for such talents, produced or
called them forth in great abundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza, whose
brother Maximilian he had betrayed; and suspecting the Pope's intention of
attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with the Emperor was not yet made
public, proposed to him in the name of Sforza, a scheme for surprising several
places in that duchy, by means of the exiles, who, from hatred to the French,
and from attachment to their former masters, were ready for any desperate
attempt. Leo not only encouraged the attempt, but advanced a considerable sum
toward the execution of it; and when through unforeseen accidents it failed of
success in every part, he allowed the exiles who had assembled in a body, to
retire to Reggio, which belonged at that time to the church. The Marechal de
Foix, who commanded at Milan in absence of his brother Lautrec, who was then in
France, tempted with the hopes of catching at once as in a snare, all the
avowed (...) of his master's government in that country, ventured to march into
the ecclesiastical territories, and to invest Reggio. But the vigilance and
good conduct of Guicciardini the historian, governor of that place, obliged the
French general to abandon the enterprise with disgrace Guic. lib. xiv. 183.
Mem. de Bellay, p. 38, etc.
. Leo, on receiving this intelligence, with which he was highly pleased, as it
furnished him a decent pretext for a rupture with France, immediately assembled
the consistory of Cardinals, and complaining bitterly of the hostile intentions
of the French King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal for the church, of which
he had given a recent proof by his proceedings against Luther, declared that he
was constrained in self-defence, and as the only expedient for the security of
the ecclesiastical state to join his arms to those of that prince. For this
purpose, he now pretended to conclude a treaty with Don John Manuel, although
it had been signed some months before this time; and he publicly
excommunicated De Foix, as an impious invader of St. Peter's patrimony.

LEO had already begun preparations for war by taking into pay a considerable
body of Swiss; but the Imperial troops advanced so slowly from Naples and
Germany, that it was the middle of autumn before the army took the field under
the command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of the Italian generals, whose
long experience and extreme caution were opposed with great propriety to the
impetuosity of the French. In the mean time, De Foix dispatched courier after
courier to inform the King of the danger which was approaching. Francis, whose
forces were either employed in the Low Countries, or assembling on the
frontiers of Spain, and who did not expect so sudden an attack in that quarter,
sent ambassadors to his allies the Swiss, to procure from them the immediate
levy of an additional body of troops; and commanded Lautrec to repair forthwith
to his government. That general who was well acquainted with the great neglect
of economy in the administration of the King's finances, and who knew how much
the troops in the Milanese had already suffered from the want of their pay,
refused to set out, unless the sum of three hundred thousand crowns was
immediately put into his hands. But the King, Louise of Savoy, his mother, and
Semblancay, the superintendant of finances, having promised, even with an oath,
that on his arrival at Milan he should find remittances for the sum which he
demanded; upon the faith of this he departed. Unhappily for France, Louise, a
woman deceitful, vindictive, rapacious, and capable of sacrificing any thing to
the gratification of her passions, but who had acquired an absolute ascendant
over her son by her maternal tenderness, her care of his education, and her
great abilities, was resolved not to perform this promise. Lautrec having
incurred her displeasure by his haughtiness in neglecting to pay court to her,
and by the freedom with which he talked concerning some of her adventures in
gallantry, she, in order to deprive him of the honor which he might have
gained by a successful defense of the Milanese, seized the three hundred
thousand crowns destined for that service, and detained them for her own use.

LAUTREC, notwithstanding this cruel disappointment, found means to assemble a
considerable army, though far inferior in number to that of the confederates.
He adopted the plan of defense most suitable to his situation, avoiding a
pitched battle with the greatest care, while he harassed the enemy continually
with his light troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys, and
covered or relieved every place which they attempted to attack. By this prudent
conduct, he not only retarded their progress, but would have soon wearied out
the Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost the whole expense of the war, as the
Emperor, whose revenues in Spain were dissipated during the commotions in that
country, and who was obliged to support a numerous army in the Netherlands,
could not make any considerable remittances into Italy. But an unforeseen
accident disconcerted all his measures, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the
French affairs, A body of twelve thousand Swiss served in their army under the
banners of the republic, with which France was in alliance. By a law, no less
political than humane, established among the cantons, their troops were not
hired ^ut by public authority to both the contending parties in any war. This
law, the love of gain had sometimes eluded, and private persons had been
allowed to ^^list in what service they pleased, though not under the public
banners, but under those of their officers. The Cardinal of Sion, who still
preserved his interest among his countrymen, and his enmity to France, having
prevailed on them to permit a levy of this kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined
the army of the confederates. The cantons, when they saw so many of their
countrymen marching under hostile standards, and ready to destroy each other,
became sensible of the infamy to which they would be exposed, as well as the
loss they might suffer, and dispatched couriers, commanding them to leave both
armies, and to return into their own country. The Cardinal of Sion, however,
had the address, by corrupting the messengers appointed to carry this order, to
prevent its being delivered to the Swiss in the service of the confederates;
but being intimated in due form to those in the French army, they, fatigued
with the length of the campaign, and murmuring for want of pay, instantly
yielded obedience in spite of Lautrec's remonstrances and entreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed the strength of his army, Lautrec
durst no longer face the confederates; and turning toward Milan, encamped on
the banks of the Adda, and placed his chief hopes of safety in preventing the
enemy from passing the river; an expedient for defending a country so
precarious, that their are few examples of its being employed with success
against any general of experience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna,
notwithstanding Lautrec's vigilance and activity, passed the Adda with little
loss, and obliged him to shut himself up within the walls of Milan, which the
confederates were preparing to besiege, when an unknown person, who never
afterward appeared either to boast of this service, or to claim a reward for
it, came from the city and acquainted Morone, that if the army would advance
that night, the Ghibelline or Imperial faction would put them in possession of
one of the gates. Colonna, though no friend to rash enterprises, allowed the
Marquis de Pescara to advance with the Spanish infantry, and he himself
followed with the rest of his troops. About the beginning of night, Pescara
arriving at the Roman gate in the suburbs, surprised the soldiers whom he found
there; those posted in the fortifications adjoining to it, immediately fled;
the Marquis, seizing the works which they abandoned, and pushing forward
incessantly, though with no less caution than vigor, became master of the city
with little bloodshed, and almost without resistance; the victors being as much
astonished as the vanquished at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautrec retired precipitately toward the Venetian territories with the remains
of his shattered army the cities of the Milanese following the fate of the
capital, surrendered to the confederates; Parma and Placentia were united to
the ecclesiastical state, and of their conquests in Lombardy, only the town of
Cremona, the castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable forts remained in the
hands of the French Guic. l. xiv. 190, etc. Mem. de Bellay, 42, etc. Galeacii
Capella de reb. gest. pro. restitut. Fran. Stortiae Comment. ap. Scardium, vol.
ii. 180, etc.
.

LEO received the accounts of this rapid succession of prosperous events with
such transports of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the French historians)
a slight fever, which being neglected, occasioned his death on the second of
December, while he was still of a vigorous age, and at the height of his glory.
By this unexpected accident, the spirit of the confederacy was broken, and its
operations suspended. The Cardinals of Sion and Medici left the army that they
might be present in the conclave; the Swiss were recalled by their superiors;
some other mercenaries disbanded for want of pay; and only the Spaniards, and a
few Germans in the Emperor's service, remained to defend the Milanese. But
Lautrec, destitute both of men and of money, was unable to improve this
favorable opportunity in the manner he would have wished. The vigilance of
Morone, and the good conduct of Colonna, disappointed his feeble attempts on
the Milanese; and Guicciardini, by his address and valor, repulsed a bolder
and more dangerous attack which he made on Parma Guic. l. xiv. 214.
.

MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the conclave, which followed upon Leo's
death, and all the arts natural to men grown old in intrigue, when contending
for a prize so valuable, were practiced. Wolsey's name, notwithstanding all the
Emperor's magnificent promises to favor his pretensions, of which that prelate
did not fail to remind him, was scarce mentioned in the conclave. Julio
Cardinal de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent than any other member of
the sacred college for his abilities, his wealth, and his experience in
transacting great affairs, had already secured fifteen voices, a number
sufficient, according to the forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own election. All the old Cardinals combined
against him, without being united in favor of any other person. While these
factions were endeavoring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each other,
Medici and his adherents voted one morning at the scrutiny, which according to
form was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian of Utrecht, who at that time
governed Spain in the Emperor's name. This they did merely to protract time;
but the adverse party instantly closing with them, to their own amazement and
that of all Europe, a stranger to Italy, unknown to the persons who gave their
suffrages in his favor, and unacquainted with the manners of the people, or
the interest of the state, the government of which they conferred upon him, was
unanimously raised to the papal throne, at a juncture so delicate and critical,
as would have demanded all the sagacity and experience of one of the most able
prelates in the sacred college. The Cardinals themselves, unable to give a
reason for this strange choice, on account of which, as they marched in
procession from the conclave, they were loaded with insults and curses by the
Roman people, ascribed it to an immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may be
imputed with greater certainty to the influence of Don John Manuel, the
Imperial ambassador, who by his address and intrigues facilitated the election
of a person devoted to his master's service, from gratitude, from interest, and
from inclination Ger. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Casp. Burman. in Analect. de
Hadr. p. 52. Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p. 144, etc.
.

BESIDES the influence which Charles acquired by Adrian's promotion, it threw
great luster on his administration. To bestow on his preceptor such a noble
recompense, and to place on the papal throne a creature whom he had raised,
were acts of uncommon magnificence and power. Francis observed, with the
sensibility of a rival, the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and resolved to
exert himself with fresh vigor, in order to wrest from him his late conquests
in Italy. The Swiss, in order to make some reparation to the French King, for
having so unseasonably withdrawn their troops from his army, which had
occasioned the loss of the Milanese, permitted him to levy ten thousand men in
the republic. Together with this reinforcement, Lautrec received from the King
a small sum in money, which enabled him once more to take the field, and after
seizing by surprise, or force, several places in the Milanese, to advance
within a few miles of the capital. The confederate army was in no condition to
obstruct his progress; and though the inhabitants of Milan, inflamed by the
artifices of Morone, and by the popular declamations of a monk whom he
employed, with the most enthusiastic zeal against the French government,
consented to raise extraordinary contributions, Colonna must soon have
abandoned the advantageous camp he had chosen at Bicocca, and have dismissed
his troops for want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service had not once
more extricated him out of his difficulties.

THE insolence and caprice of that people were often no less fatal to their
friends, than their valor and discipline were formidable to their enemies.
Having now served two months without pay, of which they complained loudly, a
sum destined for their use was sent from France under a convoy of horse; but
Morone, whose vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of troops in their
way, so that those who escorted the money durst not advance. On receiving
intelligence of this, the Swiss lost all patience, and officers as well as
soldiers crowding around Lautrec, threatened with one voice instantly to
retire, if he did not either advance the pay which was due, or promise to lead
them next morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remonstrate against these
demands, representing to them the impossibility of the former, and the rashness
of the latter, which must be attended with certain destruction, as the enemy
occupied a camp naturally of great strength, and which by art they had rendered
almost inaccessible. The Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that their valor
was capable of surmounting every obstactle, renewed their demand with greater
fierceness, offering themselves to form the vanguard, and to begin the attack.
Lautrec, unable to overcome their obstinacy, complied with their request,
hoping, perhaps, that some of those unforeseen accidents which so often
determine the fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprise with undeserved
success; and convinced that the effects of a defeat could not be more fatal
than those which would certainly follow upon the retreat of a body which
composed one half of his army. Next morning the Swiss were early in the field,
and marched with the greatest int epidity against an enemy deeply entrenched on
every side, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to receive them. As they
advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade with great firmness, and without
waiting for their own artillery, rushed impetuously upon the intrenchments. But
after incredible efforts of valor, seconded with great spirit by the French,
having lost their bravest officers and best troops, and finding that they could
make no impression on the enemy's works, they sounded a retreat; leaving the
field of battle, however, like men repulsed, but not vanquished, in close
array, and without receiving any molestation from the enemy.

NEXT day, such as survived set out for their own country; and Lautrec,
despairing of being able to make any farther resistance, retired into France,
after throwing garrisons into Cremona, and a few other places; all which,
except the citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to surrender.

GENOA, however, and its territories, remaining subject to France, still gave
Francis considerable footing in Italy, and made it easy for him to execute any
scheme for the recovery of the Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enterprizing by
continual success, and excited by the solicitations of the faction of the
Adorni, the hereditary enemies of the Fregosi, who under the protection of
France possessed the chief authority in Genoa, determined to attempt the
reduction of that state; and accomplished it with amazing facility. He became
master of Genoa by an accident as unexpected as that which had given him
possession of Milan; and almost without opposition or bloodshed, the power of
the Adorni, and the authority of the Emperor were established in Genoa Jovii
Vita Ferdin. Davila. p. 344. Guic. l. xiv. 233.
.

SUCH a cruel succession of misfortunes affected Francis with deep concern,
which was not a little augmented by the unexpected arrival of an English
herald, who, in the name of his sovereign, declared war in form against France.
This step was taken in consequence of the treaty Wolsey had concluded with the
Emperor at Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept secret. Francis, though he
had reason to be surprised with this denunciation, after having been at such
pains to sooth Henry and to gain his minister, received the herald with great
composure and dignity Journal de Louise de Savoie, p. 199.
; and without abandoning any of the schemes he was forming against the Emperor,
began vigorous preparations for resisting this new enemy. His treasury,
however, being exhausted by the efforts which he had already made, as well as
by the sums he expended on his pleasures, he had recourse to extraordinary
expedients for supplying it. Several new offices were created, and exposed to
sale; the royal demesnes were alienated; unusual taxes were imposed; and the
tomb of St. Martin was stripped of a rail of massive silver, with which Lewis
XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled it. By means of these
expedients he was enabled to levy a considerable army, and to put the frontier
towns in a good posture of defense.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous to draw as much advantage as
possible from the accession of such a powerful ally; and the prosperous
situation of his affairs, at this time, permitting him to set out for Spain,
where his presence was extremely necessary, he visited the court of England in
his way to that country. He proposed by this interview not only to strengthen
the bonds of friendship which united him and Henry, and to excite him to push
the war against France with vigor, but hoped to remove any disgust or
resentment Wolsey might have conceived on account of the cruel disappointment
which he had met with in the late conclave. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expectations; and by his artful address, during a residence of six
weeks in England, he gained not only the King and the Minister, but the nation
itself. Henry, whose vanity was sensibly flattered by such a visit, as well as
by the studied respect with which the Emperor treated him on every occasion,
entered warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal, foreseeing from Adrian's age
and infirmities, a sudden vacancy in the papal see, dissembled or forgot his
resentment; and as Charles augmented the pensions which he had already settled
on him, and renewed his promise of favoring his pretensions to the papacy,
with all his interest, he endeavored to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplishment of the latter, by fresh services. The nation, sharing in the
glory of its monarch, and pleased with the confidence which the Emperor placed
in the English by creating the Earl of Surrey, his High-Admiral, discovered no
less inclination to commence hostilities than Henry himself.

IN order to give Charles, before he left England, a proof of this general
ardour, Surrey sailed with such forces as were ready, and ^^vaged the coasts of
Normandy. He then made a descent on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt
Morlaix, and some other places of less consequence. After these slight
excursions, attended with greater dishonor than damage to France, he repaired
to Calais and took the command of the principal army, consisting of sixteen
thousand men; with which having joined the Flemish troops under the Count de
Buren, he advanced into Picardy. The army which Francis had assembled, was far
inferior in number to these united bodies. But during the long ^ars between the
two nations the French had discovered the proper method of defending their
country against the English. They had been taught by their misfortunes to avoid
a pitched battle with the utmost care, and to endeavor, by throwing garrisons
into every place capable of resistance, by watching all the enemy's motions, by
intercepting their convoys, attacking their advanced posts, and harassing them
continually with their numerous cavalry, to ruin them with the length of the
war, or to beat them by piecemeal. This plan the duke of Vendome, the French
general in Picardy, pursued with no less prudence than success; and not only
prevented Surrey from taking any town of importance, but obliged him to retire
with his army greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provisions, and by the
loss it had sustained in several unsuccessful skirmishes.

THUS ended the second campaign, in a war the most general that hitherto had
been kindled in Europe; and though Francis by his mother's ill-timed
resentment, by the disgusting insolence of his general, and the caprice of the
mercenary troops he employed, had lost his conquests in Italy, yet all the
powers combined against him had not been able to make any impression on his
hereditary dominions; and wherever they either intended or attempted an attack,
he was well prepared to receive them.

WHILE the Christian Princes were thus wasting each others strength, Solomon
the Magnificent, entered Hungary with a numerous army, and investing Belgrade,
which was deemed the chief barrier of that kingdom against the Turkish arms,
soon forced it to surrender. Encouraged by this success, he turned his
victorious arms against the island of Rhodes, the seat, at that time, of the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem. This small state he attacked with such a
numerous army, as the Lords of Asia have been accustomed in every age to bring
into the field. Two hundred thousand men, and a fleet of four hundred sail
appeared against a town defended by a garrison consisting of five thousand
soldiers, and six hundred Knights, under the command of Villiers de L'isle
Adam, the Grand Master, whose wisdom and valor rendered him worthy of that
station at such a dangerous juncture. No sooner did he begin to suspect the
destination of Solyman's vast armaments, than he dispatched messengers to all
the Christian courts, imploring their aid against the common enemy. But though
every Prince in that age, acknowledged Rhodes to be the great bulwark of
Christendom in the east, and trusted to the gallantry of its Knights as the
best security against the progress of the Ottoman arms; and though Adrian, with
a zeal which became the head and father of the church, exhorted the contending
powers, to forget their private quarrels, and by uniting their arms, to prevent
the Infidels from destroying a society which did honor to the Christian name;
yet so violent and implacable was the animosity of both parties, that,
regardless of the danger to which they exposed all Europe, and unmoved by the
entreaties of the Grand Master, or the admonitions of the Pope, they suffered
Solomon, without disturbance, to carry on his operations against Rhodes. The
Grand Master, after incredible efforts of courage, of patience, and of military
conduct during a siege of six months; after sustaining many assaults, and
disputing every post with amazing obstinacy, was obliged at last to yield to
numbers, and having obtained an honorable capitulation from the Sultan, who
admired and respected his virtue, he surrendered the town, which was reduced to
a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every resource Fontanus de Bello Rhodio ap.
Scard. Scrip. Rer. German. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Bar. Hist. d'Allem. tom. viii.
57.
. Charles and Francis, ashamed of having occasioned such a loss to Christendom
by their ambitious contests, endeavored to throw the blame of it on each
other, while all Europe, with greater justice, imputed it equally to both. The
Emperor, by way of reparation, granted the Knights of St. John the small island
of Malta, in which they fixed their residence, retaining, though with less
power and splendor, their ancient spirit, and implacable enmity to the
Infidels.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK III.
CHARLES, having had the satisfaction of seeing hostilities begun between
France and England, took leave of Henry, and arrived in Spain on the
seventeenth of June. He found that country just beginning to recover order and
strength after the miseries of a civil war to which it had been exposed during
his absence; an account of the rise and progress of which, as it was but little
connected with the other events that happened in Europe, has been reserved to
this place.

NO sooner was it known that the Cortes assembled in Galicia had voted the
Emperor a free-gift, without obtaining the redress of any grievance, than it
excited universal indignation. The citizens of Toledo, who considered
themselves, on account of the great privileges which they enjoyed, as guardians
of the liberties of the Castilian commons, finding that no regard was paid to
the remonstrances of their deputies against that unconstitutional grant, took
arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing the gates of the city which were
fortified, attacked the al-cazar, or castle, which they soon obliged the
governor to surrender. Emboldened by this success, they deprived of all
authority every person whom they suspected of any attachment to the court,
established a popular form of government, composed of deputies from the several
parishes in the city, and levied troops in their own defense. The chief leader
of the people in these insurrections was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of
the commendador of Castile, a young nobleman of a generous temper, of undaunted
courage, and possessed of the talents as well as of the ambition which in times
of civil discord raise men to power and eminence Sandov. p. 77.
.

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia produced effects still more fatal.
Tordesillas, one of their representatives in the late Cortes, had voted for the
donative; and being a bold and haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to call
together his fellow citizens in the great church, that he might give them,
according to custom, an account of his conduct in that assembly. But the
multitude, unable to bear his insolence, in attempting to justify what they
thought inexcusable, burst open the gates of the church with the utmost fury,
and seizing the unhappy Tordesillas, dragged him through the streets, with a
thousand curses and insults, toward the place of public execution. In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in procession with the holy sacrame^^, in
order to appease their rage. In vain did the monks of those monasteries by
which they passed, conjure them on their knees to spare his life, or at least
to allow him time to confess, and to receive absolution of his sins. Without
listening to the dictates either of humanity or of religion, they cried out,
"That the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor to his country," hurried
him along with greater violence, and finding that he had expired under their
hands, they hung him up with his head downward on the common gibbet P. Martyr.
Ep. 671.
. The same spirit seized the inhabitants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other
cities; and though their representatives, taking warning from the fate of
Tordesillas, had been so wise as to save themselves by a timely flight, they
were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to the ground, and their effects
consumed with fire; and such was the horror the people had conceived against
them as betrayers of the public liberty, that not one in those licentious
multitudes would touch any thing, however valuable, which had belonged to them
Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.
.

ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had scarce fixed the seat of his
government at Valladolid, when he was alarmed with an account of these
insurrections. He immediately assembled the council to deliberate concerning
the proper method of suppressing them. The counselors differed in opinion;
some insisting it was necessary to check this audacious spirit in its infancy
by a severe execution of justice; others advising to treat with lenity a people
who had some reason to be incensed, and not to drive them beyond all the bounds
of duty by an ill-timed rigor. The sentiments of the former being warmly
supported by the archbishop of Granada, president of the council, a person of
great authority, but choleric and impetuous, were approved of by Adrian, whose
zeal to support his master's authority hurried him into a measure, to which,
from his natural caution and timidity, he would otherwise have been averse. He
commanded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges, to repair instantly to Segovia,
which had set the first example of mutiny, and to proceed against the
delinquents according to law; and lest the people should be so outrageous as to
resist his authority, a considerable body of troops was appointed to attend
him. The Segovians, foreseeing what they might expect from a judge so well
known for his austere and unforgiving temper, took arms with one consent, and
having mustered twelve thousand men, shut their gates against him. Ronquillo,
enraged at this insult, denounced them rebels and outlaws; and his troops
seizing all the avenues to the town, hoped that it would soon be obliged to
surrender for want of provisions. The inhabitants, however, defended themselves
with vigor, and having received a considerable reinforcement from Toledo,
under the command of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo, and forced him to retire,
with the loss of his baggage and military chest Sandov. 112. P. Mart. Ep. 679.
Miniana, Contin. p. 15.
.

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, whom the Emperor had appointed
commander in chief of the forces in Spain, to assemble an army, and to besiege
the city in form. But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where Cardinal
Ximenes had established a vast magazine of military stores, would not suffer
him to draw from it a train of battering cannon, or to destroy their countrymen
with those arms which had been prepared against the enemies of the kingdom.
Fonseca, who could not execute his orders without artillery, determined to
seize the magazine by force, and the citizens standing on their defense, he
assaulted the town with great briskness: But his troops were so warmly
received, that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire to some of the
houses, in hopes that the citizens would abandon the walls in order to save
their families and effects. Instead of that, the expedient to which he had
recourse served only to increase their fury, and he was repulsed with great
infamy, while the flames spreading from street to street, reduced to ashes
almost the whole town, one of the most considerable at that time in Spain, and
the great mart for the manufactures of Segovia, and several other cities. As
the warehouses were then filled with goods for the approaching fair, the loss
was immense, and was felt universally; and this, added to the impression which
such a cruel action made on people long unaccustomed to the horrors of civil
war, enraged the Castilians almost to madness. Fonseca became the object of
general indignation, and was branded with the name of incendiary and enemy to
his country; and even the citizens of Valladolid, whom the presence of the
Cardinal had hitherto restrained, declared that they could no longer remain
inactive spectators of the sufferings of their countrymen, and taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt Fonseca's house to the ground,
elected new magistrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to command them,
and guarded their walls with as much diligence, as if an enemy had been ready
to attack them.

THE Cardinal, who though virtuous and disinterested, and capable of governing
the kingdom with honor in times of tranquillity, possessed neither the courage
nor sagacity necessary at such a dangerous juncture, finding himself unable to
check these outrages committed under his own eye, attempted to appease the
people, by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his orders, and had by his rash
conduct offended him, as much as he had injured them. This condescension, the
effect of irresolution and timidity, rendered the malcontents bolder and more
insolent; and the Cardinal having soon after recalled Fonseca, and dismissed
his troops, which he could no longer afford to pay, as the treasury had been
drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemish ministers, and received no supply
from the great cities which were all in arms, the people were left at full
liberty to act without control, and scarce any shadow of power remained in his
hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the effects merely of popular and
tumultuary rage; they aimed at obtaining redress of their political grievances,
and an establishment of public liberty on a secure basis, objects worthy of
all the zeal they discovered in contending for them. The feudal government in
Spain, was at that time in a state more favorable to liberty than in any other
of the great European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to the number of great
cities in that country, a circumstance of which I have already taken notice,
and which contributes more than any other to mitigate the rigor of the feudal
institutions, and to introduce a more liberal and equal form of government. The
inhabitants of every city formed a great corporation with valuable immunities
and privileges; they were admitted to a considerable share in the legislature;
they acquired the arts of industry, without which cities cannot subsist; they
accumulated wealth, by engaging in commerce; and being free and independent
themselves, were the guardians of the public freedom and independence. The
genius of the internal government established in cities, which, even in
countries where despotic power prevails most, is democratical and republican,
rendered the idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their representatives
in the Cortes were accustomed to check with equal spirit the encroachments of
the King, and the oppression of the nobles. They endeavored to extend the
privileges of their own order; they labored to shake off the remaining
encumbrances with which the feudal tyranny had burdened them; and conscious of
being one of the most considerable orders in the state, were ambitious of
becoming the most powerful.

THE present juncture appeared favorable for pushing any new claim. Their
Sovereign was absent from his dominions; by the ill conduct of his ministers he
had lost the esteem and affection of his subjects; the people exasperated by
many injuries, had taken up arms, though without concert, almost by general
consent; they were animated with fury capable of carrying them to the most
violent extremes; the royal treasury was exhausted; the kingdom destitute of
troops; and the government committed to a stranger, of great virtue indeed, but
of abilities unequal to such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the other
popular leaders who observed and determined to improve these circumstances, was
to establish some form of union or association among the malcontents, that
they might act with greater regularity and pursue one common end; and as the
different cities had been prompted to take arms by the same motives, and were
accustomed to consider themselves as a distinct body from the rest of the
subjects, they did not find this difficult. A general convention was appointed
to be held at Avila. Deputies appeared there in name of almost all the cities
entitled to have representatives in the Cortes. They all bound themselves by
solemn oath, to live and die in the service of the King, and in defense of the
privileges of their order; and assuming the name of the holy Junta or
association, proceeded to deliberate concerning the state of the nation, and
the proper method of redressing its grievances. The first that naturally
presented itself, was the nomination of a foreigner to be regent; this, they
declared with one voice to be a violation of the fundamental laws of the
kingdom, and resolved to send a deputation of their members to Adrian,
requiring him in their name to lay aside all the ensigns of his office, and to
abstain for the future from the exercise of a jurisdiction which they had
pronounced illegal P. Mart. Ep. 691:
.

WHILE they were preparing to execute this bold resolution, Padilla
accomplished an enterprise of the greatest advantage to the cause. After
relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tordesillas, the place where the
unhappy Queen Joanna had resided since the death of her husband, and being
favored by the inhabitants, was admitted into the town, and became master of
her person, for the security of which Adrian had neglected to take proper
precautions Vita dell. Imper. Carl. V. dall. Alf. Ulloa Ven. 1509. p. 67.
Miniana. Contin. p. 17.
. Padilla waited immediately upon the Queen, and accosting her with that
profound respect, which she exacted from the few persons whom she deigned to
admit into her presence, acquainted her at large with the miserable condition
of her Castilian subjects under the government of her son, who being destitute
of experience himself, permitted his foreign ministers to treat them with such
rigor, as had obliged them to take arms in defense of the liberties of their
country. The Queen, as if she had been awakened out of a lethargy, expressed
great astonishment at what he said, and told him, that as she had never heard
till that moment of the death of her father, or known the sufferings of her
people, no blame could be imputed to her, but that now she would take care to
provide a sufficient remedy; and in the mean time, added she, let it be your
concern to do what is necessary for the public welfare. Padilla, too eager in
forming a conclusion agreeable to his wishes, mistook this lucid interval of
reason for a perfect return of that faculty; and acquainting the Junta with
what had happened, advised them to remove to Tordesillas, and to hold their
meetings in that place. This was instantly done; but though Joanna received
very graciously an address of the Junta, beseeching her to take upon her the
government of the kingdom, and in token of her compliance, admitted all the
deputies to kiss her hand; though she was present at a tournament held on that
occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with both these ceremonies, which were
conducted with great magnificence in order to please her, she soon relapsed
into her former melancholy and fullenness, and could never be brought by any
arguments or entreaties, to sign any one paper necessary toward the dispatch
of business Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.
.

THE Junta concealing as much as possible this last circumstance, carried on
all their deliberations in her name; and as the Castilians, who idolized the
memory of Isabella, retained a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no sooner
was it known that she had consented to assume the reigns of government, than
the people expressed the most universal and immoderate joy; and believing her
recovery to be complete, ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of heaven,
in order to rescue their country from the oppression of foreigners. The Junta,
conscious of the reputation and power they had acquired by seeming to act under
the royal authority, were no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to resign
the office of regent, they detached Padilla to Valadolid with a considerable
body of troops, ordering him to seize such members of the council as were still
in that city, to conduct them to Tordesillas, and to bring away the seals of
the kingdom, the public archieves and treasury books. Padilla, who was received
by the citizens, as the deliverer of his country, executed his commission with
great exactness; permitting Adrian, however, still to reside in Valadolid,
though only as a private person, and without any shadow of power Sandov. 174.
P. Mart. Ep. 791.
.

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of these transactions were transmitted
while he was still in Flanders, was sensible of his own imprudence and that of
his ministers in having despised too long the murmurs and remonstrances of the
Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a kingdom the most valuable of any he
possessed, and in which lay the strength and sinews of his power, just ready to
disown his authority, and on the point of being plunged in all the miseries of
civil war. But though his presence might have averted this calamity, he could
not at that time, visit Spain without endangering the imperial crown, and
allowing the French King full leisure to execute his ambitious schemes. The
only points now to be deliberated upon, were, whether he should attempt to gain
the malcontents by indulgence and concessions, or prepare directly to suppress
them by force; and he resolved to make trial of the former, while at the same
time, if that should fail of success, he prepared for the latter. For this
purpose, he issued circular letters to all the cities of Castile, exhorting
them in the most gentle terms, and with assurances of full pardon, to lay down
their arms; he promised such cities as had continued faithful, not to exact
from them the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offered the same favor
to those who returned to their duty; he engaged that no office should be
conferred for the future upon any but native Castilians. On the other hand, he
wrote to the nobles exciting them to appear with vigor in defense of their own
rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbitant claims of the commons;
he appointed the high admiral, Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable of
Castile, Don Inigo de Velasco, two noblemen of great abilities and influence,
regents of the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and he gave them full power
and instructions, if the obstinacy of the malcontents should render it
necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by force of arms P. Heuter. Rer.
Austr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 188.
.

THE concessions he was willing to make, which, at the time of his leaving
Spain, would have fully satisfied the people, came now too late to produce any
effect. The Junta, relying on the unanimity with which the nation submitted to
their authority, elated with the success which hitherto had accompanied all
their undertakings, and seeing no military force collected to defeat or
obstruct their designs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of political
abuses. They had been employed for some time in preparing a remonstrance
containing a large enumeration not only of the grievances, of which they craved
redress, but of such new regulations as they thought necessary for the security
of their liberties. This remonstrance, which is divided into many articles
relating to all the different members of which the constitution was composed,
as well as to the various departments in the administration of government,
furnishes us with more authentic evidence concerning the intentions of the
Junta, than can be drawn from the testimony of the latter Spanish historians,
who lived in times when it became fashionable and even necessary to represent
the conduct of the malcontents in the worst light, and as flowing from the
worst motives. After a long preamble concerning the various calamities under
which the nation groaned, and the errors and corruption in government to which
these were to be imputed, they take notice of the exemplary patience wherewith
the people had endured them, till self-preservation, and the duty which they
owed to their country, had obliged them to assemble in order to provide in a
legal manner for their own safety, and that of the constitution: For this
purpose they demanded that the King would be pleased to return to his Spanish
dominions, and reside there, as all their former monarchs had done; that he
would not marry but with consent of the Cortes; that if he should be obliged at
any time to leave the kingdom, it shall not be lawful to appoint any foreigner
to be regent; that the present nomination of Cardinal Adrian to that office
shall instantly be declared void; that he would not, at his return, bring along
with him any Flemings or other strangers; that no foreign troops shall, on any
pretense whatever, be introduced into the kingdom; that none but natives shall
be capable of holding any office or benefice either in church or state; that no
foreigners shall be naturalized; that free quarters shall not be granted to
soldiers, nor to those of the King's household for any longer time than six
days, and that only when the court is in a progress; that all the taxes shall
be reduced to the same state they were in at the death of Queen Isabella; that
all alienations of the royal demesnes or revenues since that Queen's death
shall be resumed; that all new offices created since that period be abolished;
that the subsidy granted by the late Cortes in Galicia shall not be exacted;
that in all future Cortes each city shall send one representative of the
clergy, one of the gentry, and one of the commons, each to be elected by his
own order; that the crown shall not influence or direct any city with regard to
the choice of its representatives; that no member of the Cortes shall receive
any office or pension from the King, either for himself or for any of his
family, under pain of death, and confiscation of his goods; that each city or
community shall pay a competent salary to its representatives for his
maintenance during his attendance on the Cortes; that the Cortes shall assemble
once in three years at least, whether summoned by the King or not, and shall
then enquire into the observation of the articles now agreed upon, and
deliberate concerning public affairs; that the rewards which have been given or
promised to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia, shall be revoked; that
no gold, silver, or jewels, shall, upon pain of death, be sent out of the
kingdom; that judges shall have fixed salaries assigned them, and shall not
receive any share of the fines and forfeitures of persons condemned by them;
that no grant of the goods of persons accused shall be valid, if given before
sentence was pronounced against them; that all privileges which the nobles have
at any time obtained, to the prejudice of the commons, shall be revoked; that
the government of cities or towns shall not be put into the hands of the
nobles; that the lands of the nobles shall be subject to all public taxes in
the same manner as those of the commons; that an enquiry be made into the
conduct of those who have been entrusted with the management of the royal
patrimony since the accession of Ferdinand; and if the King do not within
thirty days appoint persons properly qualified for that service, it shall be
lawful for the Cortes to nominate them; that indulgencies shall not be preached
or dispersed in the kingdom until the cause of publishing them be examined and
approved of by the Cortes; that all the money arising from the sale of
indulgencies, shall be faithfully employed in carrying on war against the
Infidels; that such prelates as do not reside in their dioceses six months in
the year, shall forfeit their revenues during the time they are absent; that
the ecclesiastical judges and their officers shall not exact greater fees than
those which are paid in the secular courts; that the present archbishop of
Toledo, being a foreigner, be compelled to resign that dignity, which shall be
conferred upon a Castilian; that the King shall ratify and hold as good service
done to him and to the kingdom all the proceedings of the Junta, and pardon any
irregularities which the cities may have committed from an excess of zeal in a
good cause: That he shall promise and swear in the most solemn manner to
observe all these articles, and on no occasion attempt either to elude, or to
repeal them; and that he shall never solicit the Pope or any other prelate to
grant him a dispensation or absolution from this oath and promise Sandov. 206.
P. Mart. Ep. 686.
.

SUCH were the chief articles presented by the Junta to their Sovereign. As the
feudal institutions in the several kingdoms of Europe were originally the same,
the genius of those governments which arose from them bore a strong resemblance
to each other, and the regulations which the Castilians attempted to establish
on this occasion, differ little from those which other nations labored to
procure in their struggles with their monarchs for liberty. The grievances
complained of, and the remedies proposed by the English commons in their
contests with the princes of the house of Stuart, particularly resemble those
upon which the Junta now insisted. But the Spaniards had already acquired ideas
of their own liberty and independence, had formed bold and generous sentiments
concerning government, and discovered an extent of political knowledge to which
the English did not attain till more than a century afterward.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit of reformation among the
Castilians, hitherto unrestrained by authority, and emboldened by success,
became too impetuous, and prompted the Junta to propose innovations, which, by
alarming the other members of the constitution, proved fatal to their cause.
The nobles, who, instead of obstructing, had favored or connived at their
proceedings, while they confined their demands of redress to such grievances as
had been occasioned by the King's want of experience, and by the imprudence and
rapaciousness of his foreign ministers, were filled with indignation when they
began to touch the privileges of their order, and plainly saw that the measures
of the commons tended no less to break the power of the aristocracy, than to
limit the prerogatives of the crown. The resentment which they had conceived on
account of Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated considerably upon the
Emperor's raising the constable and admiral to a joint power with him in that
office; and as their pride and dignity were less hurt by suffering the Prince
to possess an extensive prerogative, than by admitting the high pretensions of
the people, they determined to give their Sovereign the assistance which he had
demanded of them, and began to assemble their vassals for that purpose.

THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with impatience the Emperor's answer to their
remonstrance, which they had appointed some of their number to present. The
members entrusted with this commission set out immediately for Germany, but
having received at different places certain intelligence from court, that they
could not venture to appear there without endangering their lives, they stopped
short in their journey, and acquainted the Junta of the information which had
been given them Sandov. 143.
. This excited such violent passions as transported the whole party beyond all
bounds of prudence, or of moderation. That a Castilian King should deny his
subjects access into his presence, or refuse to listen to their humble
petitions, was represented as an act of tyranny so unprecedented and
intolerable, that nothing now remained but with arms in their hands to drive
away that ravenous band of foreigners which encompassed the throne, who, after
having devoured the wealth of the kingdom, found it necessary to prevent the
cries of an injured people from reaching the ears of their Sovereign. Many
insisted warmly on approving a motion which had formerly been made, for
depriving Charles, during the life of his mother, of the regal titles and
authority which had been too rashly conferred upon him from a false supposition
of her total inability for government. Some proposed to provide a proper person
to assist her in the administration of public affairs, by marrying the Queen to
the Prince of Calabria, the heir of the Aragonese Kings of Naples, who had been
detained in prison since the time that Ferdinand had dispossessed his ancestors
of their crown. All agreed, that as the hopes of obtaining redress and security
merely by presenting their requests to their Sovereign, had kept them too long
in a state of inaction, and prevented them from taking advantage of the
unanimity with which the nation declared in their favor, it was now necessary
to collect their whole force, and to exert themselves with vigor, in opposing
this fatal combination of the King and nobles against their liberties P. Mart.
Ep. 688.
.

THEY soon took the field with twenty thousand men. Violent disputes arose
concerning the command of this army. Padilla, the darling of the people and
soldiers, was the only person whom they thought worthy of this honor. But Don
Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman of the
first order, having lately joined the commons out of private resentment against
the Emperor, the respect due to his birth, together with a secret desire of
disappointing Padilla, of whose popularity many of the Junta had become
jealous, procured him the office of general; though he soon gave them a fatal
proof that he possessed neither the experience, the abilities, nor the
steadiness which that important station required.

THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Rioseco as the place of rendezvous for their
troops, which, though far inferior to those of the commons in number, excelled
them greatly in discipline and in valor. They had drawn a considerable body of
regular and veteran infantry out of Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the
chief strength of their army, consisted mostly of gentlemen accustomed to the
military life, and animated with the martial spirit peculiar to their order in
that age. The infantry of the Junta was formed entirely of citizens and
mechanics, little acquainted with the use of arms. The small body of cavalry
they had been able to raise, was composed of persons of ignoble birth, and
perfect strangers to the service into which they entered. The character of the
generals differed no less than that of their troops. The royalists were
commanded by the Conde de Haro, the constable's eldest son, an officer of great
experience, and of distinguished abilities.

GIRON marched with his army directly to Rioseco and seizing the villages and
passes around it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged either to surrender
for want of provisions, or to fight with disadvantage before all their troops
were assembled. But he had not the abilities, nor his troops the patience and
discipline necessary for the execution of such a scheme. The Conde de Haro
found little difficulty in conducting a considerable reinforcement through all
his posts into the town* and Giron despairing of being able to reduce it,
advanced suddenly to Villa-panda, a place belonging to the constable, in which
the enemy had their chief magazine of provisions. By this ill-judged motion, he
left Tordesillas open to the royalists, whom the Conde de Haro led thither in
the night, with the utmost secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the town, in
which Giron had left no other garrison than a regiment of priests raised by the
bishop of Zamora, he, by break of day forced his way into it after a desperate
resistance, became master of the Queen's person, took prisoners many members of
the Junta, and recovered the great seal, with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta lost all the reputation and authority which they
derived from seeming to act by the Queen's commands; such of the nobles as had
hitherto been wavering or undetermined in their choice, now joined the regents
with all their forces; and an universal consternation seized the partisans of
the commons. This was much increased by the suspicions they began to entertain
of Giron, whom they loudly accused of having betrayed Tordesillas to the enemy;
and though that charge seems to have been destitute of foundation, the success
of the royalists being owing to Giron's ill-conduct rather than to his
treachery, he so entirely lost credit with his party, that he resigned his
commission, and retired to one of his castles Miscellaneous Tracts by Dr. Mich.
Geddes, vol. i. 278.
.

SUCH members of the Junta as had escaped the enemy's hands at Tordesillas,
fled to Valladolid; and as it would have required long time to supply the
places of those who were prisoners, by a new election, they made choice among
themselves of a small number of persons to whom they committed the supreme
direction of affairs. Their army, which grew stronger every day by the arrival
of troops from different parts of the kingdom, marched likewise to Valladolid;
and Padilla being appointed commander in chief, the spirits of the soldiery
revived, and the whole party forgetting the late misfortune, continued to
express the same ardent zeal for the liberties of their country, and the same
implacable animosity against their oppressors.

WHAT they stood most in need of, was money to pay their troops. A great part
of the current coin had been carried out of the kingdom by the Flemings; the
stated taxes levied in times of peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every
kind being interrupted by the war, the sum which they yielded decreased daily;
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the people by burdening them with new
impositions, to which, in that age, they were little accustomed. But from this
difficulty they were extricated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's wife, a woman
of noble birth, of great abilities, of boundless ambition, and animated with
the most ardent zeal in support of the cause of the Junta. She, with a boldness
superior to those superstitious fears which often influence her sex, proposed
to seize all the rich and magnificent ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but
lest that action, by its appearance of impiety, might offend the people, she
and her retinue marched to the church in solemn procession, in mourning habits,
with tears in their eyes, and beating their breasts, and falling on their
knees, implored the pardon of the saints whose shrines she was about to
violate. By this artifice, which screened her from the imputation of sacrilege,
and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal for a good cause had
constrained her, though with reluctance, to venture upon this action, she
procured a considerable supply of money for the Junta Sandov. 308. Dict. de
Bail, Art. Padilla.
. The regents, no less at a loss how to maintain their troops, the revenues of
the crown having either been dissipated by the Flemings, or being seized by the
commons, were obliged to take the Queen's jewels, and the plate belonging to
the nobility, and apply them to that purpose; and when these failed, they
obtained a small sum by way of loan from the King of Portugal Mart. Ep 718.
.

THE nobility discovered great unwillingness to proceed to extremities with the
Junta. They were animated with no less hatred than the commons against the
Flemings; they approved much of several articles in the remonstrance; they
thought the juncture favorable, not only for redressing past grievances, but
for rendering the constitution more perfect and secure by new regulations; they
were afraid that while the two orders of which the legislature was composed,
wasted each other's strength by mutual hostilities, the crown would rise to
power on the ruin or weakness of both, and encroach no less on the independence
of the nobles, than on the privileges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the regents made to the Junta, and
the continual negociations they carried on during the progress of their
military operations. Nor were the terms which they offered unreasonable; for,
on condition that the Junta would pass from a few articles most subversive of
the royal authority, or inconsistent with the rights of the nobility, they
engaged to procure the Emperor's consent to their other demands, which, if he,
through the influence of evil counselors, should refuse, several of the nobles
promised to join with them in order to extort it P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713.
Geddes's Tracts, i. 261.
. Such divisions, however, prevailed among the members of the Junta, as
prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging with prudence. Several of the
cities which had entered into the confederacy, were filled with that mean
jealousy and distrust of each other, which rivalship in commerce or in grandeur
is apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence and promises, had prevailed
on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other noblemen had
shaken the fidelity of some of the lesser cities; no person had arisen among
the commons of such superior abilities or elevation of mind, as to acquire the
direction of their affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of popular
qualities, but distrusted for that reason by those or highest rank who adhered
to the Junta; the conduct of Giron led the people to view with suspicion every
person of noble birth who joined their party; so that the strongest marks of
irresolution, mutual distrust, and mediocrity of genius, appeared in all their
proceedings at this time. After many consultations held concerning the terms
proposed by the regents, they suffered themselves to be so carried away by
resentment against the nobility, that, rejecting all thoughts of accommodation,
they threatened to strip them of the crown lands, which they or their ancestors
had usurped, and to re-annex them to the royal domain: And on this preposterous
scheme, which would at once have annihilated all the liberties for which they
had been struggling, by rendering the Kings of Castile absolute and independent
on their people, they were so intent that they exclaimed with less vehemence
against the exactions of the foreign ministers, than against the immense power
and wealth of the nobles, and seemed to hope that they might make peace with
Charles, by offering to enrich him with their spoils.

THE success which Padilla had met with in several small encounters, and in
reducing some inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate them into this
measure, filling them with such confidence in the valor of their troops, that
they hoped for an easy victory over the royalists. Padilla, that his army might
not remain inactive, while flushed with good fortune, laid siege to
Torrelobaton, a place of greater strength and importance than any he had
hitherto attacked, and which was defended by a sufficient garrison; and though
the besieged made a desperate resistance, and the admiral attempted to relieve
them, he took the town by storm, and gave it up to be plundered by his
soldiers. If he had marched instantly with his victorious army to Tordesillas,
the head quarters of the royalists, he could scarce have failed of making an
effectual impression on their troops, surprised at the briskness of his
operations, and far from being of sufficient strength to give him battle. But
the fickleness and imprudence of the Junta prevented his taking this step.
Incapable alike of carrying on war, or of making peace, they listened again to
overtures of accommodation, and even agreed to a short suspension of arms. This
negotiation terminated in nothing; but while it was carrying on, many of
Padilla's soldiers, unacquainted with the restraints of discipline, went off
with the booty they had got at Torrelobaton; and others, wearied out by the
unusual length of the campaign, deserted Sandov. 336.
. The constable too had leisure to assemble his forces at Burgos, and to
prepare every thing for marching, and as soon as the truce expired, he effected
a junction with the Conde de Haro, in spite of all Padilla's efforts to prevent
it. They advanced immediately toward Torrelobaton, and Padilla finding the
number of his troops so diminished that he durst not risk a battle, attempted
to retreat to Toro, which if be could have accomplished, the invasion of
Navarre at that juncture by the French, and the necessity which the regents
must have been under of detaching men to that kingdom, might have saved him
from danger. But Haro, sensible how fatal the consequences would be of
suffering him to escape, marched with such rapidity at the head of his cavalry,
that he came up with him near Villalar, and without waiting for his infantry,
advanced to the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued and disheartened by their
precipitate retreat, which they could not distinguish from a flight, happened
at that time to be passing over a ploughed field, on which such a violent rain
had fallen, that the soldiers sunk almost to the knees at every step, and
remained exposed to the fire of some fieldpieces which the rovalists had
brought along with them. All these circumstances so disconcerted and
intimidated raw soldiers, that without facing the enemy, or making any
resistance, they fled in the utmost confusion. Padilla exerted himself with
extraordinary courage and activity in order to rally them, though in vain; fear
rendering them deaf both to his threats and entreaties: Upon which, finding
matters irretrievable, and resolving not to survive the disgrace of that day,
and the ruin of his party, he rushed into the thickest of the enemy; but being
wounded and dismounted, he was taken prisoner. His principal officers shared
the same fate; the common soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the nobles
being too generous to kill men who threw down their arms Sandov. 345, etc. P.
Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin. p. 26. Epitome de la vida y Hechos del Emper.
Carlos V. per D. Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, 4to. Madr. 1627. p. 19.
.

THE resentment of his enemies did not suffer Padilla to linger long in
expectation of what should befall him. Next day he was condemned to lose his
head, though without any regular trial, the notoriety of the crime being
supposed sufficient to supercede the formality of a legal process. He was led
instantly to execution, together with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis
Maldonada, the former commander of the Segovians, and the latter of the troops
of Salamanca. Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm but undaunted
fortitude; and when Bravo, his fellow-sufferer, expressed some indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked him, by observing, "That
yesterday was the time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen, this day to
die with the meekness of Christians." Being permitted to write to his wife, and
to the community of Toledo, the place of his nativity, he addressed the former
with a manly and virtuous tenderness, and the latter with the exultation
natural to one who considered himself as a martyr for the liberties of his
country The strain of these letters is so eloquent and high-spirited that I
have translated them for the entertainment of my readers. The letter of Don
John Padilla to his wife.
"SENNORA,
"IF your grief did not afflict me more than my own death, I should deem myself
perfectly happy. For the end of life being certain to all men, the Almighty
confers a mark of distinguishing favor upon that person, for whom he appoints
a death such as mine, which, though lamented by many, is nevertheless
acceptable unto him. It would require more time than I now have to write any
thing that could afford you consolation. That my enemies will not grant me, nor
do I wish to delay the reception of that crown which I hope to enjoy. You may
bewail your own loss, but not my death, which, being so honorable, ought not
to be lamented by any. My soul, for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to
you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world which you valued most. I
do not write to my father Pero Lopez, because I dare not, for though I have
shown myself to be his son in daring to lose my life, I have not been the heir
of his good fortune. I will not attempt to say any thing more, that I may not
tire the executioner who waits for me, and that I may not excite a suspicion,
that in order to prolong my life, I lengthen out my letter. My servant Sossa,
an eye witness, and to whom I have communicated my most secret thoughts, will
inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I rest, expecting the
instrument of your grief, and of my deliverance."


His letter to the city of Toledo.
"To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole world, free from the time
of the mighty Goths; to thee, who by shedding the blood of strangers, as well
as thy own blood, have recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neighboring
cities. Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives information, how by the blood
of his body, thy ancient victories are to be refreshed. If fate has not
permitted my actions to be placed among your successful and celebrated
exploits, the fault has been in my ill-fortune, not in my good will. This I
request of thee as of a mother, to accept, since God has given me nothing more
to lose for thy sake, than that which I am now to relinquish. I am more
solicitous about thy good opinion than about my own life. The shiftings of
fortune which never stand still, are many. But this I see with infinite
consolation, that I, the least of thy children, suffer death for thee; and that
thou have nursed at thy breasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs. Many
tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which I am still ignorant,
though I know it to be near. My end will testify what was my desire. My soul I
recommend to thee as to the patroness of Christianity. Of my body I say
nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for at this very moment,
I feel the knife at my throat with greater dread of thy displeasure, than
apprehension of my own pain." Sandov. Hist. vol. i. p. 478.



. After this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Most of the Spanish historians,
accustomed to ideas of government, and of regal power very different from those
upon which he acted, have been so eager to testify their disapprobation of the
cause in which he was engaged, that they have neglected, or have been afraid to
do justice to his virtues; and by blackening his memory, have endeavored to
deprive him of that pity, which is seldom denied to illustrious sufferers.

THE victory at Villalar proved as decisive as it was complete. Valladolid, the
most zealous of all the associated cities, opened its gates immediately to the
conquerors, and being treated with great clemency by the regents, Medina del
Campo, Segovia, and many other cities followed its example. This sudden
dissolution of a confederacy, formed not upon slight disgusts or upon trifling
motives, into which the whole body of the people had entered, and which had
been allowed time to acquire some degree of order and consistence by
establishing a regular plan of government, is the strongest proof of the
inability of its leaders, or of some secret discord reigning among the members.
Though part of the army by which they had been subdued, was obliged, a few days
after the battle, to march toward Navarre, in order to check the progress of
the French in that kingdom, nothing could prevail on the dejected commons of
Castile to take arms again, and to embrace such a favorable opportunity of
acquiring those rights and privileges for which they had appeared so zealous.
The city of Toledo alone, animated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow,
who, instead of bewailing her husband with a womanish sorrow, prepared to
revenge his death, and to prosecute that cause in defense of which he had
suffered, must be excepted. Respect for her sex, or admiration of her courage
and abilities, as well as sympathy with her misfortunes, and veneration for the
memory of her husband, secured her the same ascendant over the people which he
had possessed. The prudence and vigor with which she acted, justified the
confidence they placed in her. She wrote to the French general in Navarre,
encouraging him to invade Castile by the offer of powerful assistance. She
endeavored by her letters and emissaries to revive the spirit and hopes of
other cities. She raised soldiers, and exacted a great sum from the clergy
belonging to the cathedral to defray the expense of keeping them on foot P.
Mart. Ep. 727.
. She employed every artifice that could interest or inflame the populace. For
this purpose she ordered crucifixes to be used by her troops instead of
colors, as if they had been at war with Infidels, and enemies of religion; she
marched through the streets of Toledo with her son, a young child, clad in deep
mourning, seated on a mule, having a standard carried before him representing
the manner of his father's execution Sandov. 375.
. By all these means she kept the minds of the people in such perpetual
agitation as prevented their passions from subsiding, and rendered them
insensible of the dangers to which they were exposed by standing alone in
opposition to the royal authority. While the army was employed in Navarre, the
regents were unable to attempt the reduction of Toledo by force; and all their
endeavors either to diminish Donna Maria's credit with the people, or to gain
her by large promises, and the solicitations of her brother the Marquis de
Mondeair, proved ineffectual. Upon the expulsion of the French out of Navarre,
part of the army returned into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even this made no
impression on the intrepid and obstinate courage of Donna Maria. She defended
the town with vigor, her troops beat the royalists in several sallies, and no
progress was made toward reducing the place, till the clergy, whom she had
highly offended by invading their property, having received information of the
death of William de Croy Archbishop of Toledo, whose possession of that see was
their chief grievance, and that the Emperor had named a Castilian to succeed
him, began to turn against her. They persuaded the people that she had acquired
such influence over them by the force of enchantments, that she was assisted by
a familiar demon which attended her in the form of a negro-maid, and that by
its suggestions she regulated every part of her conduct P. Mart. Ep. 727.
. The credulous multitude, whom their impatience of a long blockade, and
despair of obtaining succors either from the cities formerly in confederacy
with them, or from the French, rendered desirous of peace, took arms against
her, and driving her out of the city surrendered it to the royalists. She
retired to the citadel, which she defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and when reduced to the last extremities, she made her escape in
disguise, and fled to Portugal, where she had many relations Sandov. 375. P.
Mart. Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.
.

UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tranquillity was re-established in
Castile; and this bold attempt of the commons, like all unsuccessful
insurrections, contributed to confirm and extend the power of the crown, which
it was intended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes still continued to make a
part of the Castilian constitution, and were summoned to meet when ever the
King stood in need of money; but instead of adhering to their ancient and
cautious form of examining and redressing public grievances, before they
proceeded to grant any supply, the more courtly custom of voting a donative in
the first place was introduced, and the Sovereign having obtained all he
wanted, never allowed them to enter into any scrutiny, or to attempt any
reformation injurious to his authority. The privileges which the cities had
enjoyed were gradually circumscribed or abolished; their commerce began from
this period to decline; and becoming less wealthy and less populous, they lost
that power and influence which they had acquired in the Cortes.

WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities of civil war, the kingdom of
Valencia was torn by intestine commotions still more violent. The association
which had been formed in the city of Valencia in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty, and which was distinguished by the name of the Germanada,
continued to subsist after the Emperor's departure from Spain; and the members
of it, upon pretext of defending the coasts against the descents of the
Corsairs of Barbary, and under sanction of that permission, which Charles had
rashly granted them, refused to lay down their arms. But as the grievances
which the Valencians aimed at redressing, proceeded from the arrogance and
exactions of the nobility, rather than from any unwarrantable exercise of the
royal prerogative, their resentment turned chiefly against the former. As soon
as they were allowed the use of arms, and became conscious of their own
strength, they grew impatient to take vengeance of their oppressors. They drove
the nobles out of most of the cities, plundered their houses, wasted their
lands, and assaulted their castles. They then proceeded to elect thirteen
persons, one from each company of tradesmen established in Valencia, and
committed the administration of government to them, under pretext that they
would reform the laws, establish one uniform mode of dispensing justice without
partiality, or regard to the distinction of ranks, and thus restore men to some
degree of their original equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-defence. Hostilities began, and
were carried on with all the rancour, with which resentment at oppression
inspired the one party, and the idea of insulting dignity animated the other.
As no person of honorable birth, or of liberal education joined the Germanada,
the councils as well as troops of the confederacy were conducted by low
mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by the
fierceness of their zeal, and the extravagance of their proceedings. Among such
men, the laws introduced in civilized nations, in order to restrain or moderate
the violence of war, were unknown or despised; and they committed the wildest
acts of cruelty and outrage.

THE Emperor occupied with suppressing the insurrection in Castile, which more
immediately threatened the subversion of his power and prerogative, was unable
to give much attention to the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of
that kingdom to fight their own battles. His viceroy, the Conde de Melito, had
the supreme command of the forces which the nobles raised among their vassals.
The Germanada carried on the war during the years 1520 and 1521, with a more
persevering courage, than could have been expected from a body so tumultuary,
under the conduct of such leaders. They defeated the nobility in several
actions, which, though not considerable, were extremely sharp. They repulsed
them in their attempts to reduce different towns. But the nobles, by their
superior skill in war, and at the head of troops more accustomed to service,
gained the advantage in most of the rencounters. At length, they were joined by
a body of Castilian cavalry, which the regents dispatched toward Valencia,
soon after their victory over Padilla at Villalar, and by their assistance they
acquired such superiority, that they entirely broke and ruined the Germanada.
The leaders of the party were put to death, almost without any formality of
legal trial, and suffered such cruel punishments, as the sense of recent
injuries prompted the nobles to inflict. The government of Valencia was
re-established in its ancient form Argensola Anales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99.
118. Sayas Anales de Aragon, cap. 5. 12, etc. P. Mart. Ep. lib. 33. and 34.
passim. Ferrer. Hist. d'Espagne, viii 542. 564, etc.
.

IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the same spirit of disaffection and mutiny,
which reigned in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear; but by the
prudent conduct of the viceroy, Don John de Lanuza, they were so far composed,
as to prevent their breaking out into any open insurrection. But in the island
of Majorca, which was annexed to the crown of Aragon, the same causes that had
excited the commotions in Valencia, produced effects no less violent. The
people, impatient of the hardships which they endured under the rigid
jurisdiction of the nobility, took arms in a tumultuary manner; deposed their
viceroy; drove him out of the island; and massacred every gentleman who was so
unfortunate as to fall into their hands. The obstinacy with which the people of
Majorca persisted in their rebellion, was equal to the rage with which they
began it. It required no inconsiderable effort to reduce them to obedience* and
tranquillity was re-established in every part of Spain before they could be
brought to submit to their Sovereign Argensola Anales de Aragon, c. 113.
Ferrer. Hist. viii. 542. Sayas Anales de Aragon. cap. 7. 11. 14. 76. 81.
Ferreras Hist. d'Espagne, viii. 579. 609, etc.
.

WHILE the spirit of disaffection was so general among the Spaniards, and so
many causes concurred in precipitating them into such violent measures, in
order to obtain the redress of their grievances, it may appear strange, that
the malcontents in the different kingdoms should have carried on their
operations without any mutual concert, or even any intercourse with each other.
By uniting their councils and arms, they might have acted both with greater
force, and with more effect. The appearance of a national confederacy would
have rendered it no less respectable among the people, than formidable to the
crown; and the Emperor, unable to resist such a combination, must have complied
with any terms which the members of it thought fit to prescribe. Many things,
however, prevented the Spaniards from forming themselves into one body, and
pursuing common measures. The people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though
they were become the subjects of the same Sovereign, retained, in full force,
their national antipathy to each other. The remembrance of their ancient
rivalship and hostilities was still recent, and the sense of reciprocal
injuries so entire, as to be incompatible with their acting with confidence and
concert. Each nation chose rather to depend on its own efforts, and to maintain
the struggle alone, than to implore the aid of neighbors, whom they distrusted
and hated. At the same time, the forms of government in the several kingdoms of
Spain were so different, and the grievances of which they complained, as well
as the alterations and amendments which they attempted to introduce, so
various, that it was not easy to bring them to unite in any common plan. To
this disunion Charles was indebted for the preservation of his Spanish crowns;
and while each of the kingdoms followed separate measures, all of them were
obliged at last to conform to the will of their Sovereign.

THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled his subjects who had been in arms
against him with deep apprehensions; from which he soon delivered them by an
act of clemency, no less prudent than generous. After a rebellion so general,
scarce twenty persons, among so many criminals obnoxious to the law, had been
punished capitally in Castile. Though strongly solicited by his council,
Charles refused to shed any more blood by the hands of the executioner; and
published a general pardon, extending to all crimes committed since the
commencement of the insurrections, from which only fourscore were excepted.
Even these he seems to have named, rather with an intention to intimidate
others, than from any inclination to seize them; for when an officious courtier
offered to inform him where one of the most considerable among them was
concealed, he avoided it by a good-natured pleasantry; "Go," says he, "I have
now no reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some cause to keep at a
distance from me, and you would be better employed in telling him that I am
here, than in acquainting me with the place of his retreat Sandov. 377, etc.
Vida del. Emper. Carlos, per Don Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, p. 30.
." By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as by his care to avoid every
thing which had disgusted the Castilians during his former residence among
them; by his address in assuming their manners, in speaking their language, and
in complying with all their humors and customs, he acquired an ascendant over
them which scarce any of their native monarchs had ever attained, and brought
them to support him in all his enterprises with a zeal and valor to which he
owed much of his success and grandeur Ulloa Vita de Carlos V. p. 85.
.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian set out for Italy to take
possession of his new dignity. But though the Roman people longed extremely for
his arrival, they could not, on his first appearance, conceal their surprise
and disappointment. After being accustomed to the princely magnificence of
Julius, and the elegant splendor of Leo, they beheld with contempt an old man
of an humble deportment, of austere manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of
taste in the arts, and unadorned with any of the external accomplishments which
the vulgar expect in those raised to eminent stations Guic. l. 15. 238. Jovii
Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor. Epitr. des Princ. 84.
. Nor did his political views and maxims seem less strange and astonishing to
the pontifical ministers. He acknowledged and bewailed the corruptions which
abounded in the church, as well as in the court of Rome, and prepared to reform
both; he discovered no intention of aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled
at retaining such territories as some of his predecessors had acquired by
violence and fraud, rather than by any legal title; and for that reason he
invested Francesco Maria de Rovere anew in the duchy of Urbino, of which Leo
had stripped him, and surrendered to the duke of Ferrara several places wrested
from him by the church Guic. lib. 15. 240.
. To men little habituated to see Princes regulate their conduct by the maxims
of morality and the principles of justice, these actions of the new Pope
appeared incontestible proofs of his weakness and inexperience; and Adrian, who
was a perfect stranger to the complex and intricate system of Italian politics,
and who could place no confidence in persons whose subtilty and refinements in
business suited so ill with his natural simplicity and candor, being often
embarassed, and irresolute in his deliberations, the opinion of his incapacity
daily increased, until both his person and government became objects of
ridicule among his subjects Jovii Vita Adr. 118. P. Mart. Ep 774. Ruscelli
Lettere de Princ. vol. i. p. 87, 96, 101.
.

ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, endeavored to assume the impartiality
which became the common father of Christendom, and labored to reconcile the
contending Princes, that they might unite in a league against Solomon, whose
conquest of Rhodes rendered him more formidable than ever to Europe Bellefor.
Epitr. p. 86.
. But this was an undertaking far beyond his abilities. To examine such a
variety of pretensions, to adjust such a number of interfering interests, to
extinguish the passions which ambition, emulation, and mutual injuries had
kindled, to bring so many hostile powers to pursue the same scheme with
unanimity and vigor, required not only uprightness of intentions, but a great
superiority both of understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace than the Pope. The Imperial
army under Colonna was still kept on foot, but as the Emperor's revenues in
Spain, in Naples, and in the Low Countries, were either exhausted, or applied
to some other purpose, it depended entirely for pay and subsistence on the
Italians. A great part of it was quartered in the ecclesiastical state, and
monthly contributions were levied upon the Florentines, the Milanese, the
Genoese, and Lucchese, by the viceroy of Naples; and though all exclaimed
against such oppression, and were impatient to be delivered from it, the dread
of worse consequences from the rage of the army, or the resentment of the
Emperor, obliged them to submit Guic. l. 15. 238.
.

SO much regard, however, was paid to the Pope's exhortations, and to a bull
which he issued requiring all Christian Princes to consent to a truce for three
years, that the Imperial, the French, and the English Ambassadors at Rome were
empowered to treat of that matter; but while they wasted their time in
fruitless negociations, their masters continued their preparations for war. The
Venetians, who had hitherto adhered with great firmness to their alliance with
Francis, being now convinced that his affairs in Italy were in a desperate
situation, entered into a league against him with the Emperor; to which Adrian,
at the instigation of his countryman and friend Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of
Naples, who persuaded him that the only obstacles to peace arose from the
ambition of the French King, soon after acceded. The other Italian states
followed their example; and Francis was left without a single ally to resist
the efforts of so many enemies whose armies threatened, and whose territories
encompassed his dominions on every side Guic. l. 15, 2, 1, 248.
.

THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it was thought, would have obliged
Francis to keep wholly on the defensive, or at least have prevented his
entertaining any thoughts of marching into Italy. But it was the character of
that Prince, too apt to become remiss, and even negligent on ordinary
occasions, to rouse at the approach of danger, and not only to encounter it
with spirit and intrepidity, qualities which never forsook him, but to provide
against it with diligence and industry. Before his enemies were ready to
execute any of their schemes, Francis had assembled a numerous army. His
authority over his own subjects was far greater than that which Charles or
Henry possessed over theirs. They depended on their parliaments for money,
which was usually granted them in small sums, very slowly, and with much
reluctance. The taxes he could impose were more considerable, and levied with
greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on other occasions, his army was
in the field while they were devising ways and means for raising theirs.
Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped to disconcert all the Emperor's
schemes, by marching in person into the Milanese; and this bold measure, the
more formidable, because unexpected, could scarce have failed of producing that
effect. The vanguard of his army had already reached Lions, and he himself was
hastening after it with the second division of his troops, when the discovery
of a domestic conspiracy which threatened the ruin of the kingdom, obliged him
to stop short, and to alter his measures.

THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles duke of Bourbon, Lord High
Constable, whose noble birth, vast fortune, and high office, raised him to be
the most powerful subject in France, as his great talents, equally suited to
the field or the council, and his signal services to the crown rendered him the
most illustrious and deserving. The near resemblance between the King and him
in many of their qualities, both being fond of war, and ambitious to excel in
active and manly exercises, as well as their equality in age, and their
proximity of blood, ought naturally to have secured him a considerable share in
that monarch's favor. But unhappily Louise, the King's mother, had contracted
a violent aversion to the house of Bourbon, for no better reason than because
Anne of Bretagne, the Queen of Lewis the Twelfth, with whom she lived in
perpetual enmity, discovered a peculiar attachment to that branch of the royal
family; and she had taught her son, who was too susceptible of any impression
she gave him, to view all the constable's actions with a mean and unbecoming
jealousy. His distinguished merit at the battle of Marignano had not been
sufficiently rewarded; he had been recalled from the government of Milan upon
very frivolous pretenses, and had met with a cold reception, which his prudent
conduct in that difficult station did not deserve; the payment of his pensions
had been suspended without any good cause; and during the campaign of one
thousand five hundred and twenty-one, the King, as has already been related,
had affronted him in the presence of the whole army, by giving the command of
the van to the Duke of Alencon. The constable, at first, bore these indignities
with greater moderation than could have been expected from an high-spirited
Prince, conscious of what was due to his rank, and to his services. Such a
multiplicity of injuries, however, exhausted his patience; and inspiring him
with thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and began to hold a secret
correspondence with some of the Emperor's ministers.

ABOUT that time the Duchess of Bourbon happened to die without leaving any
children; and Louise, of a disposition no less amorous than vindictive, and
still susceptible of the tender passions at the age of forty-six, began to view
the constable, a Prince as amiable as he was accomplished, with other eyes; and
notwithstanding the great disparity of their years, she formed the scheme of
marrying him. Bourbon, who might have expected every thing to which an
ambitious mind can aspire, from the doting fondness of a woman who governed her
son and the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating the Queen in her
sudden transition from hatred to love, or of dissembling so meanly as to
pretend affection for one who had prosecuted him so long with unprovoked
malice, not only rejected the match, but embittered his refusal by some severe
rai^lery on Louise's person and character. She finding herself not only
contemned, but insulted, her disappointed love turned into hatred, and since
she could not marry, she resolved to ruin Bourbon.

FOR this purpose she consulted with the Chancellor du Prat, a man, who by a
base prostitution of great talents, and of superior skill in his profession,
had risen to that high office. By his advice a law suit was commenced against
the constable, for the whole estate belonging to the house of Bourbon. Part of
it was claimed in the King's name, as having fallen to the crown; part in that
of Louise, as the nearest heir in blood of the deceased Duchess. Both these
claims were equally destitute of any foundation in justice; but Louise, by her
solicitations and authority, and Du Prat by employing all the artifices and
chicanery of law, prevailed on the judges to order the estate to be sequ^stred.
This unjust decision drove the constable to despair, and to measures which
despair alone could have dictated. He renewed his intrigues in the Imperial
court, and flattering himself that the injuries he had suffered would justify
his having recourse to any means in order to obtain revenge, he offered to
transfer his allegiance from his natural Sovereign to the Emperor, and to
assist him in the conquest of France. Charles, as well as the King of England,
to whom the secret was communicated Rymer's Foeder. xiii. 794.
, expecting prodigious advantages from his ^volt, were ready to receive him
with open arms, and spared neither promises nor allurements (...) might help to
confirm him in his resolution. The Emperor offered him in marriage his sister
Eleanor, the widow of the King of Portugal, with a vast portion. He was
included as a principal in the treaty between Charles and Henry. The counties
of Provence and Dauphine were to be settled on him, with the title of King. The
Emperor engaged to enter France by the Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the
Flemings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied at their
common charge, were to penetrate into Burgundy, and to act in concert with
Bourbon, who undertook to raise six thousand men among his friends and vassals
in the heart of the kingdom. The execution of this deep-laid and dangerous plot
was suspended, until the King should cross the Alps with the only army capable
of defending his dominions; and as he was far advanced in his march for that
purpose, France stood on the brink of destruction ^huani Hist. lib. i. c. 10.
Heutr. Rer. Aust. lib. viii. c. 18. p. 207.
.

HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negotiation which had now been carrying on for
several months, though conducted with the most profound secrecy and
communicated only to a few chosen confidents, could not altogether escape the
observation of the rest of the constable's numerous retainers, rendered more
inquisitive by finding that they were distrusted. Two of these gave the King
some intimation of a mysterious correspondence between their master and the
Comte de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman of great confidence with the Emperor.
Francis, who could not bring himself to suspect that the first Prince of the
blood would be so base as to betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins, where the constable was in bed, feigning indisposition,
that he might not be obliged to accompany the King into Italy, and acquainted
him of the intelligence which he had received. Bourbon, with great solemnity
and the most imposing affectation of ingenuity and candor, asserted his own
innocence; and as his health, he said, was now more confirmed, he promised to
join the army within a few days. Francis, open and candid himself, and too apt
to be deceived by the appearance of those virtues in others, gave such credit
to what he said, that he refused to arrest him, although advised to take that
precaution by his wisest counselors, and as if the danger had been over, he
continued his march toward Lions. The constable set out soon after, seemingly
with an intention to follow him; but turning suddenly to the left, he crossed
the Rhone, and after infinite fatigues and perils escaped all the parties which
the King, sensible too late of his credulity, sent out to intercept him, and
reached Italy in safety Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, etc. Pasquier Recherches de la
France, p. 481.
.

FRANCIS took every possible precaution to prevent the bad effects of the
irreparable error he had committed. He put garrisons in all places of strength
in the constable's territories. He seized all the gentlemen whom he could
suspect of being his associates, and as he had not hitherto discovered the
whole extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor knew how far the infection had
spread among his subjects, he was afraid that his absence might encourage them
to make some desperate attempt, and for that reason relinquished his intention
of leading his army in person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on the Milanese; but appointed admiral
Bonnivet to take the supreme command in his stead, and to march into that
country with an army 30,000 strong. Bonnivet did not owe this preferment to his
abilities as a general; for of all talents requisite to form a great commander,
he possessed only personal courage, the lowest and the most common. But he was
the most accomplished gentleman in the French court, of agreeable manners, an
insinuating address, and a sprightly conversation; and Francis, who lived in
great familiarity with his courtiers, was so charmed with these qualities, that
he honored him on all occasions, with the most partial and distinguishing
marks of his favor. He was, besides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as
the King scarce knew whom to trust at that juncture, he thought the chief
command could be lodged no where so safely as in his hands.

COLONNA, who was entrusted with the defense of the Milanese, his own conquest,
was in no condition to resist such a formidable army. He had scarce money
sufficient to pay his troops, reduced to a small number by sickness or
desertion, and had, for that reason, been obliged to neglect every precaution
necessary for the security of the country. The only plan he formed, was to
defend the passage of the river Tesino against the French; and, as if he had
forgotten how easily he himself had disconcerted a similar scheme formed by
Lautrec, he promised with great confidence on its being effectual. But in spite
of all his caution, it succeeded no better with him than with Lautrec. Bonnivet
passed the river without loss, at a ford which had been neglected, and the
Imperialists retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town as soon as the
French should appear before it. By an unaccountable negligence which
Guiccardini imputes to infatuation Guic. lib. 15. 254.
. Bonnivet did not advance for three or four days, and lost the opportunity
with which his good fortune presented him. The citizens recovered from their
consternation: Colonna still active, at the age of fourscore, and Morone, whose
enmity to France was indefatigable, were employed night and day in repairing
the fortifications, in amassing provisions, in collecting troops from every
quarter, and by the time the French approached, had put the city in a condition
to stand a siege. Bonnivet, after some fruitless attempts on the town, which
harassed his own troops more than the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of
the season to retire into winter quarters.

DURING these transactions, Pope Adrian died; an event so much to the
satisfaction of the Roman people, whose hatred or contempt of him augmented
every day, that the night after his decease, they adorned the door of his chief
physician's house with garlands, adding this inscription, TO THE DELIVERER OF
HIS COUNTRY ^^vii Vit. Adr. 127.
. The Cardinal de Medici instantly renewed his pretensions to the Papal
dignity, and entered the conclave with high expectations on his own part, and a
general opinion of the people that they would be successful. But though
supported by the Imperial faction, possessed of great personal interest, and
capable of all the artifices, refinements, and corruptions, which reign in
those assemblies, the obstinacy and intrigues of his rivals protracted the
conclave to the unusual length of fifty days. The address and perseverance of
the Cardinal surmounted at last every obstacle. He was raised to the head of
the church, and assumed the government of it by the name of Clement VII. The
choice was universally approved of. High expectations were conceived of a Pope,
whose great talents, and long experience in business, seemed to qualify him no
less for defending the spiritual interests of the church, exposed to imminent
danger by the progress of Luther's opinions, than for conducting its political
operations with the prudence requisite at such a difficult juncture; and who,
besides these advantages, rendered the ecclesiastical state more respectable,
by having in his hands the government of Florence, and the wealth of the family
of Medici Guic. lib. 15. 263.
.

CARDINAL WOLSEY, not disheartened by the disappointment of his ambitious views
at the former election, had entertained more sanguine hopes of success on this
occasion. Henry wrote to the Emperor, reminding him of his engagements to
second the pretensions of his minister. Wolsey bestirred himself with activity
suitable to the importance of the prize for which he contended, and instructed
his agents at Rome to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain his
end. But Charles had either amused him with vain hopes, which he never intended
to gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose a candidate who had such a
prospect of succeeding as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durst not venture to
provoke the people of Rome, while their indignation against Adrian's memory was
still fresh, by placing another Ultramontane in the papal throne. Wolsey, after
all his expectations and endeavors, had the mortification to see a Pope
elected, of such an age, and of so vig^ (...), that he could not comfort
himself much with the chance of surviving him. Wolsey, by this second proof,
was fully convinced of the Emperor's insincerity, and it ^xcited in him all the
resentment which an haughty mind feels on being at once disappointed and
deceived; and though Clement endeavored to sooth his vindictive nature by
granting him a commission to be legate in England during life, with such ample
powers as vested in him almost the whole papal jurisdiction in that kingdom,
the injury he had received entirely dissolved the tie which had united him to
Charles, and from that moment he meditated revenge. It was necessary, however,
to conceal his intention from his master, and to suspend the execution of it,
until by a dextrous improvement of the incidents which might occur, he should
be able gradually to alienate the King's affections from the Emperor. For this
reason, he was so far from expressing any uneasiness on account of the repulse
he had met with, that he abounded on every occasion, private as well as public,
in declarations of his high satisfaction with Clement's promotion Fiddes's life
of Wolsey, 294, etc. Herbert.
.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled with great sincerity whatever he was
bound to perform by the league against France, though more slowly than he could
have wished. His thoughtless profusion, and total neglect of economy reduced
him often to great straits for money. The operations of war were now carried on
in Europe in a manner very different from that which had long prevailed.
Instead of armies suddenly assembled, which under distinct chieftains followed
their Prince into the field for a short space, and served at their own cost;
troops were now levied at a great charge, and received regularly considerable
pay. Instead of impatience on both sides to bring every quarrel to the issue of
a battle, which commonly decided the fate of open and defenseless countries,
and allowed the barons, together with their vassals, to return to their
ordinary occupations; towns were fortified with great art, and defended with
much obstinacy; war, from a simple, became a very intricate science; and
campaigns grew of ^se to be more tedious, and less decisive. The expense which
these alterations in the military system necessarily created, appeared
intolerable to nations hitherto unaccustomed to the burden of heavy taxes.
Hence proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious spirit of the English
parliaments in that age, which Henry, with all his authority, was seldom able
to overcome. The commons, having refused at this time to grant him the supplies
he demanded, he had recourse to the ample and almost unlimited prerogative,
which the Kings of England then possessed, and by a violent and unusual
exertion of it, raised the money he wanted. This, however, wasted so much time,
that it was late in the season before his army, under the duke of Suffolk,
could take the field. Being joined by a considerable body of Flemings, Suffolk
marched into Picardy, and Francis from his extravagant eagerness to recover the
Milanese, having left that frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far as
the banks of the river Oyse, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with consternation. But the arrival of some troops detached by the
King, who was still at Lions; the active gallantry of the French officers, who
allowed the allies no respite night or day; the rigor of a most unnatural
season, together with scarcity of provisions, compelled Suffolk to retire; and
La Tremouille, who commanded in those parts, had the glory of having, with an
handful of men, checked the progress of a formidable army, and of having driven
them with ignominy out of the French territories Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73,
etc.
.

THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and Guienne were not more fortunate,
though in both these provinces Francis was equally ill prepared to resist them.
The conduct and valor of his generals supplied his want of foresight; the
Germans who made an irruption into one of these provinces, and the Spaniards
who attacked the other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

THUS ended the year 1523, during which Francis's good fortune and success had
been such as gave all Europe an high idea of his power and resources. He had
discovered and disconcerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author of which he had
drived into exile, almost without an attendant; he had rendered abortive all
the schemes of the powerful confederacy formed against him; he had protected
his dominions when attacked on three different sides; and though his army in
the Milanese had not made such progress as might have been expected from its
superiority to the enemy in number, he had recovered and still kept possession
of one half of that duchy.

THE ensuing year opened with events more disastrous to France. Fontarabia was
lost by the cowardice or treachery of its governor. In Italy, the allies
resolved on an early and vigorous effort in order to dispossess Bonnivet of
that part of the Milanese which lies beyond the Tesino; Clement, who, under the
pontificates both of Leo and Adrian, had discovered an implacable enmity to
France, began now to view the power which the Emperor was daily acquiring in
Italy, with so much jealousy, that he refused to accede, as his predecessors
had done, to the league against Francis, and forgetting private passions and
animosities, labored with the zeal which became his character, to bring about
a reconciliation among the contending parties. But all his endeavors were
ineffectual; a numerous army, to which each of the allies furnished their
contingent of troops, was assembled at Milan by the beginning of March. Lannoy,
viceroy of Naples, took the command of it upon Colonna's death, though the
chief direction of military operations was committed to Bourbon, and the
marquis de Pescara; the latter, the ablest and most enterprizing of the
Imperial generals; the former inspired by his resentment with new activity and
invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with the characters of the French
commanders, the genius of their troops, and the strength as well as weakness of
their armies, as to be of infinite service to the party which he joined. But
all these advantages were nearly lost through the Emperor's inability to raise
money sufficient for executing the various and extensive plans which he had
formed. When his troops were commanded to march, they mutinied against their
leaders, demanding the pay which was due to them for some months; and
disregarding both the menaces and entreaties of their officers, threatened to
pillage the city of Milan if they did not instantly receive satisfaction. Out
of this difficulty the generals of the allies were extricated by Morone, who,
prevailing on his countrymen, over whom his influence was prodigious, to
advance the sum that was requisite, the army took the field Guic. l. xv. 267.
Capella, 190.
.

BONNIVET was destitute of troops to oppose this army, and still ^ore of the
talents that could render him an equal match for its leaders. After various
movements and encounters, described with great accuracy by the contemporary
historians, a detail of which, at this distance of time, would be equally
uninteresting and uninstructive, he was forced to abandon the strong camp in
which he had entrenched himself at Biagrassa. Soon after, partly by his own
misconduct, partly by the activity of the enemy, who harassed and ruined his
army by continual skirmishes, while they carefully declined a battle which he
often offered them, and partly by the caprice of 6000 Swiss, who refused to
join his army, though within a day's march of it; he was reduced to the
necessity of attempting a retreat into France through the valley of Aost^^^
Just as he arrived on the banks of the Sessia, and began to pass that river,
Bourbon and Pescara appeared with the vanguard of the allies, and attacked his
rear with great fury. At the beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exerting
himself with much valor, was wounded so dangerously as obliged him to quit the
field; and the conduct of the rear was committed to the chevalier Bayard, who,
though so much a stranger to the arts of a court, that he never rose to the
chief command, was always called, in times of real danger, to the posts of
difficulty and importance. He put himself at the head of the men at arms, and
animating them by his presence and example to sustain the whole shock of the
enemy's troops, he gained time for the rest of his countrymen to make good
their retreat. But in this service he received a wound, which he immediately
perceived to be mortal, and being unable to continue any longer on horseback,
he ordered one of his attendants to place him under a tree, with his face
toward the enemy; then fixing his eyes on the guard of his sword, which he
held up instead of a cross, he addressed his prayers to God, and in this
posture, which became his character both as a soldier and as a Christian, he
calmly waited the approach of death. Bourbon, who led the foremost of the
enemies troops, found him in this situation, and expressed regret and pity at
the sight. "Pity not me," cried the high-spirited chevalier, "I die as a man of
honor ought, in the discharge of my duty: They indeed are objects of pity, who
fight against their King, their country, and their oath." The Marquis de
Pescara, passing soon after, manifested his admiration of Bayard's virtues, and
his sorrow for his fall, with the generosity of a gallant enemy; and finding
that he could not be removed with safety from that spot, ordered a tent to be
pitched there, and appointed proper persons to attend him. He died,
notwithstanding their care, as his ancestors for several generations had done,
in the field of battle. Pescara ordered his body to be embalmed, and sent to
his relations; and such was the respect paid to military merit in that age,
that the Duke of Savoy commanded it to be received with royal honors in all
the cities of his dominions; in Dauphine, Bayard's native country, the people
of all ranks came out in a solemn procession to meet it Bellefor. Epitr. p. 73.
Mem. de Bellay, 75. Oeuv. de Brant. tom. vi. 108, etc. Pasquier Recherches, p.
526.
.

BONNIVET led back the shattered remains of his army into France; and in one
short campaign, Francis was stripped of all he had possessed in Italy, and left
without one ally in that country.

WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of Charles and Francis spread over so
many countries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound tranquillity, extremely
favorable to the reformation, which continued to make progress daily. During
Luther's confinement in his retreat at Wartburg, Carlostadius, one of his
disciples, animated with the same zeal, but possessed of less prudence and
moderation than his master, began to propagate wild and dangerous opinions,
chiefly among the lower people. Encouraged by his ex^tions they rose in several
villages of Saxony, broke into the churches with tumultuary violence, and threw
down and destroyed the images with which they were adorned. These irregular and
outrageous proceedings were so repugnant to all the Elector's cautious maxims,
that if they had not received a timely check, they could scarce have failed of
alienating from the reformers that Prince, jealous to a great degree of his own
authority, and afraid of giving offense to the Emperor, and other patrons of
the ancient opinions. Luther, sensible of the danger, immediately quitted his
retreat, without waiting for Frederick's permission, and returned to
Wittemberg. Happily for the reformation, the veneration for his person and
authority were still so great, that his appearance alone suppressed that spirit
of extravagance which began to seize his party. Carlostadius and his fanatical
followers struck dumb by his rebukes, declared that they heard the voice of an
angel, not of a man Sleid. Hist. 51. Seckend. 195.
.

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun to translate the Bible into the
German tongue, an undertaking of no less difficulty than importance, of which
he was extremely fond, and for which he was well qualified: He had a competent
knowledge in the original languages; a thorough acquaintance with the style and
sentiments of the inspired writers; and though his compositions in Latin were
rude and barbarous, he was reckoned a great master of the purity of his
mother tongue, and could express himself with all the elegance of which it is
capable. By his own assiduous application, together with the assistance of
Melancthon, and several other of his disciples, he finished part of the New
Testament this year; and the publication of it proved more fatal to the church
of Rome, than that of all his own works. It was read with wonderful avidity and
attention by persons of every rank. They were astonished at discovering how
contrary the precepts of the author of our religion are, to the inventions of
those who pretended to be his vicegerents; and having now in their hand the
rule of faith, they thought themselves qualified by applying it to judge of the
established opinions, and to pronounce when they were conformable to the
standard, and when they departed from it. The great advantage arising from
Luther's translation of the Bible, encouraged the advocates for reformation, in
the other countries of Europe, to imitate his example, and to publish versions
of the Scriptures in their respective languages.

ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Franckfort, Hamburgh, and several other cities in
Germany of the first rank openly embraced the reformed religion, and by the
authority of their magistrates abolished the mass, and the other superstitious
rites of Popery Seckend. 241. Chytraei Contin. Krantzii, 203.
. The Elector of Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, and
Prince of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of Luther's opinions, and countenanced
the preaching of them among their subjects.

THE court of Rome beheld this growing defection with great concern; and
Adrian's first care after his arrival in Italy, had been to deliberate with the
cardinals, concerning the proper means of putting a stop to it. This Pope was
profoundly skilled in scholastic theology, and having been early taken notice
of on that account, he still retained such an excessive admiration of the
science to which he owed his reputation and success in life, that he considered
Luther's invectives against the schoolmen, particularly Thomas Aquinas, as
little less than blasphemy. All the tenets of that doctor appeared to him so
clear and irrefragable, that he supposed every person who called in question or
contradicted them, to be either blinded by ignorance, or to be acting in
opposition to the conviction of his own mind: Of course, no Pope was ever more
bigoted or inflexible with regard to points of doctrine than Adrian; he not
only maintained them as Leo had done, because they were ancient, or because it
was dangerous for the church to allow of innovations, but he adhered to them
with the zeal of a theologian, and with the tenaciousness of a disputant. At
the same time, his own manners being extremely simple, and uninfected with any
of the vices which reigned in the court of Rome, he was as sensible of its
corruptions as the reformers themselves, and viewed them with no less
indignation. The brief he addressed to the Diet of the empire assembled at
Nuremberg, and the instructions he gave Cheregato the nuncio whom he sent
thither, were framed agreeably to these views. On the one hand, he condemned
Luther's opinions with more asperity and rancour of expression than Leo had
ever used; he severely censured the Princes of Germany for suffering him to
spread his pernicious tenets, by their neglecting to execute the edict of the
Diet at Worms, and required them, if Luther did not instantly retract his
errors, to destroy him with fire as a gangrened and incurable member, in like
manner as Dathan and Abiram had been cut of by Moses, Annanias and Sapphira by
the apostles, and John Huss and Jerome of Prague by their ancestors Fascic.
Rer. Expet. and Fugiend. 342.
. On the other hand, he, with great candor, and in the most explicit terms,
acknowledged the corruptions of the Roman court to be the source from which had
flowed all the evils that the church now felt or dreaded; he promised to exert
all his authority toward reforming these abuses, with as much dispatch as the
nature and inveteracy of the disorders would admit; and he requested of them to
give him their advice with regard to the most effectual means of suppressing
that new heresy which had sprung up among them Fascic. Rer. Expet. and Fugiend.
p. 345.
.

THE members of the Diet, after praising the Pope's pious and laudable
intentions, excused themselves for not executing the edict of Worms, by
alleging that the prodigious increase of Luther's followers, as well as the
aversion to the court of Rome among their other subjects on account of its
innumerable exactions, rendered such an attempt not only dangerous, but
impossible. They affirmed, that the grievances of Germany, which did not arise
from imaginary injuries, but from impositions no less real than intolerable, as
his Holiness would learn from a catalogue of them, which they intended to lay
before him, called now for some new and efficacious remedy, and in their
opinion, the only remedy adequate to the disease, or which afforded them any
hopes of seeing the church restored to soundness and vigor, was a general
council. Such a council, therefore, they advised him, after obtaining the
Emperor's consent, to assemble without delay, in one of the great cities of
Germany, that all who had a right to be present might deliberate with freedom,
and propose their opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous situation of
religion at this juncture required Fascic. Rer. Expet. and Fugiend. p. 346.
.

THE nuncio, more artful than his master, and better acquainted with the
political views and interests of the Roman court, was startled at the
proposition of a council; and easily foresaw how dangerous such an assembly
might prove at a time when many openly denied the papal authority, and the
reverence and submission yielded to it visibly declined among all. For that
reason he employed his utmost address, in order to prevail on the members of
the Diet to proceed themselves with greater severity against the Lutheran
heresy, and to relinquish their proposal concerning a general council to be
held in Germany, They, perceiving the nuncio to be more solicitous about the
interests of the Roman court, than the tranquillity of the empire, or purity of
the church, remained inflexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue of
their grievances to be presented to the Pope Ibid. 349.
. The nuncio, that he might not be the bearer of a remonstrance so disagreeable
to his court, left Nuremberg abruptly, without taking leave of the Diet Ibid.
376.
.

THE secular Princes accordingly, for the ecclesiastics, although they gave no
opposition, did not think it decent to join with them, drew up the list (so
famous in the German annals) of an hundred grievances which the empire imputed
to the iniquitous dominion of the papal see. This list contained grievances
much of the same nature with that prepared under the reign of Maximilian. It
would be tedious to enumerate each of them; they complained of the sums exacted
for dispensations, absolutions and indulgences; of the expense arising from the
lawsuits carried to Rome; of the innumerable abuses occasioned by
reservations, commendams, and annates; of the exemption from civil jurisdiction
which the clergy had obtained; of the arts by which they brought all secular
causes under the cognizance of the ecclesiastical judges; of the indecent and
profligate lives which not a few of the clergy led; and of various other
particulars, many of which have already been mentioned among the circumstances
which contributed to the favorable reception, or to the quick progress of
Luther's doctrines. In the end they concluded, that if the holy see did not
speedily deliver them from those intolerable burdens, they had determined to
endure them no longer, and would employ the power and authority with which God
had entrusted them, in order to procure relief Fascic. Rer. Expet. and Fugiend.
354.
.

INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and his followers as the nuncio had
recommended, the recess or edict of the Diet contained only a general
injunction to all ranks of men to wait with patience for the determinations of
the council which was to be assembled, and in the mean time not to publish any
new opinions, contrary to the established doctrines of the church; together
with an admonition to all preachers to abstain from matters of controversy in
their discourses to the people, and to confine themselves to the plain and
instructive truths of religion Ibid. 348.
.

THE reformers derived great advantage from the transactions of this Diet, as
they afforded them the fulest and most authentic evidence that gross
corruptions prevailed in the court of Rome, and that the empire was loaded by
the clergy with insupportable burdens. With regard to the former, they had now
the testimony of the Pope himself, that their invectives and accusations were
not malicious or ill-founded. As to the latter, the representatives of the
Germanick body, in an assembly where the patrons of the new opinions were far
from being the most numerous or powerful, had pointed out as the chief
grievances of the empire, those very practices of the Romish church against
which Luther and his disciples were accustomed to declaim. Accordingly, in all
their controversial writings after this period, they often appealed to Adrian's
declaration, and to the hundred grievances, in confirmation of whatever they
advanced concerning the dissolute manners, or insatiable ambition and
rapaciousness of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's conduct was considered as a proof of the most childish
simplicity and imprudence. Men trained up amidst the artifices and corruptions
of the papal court, and accustomed to judge of actions not by what was just,
but by what was useful, were astonished at a Pontiff, who, departing from the
wise maxims of his predecessors, acknowledged disorders which he ought to have
concealed; and forgetting his own dignity, asked advice of those, to whom he
was entitled to prescribe. By such an excess of impolitic sincerity, they were
afraid, that instead of reclaiming, he would render the enemies of the church
more presumptuous, and instead of extinguishing heresy, would weaken the
foundations of the papal power, or stop the chief sources from which wealth
flowed into the church F. Paul. Hist. of Counc. p. 28. Pallavic. Hist. 58
. For this reason they industriously opposed all his schemes of reformation,
and by throwing objections and difficulties in his way, endeavored to retard
or to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed on the one hand, at the
obstinacy of the Lutherans, disgusted, on the other, with the manners and
maxims of the Italians, and finding himself unable to correct either the one or
the other, often lamented his own situation, and often looked back with
pleasure on that period of his life when he was only dean of Louvain, a more
humble but happier station, in which little was expected from him, and there
was nothing to frustrate his good intentions ^ovii Vit. Adr. p. 118.
.

CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian as much in the arts of government,
as he was inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness of intention. He
was animated not only with the aversion which all Popes naturally bear to a
council, but having gained his own election by means very uncanonical, he was
afraid of an assembly that might subject it to a scrutiny which it could not
stand. He determined, therefore, to elude by every possible means the demands
of the Germans, both with respect to the calling of a council, and reforming
abuses in the papal court, which the rashness and incapacity of his predecessor
had brought upon him. For this purpose he made choice of Cardinal Campeggio, an
artful man, often entrusted by the Popes with negociations of importance, as
his nuncio to the Diet of the empire assembled again at Nuremberg.

CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of what had passed in the last meeting,
exhorted the Diet in a long discourse, to execute the edict of Worms with
vigor, as the only effectual means of suppressing Luther's doctrines. The
Diet, in return, desired to know the Pope's intentions concerning the council,
and the redress of the hundred grievances. The former, the nuncio endeavored
to elude by general and unmeaning declarations of the Pope's resolution to
pursue such measures as would be for the greatest good of the church. With
regard to the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did not reach Rome till
after Adrian's death, and of consequence had not been regularly laid before the
present Pope, Campeggio took advantage of this circumstance to decline making
any definitive answer to them in Clement's name; though, at the same ^me, he
observed that their catalogue of grievances contained many particulars
extremely indecent and undutiful, and that the publishing it by their own
authority was highly disrespectful to the Roman see. In the end, he renewed his
demand of their proceeding with rigor against Luther and his adherents; but
though an ambassador from the Emperor, who was at that time very solicitous to
gain the Pope, warmly seconded the nuncio, with many professions of his
master's zeal for the honor and dignity of the papal see, the recess of the
Diet was conceived in terms of almost the same import with the former, without
enjoining any additional severity against Luther and his party Seckend. 286.
Sleid. Hi^. 66.
.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order to amuse and sooth the people,
published certain articles for the amendment of some disorders and abuses which
prevailed among the inferior clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell
so far short of the expectations of the Lutherans, and of the demands of the
Diet, gave no satisfaction, and produced little effect. The nuncio, with a
tender hand, lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed a deeper blow, and by
striking at the root wished to exterminate the evil Seckend. 292.
.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IV.
THE expulsion of the French, both out of the Milanese, and the republic of
Genoa, was considered by the Italians, as the conclusion of the war between
Charles and Francis; and as they began immediately to be apprehensive of the
Emperor, when they saw no power remaining in Italy capable either to control
or oppose him, they longed ardently for the re-establishment of peace. Having
procured the restoration of Sforza to his paternal dominions, which had been
their chief motive for entering into a confederacy with Charles, they plainly
discovered their intention to contribute no longer toward increasing the
Emperor's superiority over his rival, which was already the object of their
jealousy. The Pope, especially, whose natural timidity increased his suspicions
of Charles's designs, endeavored by his ambassadors and remonstrances to
inspire him with moderation, and incline him to peace.

BUT the Emperor, intoxicated with success, and urged on by his own ambition,
no less than by Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Clement's admonitions,
and declared his resolution of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions where he least dreaded an
attack, and was least prepared to resist it. His most experienced ministers
dissuaded him from undertaking such an enterprise with a feeble army, and an
exhausted treasury: But he relied so much on having obtained the concurrence of
the King of England, and on the hopes which Bourbon, with the confidence and
credulity natural to exiles, entertained of being joined by a numerous body of
his partisans as soon as the Imperial troops should enter France, that he
persisted obstinately in the measure. Henry undertook to furnish an hundred
thousand ducats toward defraying the expense of the expedition during the
first month, and had it in his choice either to continue the payment of that
sum monthly, or to invade Picardy before the end of July with a powerful army.
The Emperor engaged to attack Guienne at the same time with a considerable body
of men, and if these enterprises proved successful, they agreed that Bourbon,
besides the territories he had lost, should be put in possession of Provence,
with the title of King, and should do homage to Henry as the lawful King of
France, for his new dominions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant project, the invasion of Provence was the only one which was
executed. For although Bourbon, with a scrupulous delicacy, altogether
unexpected, after the part he had acted, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby absolved him from any
obligation to promote the enterprise, Charles's eagerness to carry his own plan
into execution did not in any degree abate. The army he employed for that
purpose amounted only to eighteen thousand men; the supreme command of which
was given to the Marquis de Pescara, with instructions to pay the greatest
deference to Bourbon's advice in all his operations. Pescara passed the Alps
without opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to Marseilles. Bourbon
had advised him rather to march toward Lions, in the neigbourhood of which
city his territories were situated, and where of course his influence was most
extensive: But the Emperor was so desirous to get possession of a port, which
would, at all times, secure him easy access into France, that by his authority
he overruled the constable's opinion, and directed Pescara to make the
reduction of Marseilles his chief object Guic. l. 15. 273, etc. Mem. de Bellay,
p. ^0.
.

FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to prevent this attempt, took the most
proper precautions to defeat it. He laid waste the adjacent country, in order
to render it more difficult for the enemy to subsist their army; he razed the
suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifications, and threw into it a
numerous garrison under the command of brave and experienced officers. To
these, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their dread of the Spanish yoke
inspired with contempt of danger, joined themselves; by their united courage
and industry, all the efforts of Pescara's military skill, and of Bourbon's
activity and revenge, were rendered abortive. Francis, meanwhile, had leisure
to assemble a powerful army under the walls of Avignon, and no sooner began to
advance toward Marseilles, than the Imperial troops, exhausted by the fatigues
of a siege which had lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and almost
destitute of provisions, retired with precipitation toward Italy Guic. l. 15.
277. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 93.
.

IF, during these operations of the army in Provence, either Charles or Henry
had attacked France in the manner which they had projected, that kingdom must
have been exposed to the most imminent danger. But on this, as well as on many
other occasions, the Emperor found that the extent of his revenues was not
adequate to the greatness of his power, or the ardour of his ambition, and the
want of money obliged him, though with much reluctance, to circumscribe his
plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted. Henry, disgusted at Bourbon's
refusing to recognize his right to the crown of France; alarmed at the motions
of the Scots, whom the solicitations of the French King had persuaded to march
toward the borders of England; and no longer incited by his minister, who was
become extremely cool with regard to the Emperor's interests; took no measures
to support an enterprise, of which, as of all new undertakings, he had been at
first excessively fond Fiddes's Life of Wolsey. Append. No 70, 71, 72.
.

IF the King of France had been satisfied with having delivered his subjects
from this formidable invasion, and having shown all Europe the facility with
which the internal strength of his dominions enabled him to resist the
impressions of a foreign enemy, even when seconded by the abilities and
powerful efforts of a rebellious subject, the campaign, notwithstanding the
loss of the Milanese, would have been far from ending ingloriously. But
Francis, animated with courage more becoming a soldier than a general; pushed
on by ambition, enterprizing rather than considerate; and too apt to be elated
with success; was fond of every undertaking that seemed bold and adventurous.
Such an undertaking the situation of his affairs at that juncture, naturally
presented to his view. He had under his command one of the most powerful and
best appointed armies France had ever brought into the field, which he could
not think of disbanding without having employed it in any service. The Imperial
troops had been obliged to retire almost ruined by hard duty, and disheartened
with ill success; the Milanese had been left altogether without defense; it was
not impossible to reach that country before Pescara, with his shattered forces,
could arrive there; or if fear should add speed to their retreat, they were in
no condition to make head against his fresh and numerous troops; and Milan
would now, as in former instances, submit without resistance to a bold invader.
Those considerations, which were not destitute of plausibility, appeared to his
sanguine temper to be of the utmost weight. In vain did his wisest ministers
and generals represent to him the danger of taking the field at a season so far
advanced, with an army composed chiefly of Swiss and Germans, to whose caprices
he would be subject in all his operations, and on whose fidelity his safety
must absolutely depend. In vain did Louise of Savoy advance by hasty journies
toward Provence, that she might exert all her authority in dissuading her son
from such a rash enterprise. Francis disregarded the remonstrances of his
subjects; and that he might save himself the pain of an interview with his
mother, whose counsels he had determined to reject, he began his march before
her arrival; appointing her, however, by way of atonement for that neglect, to
be regent of the kingdom during his absence. Bonnivet, by his persuasions,
contributed not a little to confirm Francis in this resolution. That favorite,
who strongly resembled his master in all the defective parts of his character,
was led by his natural impetuosity, warmly to approve of such an enterprise;
and being prompted, besides, by his impatience to revisit a Milanese lady, of
whom he had been deeply enamoured during his late expedition, he is said, by
his flattering descriptions of her beauty and accomplishments, to have inspired
Francis, who was extremely susceptible of such passions, with an equal desire
of seeing her ^euv. de Brant. tom. vi. 253.
.

THE French passed the Alps at mount Cenis; and as their success depended on
dispatch, they advanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara, who had been
obliged to take a longer and more difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was soon
informed of their intention; and being sensible that nothing but the presence
of his troops could save the Milanese, marched with such rapidity, that he
reached Alva on the same day that the French army arrived at Vercelli. Francis,
instructed by Bonnivet's error in the former campaign, advanced directly
toward Milan, where the unexpected approach of an enemy so powerful,
occasioned such consternation and disorder, that although Pescara entered the
city with some of his best troops, he found that the defense of it could not be
undertaken with any probability of success; and having thrown a garrison into
the citadel, retired through one gate, while the French were admitted at
another Mem. de Bellay, p. 81. Guic. l. 15. 278.
.

THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch disconcerted all the schemes of
defense which the Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did generals attempt
to oppose a formidable invasion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles possessed dominions more extensive than any other Prince in
Europe, and had, at this time, no other army but that which was employed in
Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative in all
his different states was so limited, and his subjects, without whose consent he
could raise no taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden themselves with
new and extraordinary impositions, that even this small body of troops was in
want of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of clothing. In such a
situation, it required all the wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara,
and the implacable resentment of Bourbon, to preserve them from sinking under
despair, and to inspire them with resolution to attempt, or sagacity to
discover what was essential to their safety. To the efforts of their genius,
and the activity of their zeal, the Emperor was more indebted for the
preservation of his Italian dominions than to his own power. Lannoy, by
mortgaging the revenues of Naples, procured some money, which was immediately
applied toward providing the army with whatever was most necessary Guic. l.
15. 280.
. Pescara, beloved and almost adored by the Spanish troops, exhorted them to
show the world, by their engaging to serve the Emperor, in that dangerous
exigency, without making any immediate demand of pay, that they were animated
with sentiments of honor very different from those of mercenary soldiers, to
which proposition, that gallant body of men, with an unexampled generosity gave
their consent Jovii Vit. Davali. lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. 621. Ulloa Vita dell
Carlo V. v. p. 94, etc. Vida dell Emper. Carlos V. per Vera y Zuniga. p. 36.
. Bourbon having raised a considerable sum, by pawning his jewels, set out for
Germany, where his influence was great, that by his presence he might hasten
the levying of troops for the Imperial service Mem. de Bellay, p. 83.
.

FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the Emperor's generals time to derive
advantage from all these operations. Instead of pursuing the enemy, who retired
to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable post, which Pescara had resolved to abandon
on his approach, he, in compliance with the opinion of Bonnivet, though
contrary to that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Tesino; a
town, indeed, of great importance, the possession of which would have opened to
him all the fertile country lying on the banks of that river. But the
fortifications of the place were strong; it was dangerous to undertake a
difficult siege at so late a season; and the Imperial generals, sensible of its
consequence, had thrown into the town a garrison of six thousand veterans,
under the command of Antonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank; of great
experience; of a patient but enterprizing courage; fertile in resources;
ambitious of distinguishing himself; and capable, for that reason, as well as
from his having been long accustomed both to obey and to command, of suffering
or performing any thing in order to procure success.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obstinacy equal to the rashness with which
he had undertaken it. During three months, every thing known to the engineers
of that age, or that could be effected by the valor of his troops, was
attempted in order to reduce the place; while Lannoy and Pescara, unable to
obstruct his operations, were obliged to remain in such an ignominious state of
inaction, that a Pasquinade was published at Rome, offering a reward to any
person who could find the Imperial army, lost in the month of October in the
mountains between France and Lombardy, and which had not been heard of since
that time Sandov. i. 608.
.

LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties under which his countrymen
labored, and the impossibility of their facing, in the field, such a powerful
army as formed the siege of Pavia, placed his only hopes of safety in his own
vigilance and valor. The efforts of both were extraordinary, and in proportion
to the importance of the place, with the defense of which he was entrusted. He
interrupted the approaches of the French by frequent and furious sallies.
Behind the breaches which their artillery made, he erected new works, that
appeared to be scarce inferior in strength to the original fortifications. He
repulsed the besiegers in all their assaults; and by his own example, brought
not only the garrison, but the inhabitants to bear the most intolerable
fatigues, and to encounter the greatest dangers without murmuring. The rigor
of the season conspired with his endeavors in retarding the progress of the
French. Francis attempting to become master of the town, by diverting the
course of the Tesino, which is its defense on one side, a sudden inundation of
the river destroyed, in one day, the labor of many weeks, and swept away all
the mounds which his army had raised with infinite toil, as well as at great
expense Guic. l. 15. 280. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING the slow progress of the besiegers, and the glory which Leyva
acquired by his gallant defense, it was not doubted but that the town would at
last be obliged to surrender. The Pope, who already considered the French arms
as superior in Italy, became impatient to disengage himself from his
connections with the Emperor, of whose designs he was extremely jealous; and to
enter into terms of friendship with Francis. As Clement's timid and cautious
temper rendered him incapable of following the bold plan which Leo had formed
of delivering Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he returned to the more
obvious and practicable scheme of employing the power of the one to balance and
to restrain that of the other. For this reason, he did not dissemble his
satisfaction at seeing the French King recover Milan, as he hoped that the
dread of such a neighbor would be some check upon the Emperor's ambition,
which no power in Italy was now able to control. He labored hard to bring
about a peace that would secure Francis in possession of his new conquests; and
as Charles, who was always inflexible in the prosecution of his schemes,
rejected the proposition with disdain, and with bitter exclamations against the
Pope, by whose persuasions, while Cardinal de Medici, he had been induced to
invade the Milanese, Clement immediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with
the King of France, in which the republic of Florence was included Guic. l.
15. 282. 285.
.

FRANCIS having by this transaction, deprived the Emperor of his two most
powerful allies, and at the same time having secured a passage for his own
troops through their territories, formed a scheme of attacking the kingdom of
Naples, hoping either to overrun that country, which was left altogether
without defense, or that at least such an unexpected invasion would oblige the
viceroy to recall part of the Imperial army out of the Milanese. For this
purpose he ordered six thousand men to march under the command of John Stuart
Duke of Albany. But Pescara foreseeing that the effect of this diversion would
depend entirely upon the operations of the armies in the Milanese, persuaded
Lannoy to disregard Albany's motions Guic. l. 15. 285.
, and to bend his whole force against the King himself; so that Francis not
only weakened his army very unseasonably by this great detachment; but incurred
the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical and extravagant projects.

MEANWHILE the garrison of Pavia was reduced to extremity; their ammunitions
and provisions began to fail; the Germans, of whom it was chiefly composed,
having received no pay for seven months Gold. Polit. Imperial. 875.
, threatened to deliver the town into the enemies hands, and could scarce be
retained from mutiny by all Leyva's address and authority. The Imperial
generals, who were no strangers to his situation, saw the necessity of marching
without loss of time to his relief. This they had now in their power: Twelve
thousand Germans, whom the zeal and activity of Bourbon taught to move with
unusual rapidity, had entered Lombardy under his command, and rendered the
Imperial army nearly equal to that of the French, greatly diminished by the
absence of the body under Albany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege, and
the rigor of the season. But the more their troops increased in number, the
more sensibly did they feel the distress arising from want of money. Far from
having funds for paying a powerful army, they had scarce what was sufficient
for defraying the charges of conducting their artillery, and of carrying their
ammunition and provisions. The abilities of the generals, however, supplied
every defect. By their own example, as well as by magnificent promises, in the
name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the troops of all the different nations
which composed their army, to take the field without pay; they engaged to lead
them directly toward the enemy; and flattered them with the certain prospect
of victory, which would at once enrich them with such royal spoils as would be
an ample reward for all their services. The soldiers, sensible that by quitting
the army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due to them, and eager to get
possession of the promised treasures, demanded a battle with all the impatience
of adventurers who fought only for plunder Eryci Peuteani Hist. Cisalpina ap.
Graevii These. Antiquit. Ital. iii. p. 1170, 1179.
.

THE Imperial generals, without suffering the ardour of their troops to cool,
advanced immediately toward the French camp. On the first intelligence of
their approach, Francis called a council of war, to deliberate what course he
ought to take. All his officers of greatest experience were unanimous in
advising him to retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy who courted it
from despair. The leaders of the Imperialists, they observed, would either be
obliged in a few weeks to disband an army, which they were unable to pay, and
which they kept together only by the hope of pillage, or the soldiers enraged
at the nonperformance of the promises to which they had trusted, would rise in
some furious mutiny which would allow them to think of nothing but their own
safety: That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some strong post, and waiting in
safety the arrival of fresh troops from France and Switzerland, might, before
the end of spring, take possession of all the Milanese, without danger, or
bloodshed. But in opposition to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was to give
counsels fatal to France during the whole campaign, represented the ignominy it
would reflect on their Sovereign if he should abandon a siege which he had
prosecuted so long, or turn his back before an enemy to whom he was still
superior in number; and insisted on the necessity of fighting the Imperialists
rather than relinquish an undertaking, on the success of which the King's
future fame depended. Unfortunately, Francis's notions of honor were delicate
to an excess that bordered on what was romantic. Having often said that he
would take Pavia, or perish in the attempt, he thought himself bound not to
depart from that resolution; and rather than expose himself to the slightest
imputation, he chose to forego all the advantages which were the certain
consequences of a retreat, and determined to wait for the Imperialists before
the walls of Pavia Guic. l. 1^. 291.
.

THE Imperial generals found the French so strongly entrenched, that
notwithstanding the powerful motives which urged them on, they hesitated long
before they ventured to attack them; but at last, the necessities of the
besieged, and the murmurs of their own soldiers obliged them to put every thing
to hazard. Never did armies engage with greater ardour, or with an higher
opinion of the importance of the battle they were going to fight; never were
troops more strongly animated with emulation, national antipathy, mutual
resentment, and all the passions which inspire obstinate bravery. On the one
hand, a gallant young Monarch, seconded by a generous nobility, and followed by
subjects to whose natural impetuosity, indignation at the opposition they had
encountered, added new force, contended for victory and honor. On the other
side, troops more completely disciplined, and conducted by generals of greater
abilities, fought from necessity, with courage heightened by despair. The
Imperialists, however, were unable to resist the first efforts of the French
valor, and their firmest battalions began to give way. But the fortune of the
day was quickly changed. The Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of the
reputation of their country for fidelity and martial glory, abandoned their
post in a cowardly manner. Levya, with his garrison, sallied out and attacked
the rear of the French during the heat of the action with such fury as threw it
into confusion; and Pescara falling on their cavalry, with the Imperial horse,
among whom he had prudently intermingled a considerable number of Spanish foot,
armed with the heavy muskets then in use, broke this formidable body by an
unusual method of attack against which they were wholly unprovided. The rout
became universal; and resistance ceased in almost every part, but where the
King was in person, who fought now, not for fame or victory, but for safety.
Though wounded in several places, and thrown from his horse, which was killed
under him, Francis defended himself on foot with an heroic courage. Many of his
bravest officers gathering round him, and endeavoring to save his life at the
expense of their own, fell at his feet. Among these was Bonnivet, the author of
this great calamity, who alone died unlamented. The King, exhausted with
fatigue, and scarce capable of farther resistance, was left almost alone,
exposed to the fury of some Spanish soldiers, strangers to his rank, and
enraged at his obstinacy. At that moment came up Pomperant, a French gentleman,
who had entered together with Bourbon into the Emperor's service, and placing
himself by the side of the Monarch against whom he had rebelled, assisted in
protecting him from the violence of the soldiers; at the same time beseeching
him to surrender to Bourbon, who was not far distant. Imminent as the danger
was which now surrounded Francis, he rejected with indignation the thoughts of
an action which would have afforded such matter of triumph to his traitorous
subject; and calling for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be near at hand, gave
up his sword to him; which he, kneeling to kiss the King's hand, received with
profound respect; and taking his own sword from his side, presented it to him,
saying, That it did not become so great a Monarch to remain disarmed in the
presence of one of the Emperor's subjects Guic. l. 15. 292. Oeuv. de Brant. vi.
3^5. Mem. de Bellay, p. 90. Sandov. Hist. i. 638, etc. P. Mart. Ep. 805, 810.
Ruscelli Lettere de Principi ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 98.
.

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of the most fatal France had ever seen.
Among these were many noblemen of the highest distinction, who chose rather to
perish than to turn their backs with dishonor. Not a few were taken prisoners,
of whom the most illustrious was Henry D'Albret, the unfortunate King of
Navarre. A small body of the rear-guard made its escape under the command of
the Duke Alenson; the feeble garrison of Milan on the first news of the defeat,
retired without being pursued, by another road; and in two weeks after the
battle, not a Frenchman remained in Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all the outward marks of honor due to
his rank and character, guarded him with the utmost attention. He was
solicitous, not only to prevent any possibility of his escaping, but afraid
that his own troops might seize his person, and detain it as the best security
for the payment of their arrears. In order to provide against both these
dangers, he conducted Francis, the day after the battle, to the strong castle
of Pizzichitone, near Cremona, committing him to the custody of Don Ferdinand
Alarcon, general of the Spanish infantry, an officer of great bravery, and of
strict honor, but remarkable for that severe and scrupulous vigilance which
such a trust required.

MEANWHILE, Francis, who formed a judgment of the Emperor's dispositions by his
own, was extremely desirous that Charles should be informed of his situation,
fondly hoping, that from his generosity or sympathy, he would obtain speedy
relief. The Imperial generals were no less impatient to give their Sovereign an
early account of the decisive victory which they had gained, and to receive his
instructions with regard to their future conduct. As the most certain and
expeditious method of conveying intelligence to Spain, at that season of the
year, was by land, Francis gave the Commendador Pennalosa, who was charged with
Lannoy's dispatches, a passport to travel through France.

CHARLES received the account of this signal and unexpected success that had
crowned his arms, with a moderation, which, if it had been real, would have
done him more honor than the greatest victory. Without uttering one word
expressive of exultation, or of intemperate joy, he retired immediately into
his chapel, and having spent an hour in offering up his thanksgivings to
heaven, returned to the presence chamber, which by that time was filled with
grandees and foreign ambassadors, assembled in order to congratulate him: He
accepted of their compliments with a modest deportment; he lamented the
misfortune of the captive King, as a striking example of the sad reverse of
fortune, to which the most powerful Monarchs are subject; he forbad any public
rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on among Christians, reserving them
until he should obtain a victory equally illustrious over the Infidels; and
seemed to take pleasure in the advantage he had gained, only as it would prove
the occasion of restoring peace to Christendom Sandov. Hist. i. 651. Ulloa Vita
dell Carlo V. p. 110.
.

CHARLES, however, had already begun to form schemes in his own mind, which
little suited such external appearances. Ambition, not generosity, was the
ruling passion in his mind; and the victory at Pavia opened such new and
unbounded prospects of gratifying it, as allured him with irresistible force:
But it being no easy matter to execute the vast designs which he meditated, he
thought it necessary, while proper measures were taking for that purpose, to
affect the greatest moderation, hoping under that veil to conceal his real
intentions from the other Princes of Europe.

MEANWHILE France was filled with consternation. The King himself had early
transmitted an account of the rout at Pavia in a letter to his mother,
delivered by Pennalosa, which contained only these words: "Madam, all is lost
except our honor." Those who survived, when they arrived from Italy, brought
such a melancholy detail of particulars, as made all ranks of men sensibly feel
the greatness and extent of the calamity. France, without its Sovereign,
without money in her treasury, without an army, without officers to command it,
and encompassed on all sides by a victorious and active enemy, seemed to be on
the very brink of destruction. But on that occasion the great abilities of
Louise the Regent saved the kingdom, which the violence of her passions had
more than once exposed to the greatest danger. Instead of giving herself up to
such lamentations as were natural to a woman so remarkable for her maternal
tenderness, she discovered all the foresight, and exerted all the activity of a
consumate politician. She assembled the nobles at Lions, and animated them by
her example no less than by her words, with such zeal in defense of their
country as its present situation required. She collected the remains of the
army which had served in Italy, ransomed the prisoners, paid their arrears, and
put them in a condition to take the field. She levied new troops, provided for
the security of the frontiers, and raised sums sufficient for defraying these
extraordinary expenses. Her chief care, however, was to appease the resentment,
or to gain the friendship of the King of England; and from that quarter, the
first ray of comfort broke in upon the French affairs.

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances with Charles or Francis, seldom
followed any regular or concerted plan of policy, but was influenced chiefly by
the caprice of temporary passions, such occurrences often happened as recalled
his attention toward that equal balance of power which it was necessary to
keep between the two contending potentates, the preservation of which he always
boasted to be his peculiar office. He had expected that his union with the
Emperor might afford him an opportunity of recovering some part of those
territories in France which had belonged to his ancestors, and for the sake of
such an acquisition he did not scruple to give his assistance toward raising
Charles to a considerable pre-eminence above Francis. He had never dreamt,
however, of any event so decisive and so fatal as the victory at Pavia, which
seemed not only to have broken, but to have annihilated the power of one of the
rivals; so that the prospect of the sudden and entire revolution which this
would occasion in the political system, filled him with the most disquieting
apprehensions. He saw all Europe in danger of being overrun by an ambitious
Prince, to whose power there now remained no counterpoise; and though he
himself might at first be admitted, in quality of an ally, to some share in the
spoils of the captive Monarch, it was easy to discern that with regard to the
manner of making the partition, as well as his security for keeping possession
of what should be allotted him, he must absolutely depend upon the will of a
confederate, to whose forces his own bore no proportion. He was sensible that
if Charles were permitted to add any considerable part of France to the vast
dominions of which he was already master, his neighborhood would be much more
formidable to England than that of the ancient French Kings; while, at the same
time, the proper balance on the continent, to which England owed both its
safety and importance, would be entirely lost. Concern for the situation of the
unhappy Monarch co-operated with these political considerations; his gallant
behavior in the battle of Pavia had excited an high degree of admiration,
which never fails of augmenting sympathy; and Henry, naturally susceptible of
generous sentiments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer of a vanquished
enemy from a state of captivity. The passions of the English minister, seconded
the inclinations of the Monarch. Wolsey, who had not forgot the disappointment
of his hopes in two successive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly to the
Emperor, thought this a proper opportunity of taking revenge; and Louise
courting the friendship of England with such flattering submissions, as were no
less agreeable to the King than to the Cardinal, Henry gave her secret
assurances that he would not lend his aid toward oppressing France, in its
present helpless state, and obliged her to promise that she would not consent
to dismember the kingdom, even in order to procure her son's liberty Mem. de
Bellay, 94. Guic. l. 16. 318. Herbert.
.

BUT as Henry's connections with the Emperor made it necessary to act in such a
manner, as to save appearances, he ordered public rejoicings to be made in his
dominions for the success of the Imperial arms; and as if he had been eager to
seize the present opportunity of ruining the French monarchy, he sent
ambassadors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles upon his victory; to put
him in mind, that he, as his ally, engaged in one common cause, was entitled to
partake in the fruits of it; and to require that in compliance with the terms
of their confederacy, he would invade Guienne with a powerful army, in order to
give him possession of that province. At the same time, he offered to send the
Princess Mary into Spain or the Low Countries, that she might be educated under
the Emperor's direction until the conclusion of the marriage agreed on between
them; and in return for that mark of his confidence, he insisted that Francis
should be delivered to him, in consequence of that article in the treaty of
Bruges, whereby each of the contracting parties was bound to surrender all
usurpers to him whose rights they had invaded. It was impossible that Henry
could expect that the Emperor would listen to these extravagant demands, which
it was neither his interest, nor in his power to grant. They appear evidently
to have been made with no other intention than to furnish him with a decent
pretext for entering into such engagements with France as the juncture required
Herbert, p. 64.
.

IT was among the Italian states, that the victory at Pavia occasioned the
greatest alarm and terror. That balance of power on which they relied for their
security, and which it had been the constant object of all their negociations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a moment. They were exposed by
their situation to feel the first effects of the uncontrouled authority Charles
had acquired. They observed many symptoms of a boundless ambition in that young
Prince, and were sensible, that as Emperor, or King of Naples, he could either
form dangerous pretensions upon each of their territories, or invade them with
great advantage. They deliberated, therefore, with much solicitude concerning
the means of raising such a force as might obstruct his progress Guic. l. 16.
300. Ruscelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74, 76, etc. Thuani Hist. lib. i. c. 11.
. But their consultations, conducted with little union, and executed with less
vigor, had no effect. Clement, instead of pursuing the measures which he had
concerted with the Venetians for securing the liberty of Italy, was so
intimidated by Lannoy's threats, or overcome by his promises, that he entered
into a separate treaty, binding himself to advance a considerable sum in return
for certain emoluments which he was to receive. The money was instantly paid;
Charles afterward refused to ratify the treaty; and the Pope remained exposed
at once to infamy and to ridicule; to the former, because he had deserted the
public cause for his private interest; to the latter, because he had been a
loser by that unworthy action Guic. l. 16. 305. Mauroceni Histor. Venet ap
Istorichi delle cose Venez. V. 131, 136.
.

HOW dishonorable soever the artifice might be which was employed in order to
defraud the Pope of this sum, it came very seasonably into the viceroy's hands,
and put it in his power to extricate himself out of an imminent danger. Soon
after the defeat of the French army, the German troops which had defended Pavia
with such meritorious courage and perseverance, growing insolent upon the fame
they had acquired, and impatient of relying any longer on fruitless promises
with which they had been so often amused, rendered themselves masters of the
town, with a resolution to keep possession of it as a security for the payment
of their arrears, and the rest of the army discovered a much stronger
inclination to assist, than to punish the mutineers. By dividing among them the
money exacted from the Pope, Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Germans; but though
this satisfied their present demands, he had so little prospect of being able
to pay them or his other forces regularly for the future, and was under such
continual apprehensions of their seizing the person of the captive King, that
not long after, he was obliged to dismiss all the Germans and Italians in the
Imperial service Guic. l. 16. p. 302.
. Thus, from a circumstance that now appears very singular, but arising
naturally from the constitution of most European governments in the sixteenth
century, while Charles was suspected by all his neighbors of aiming at
universal monarchy, and while he was really forming vast projects of this kind,
his revenues were so limited, that he could not keep on foot his victorious
army, though it did not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

DURING these transactions, Charles, whose pretensions to moderation and
disinterestedness were soon forgotten, deliberated with the utmost solicitude,
how he might derive the greatest advantages from the misfortune of his
adversary. Some of his counselors advised him to treat Francis with the
magnanimity that became a victorious Prince, and instead of taking advantage of
his situation to impose rigorous conditions, to dismiss him on such equal
terms, as would bind him for ever to his interest by the ties of gratitude and
affection, more forcible, as well as more permanent, than any which could be
formed by extorted oaths and involuntary stipulations. Such an exertion of
generosity is not, perhaps, to be expected in the conduct of political affairs,
and it was far too refined for that Prince to whom it was proposed. The more
obvious, but less splendid scheme of endeavoring to make the utmost of
Francis's calamity, had a greater number in the council to recommend it, and
suited better with the Emperor's genius. But though Charles adopted this plan,
he did not execute it in a proper manner. Instead of making one great effort to
penetrate into France with all the forces of Spain and the Low Countries;
instead of crushing the Italian states before they recovered from the
consternation which the success of his arms had occasioned; he had recourse to
the artifices of intrigue and negotiation. This proceeded partly from
necessity, partly from the natural disposition of his mind. The situation of
his finances at that time rendered it extremely difficult to carry on any
extraordinary armament; and he himself having never appeared at the head of his
armies, the command of which he had hitherto committed to his generals, was
averse from bold and martial counsels, and trusted more to the arts with which
he was acquainted. He laid, besides, too much stress upon the victory of Pavia,
as if by that event the strength of France had been annihilated, its resources
exhausted, and the kingdom itself, no less than the person of its Monarch, had
been subjected to his power.

FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the highest price upon Francis's
freedom, and having appointed the Count de Roeux to visit the captive King in
his name, he instructed him to propose the following articles, as the
conditions on which he would grant him his liberty; that he should restore
Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose ancestors it had been unjustly wrested;
that he should surrender Provence and Dauphine, that they might be erected into
an independent kingdom for the Constable Bourbon; that he should make full
satisfaction to the King of England for all his claims; and finally, renounce
the pretensions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other territory in Italy.
When Francis, who had hitherto flattered himself that he should be treated by
the Emperor with the generosity becoming one great Prince toward another,
heard these rigorous conditions, he was so transported with indignation, that
drawing his dagger hastily, he cried out, 'Twere better that a King should die
thus. Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold on his hand; but though he
soon recovered greater composure, he still declared in the most solemn manner,
that he would rather remain a prisoner during life, than purchase liberty by
such ignominious concessions Mem. de Bellay, 94. Ferrera's Hist. ix. 43.
.

THIS mortifying discovery of the Emperor's intentions, greatly augmented
Francis's chagrin and impatience under his confinement, and must have driven
him to absolute despair, if he had not laid hold of the only thing which still
could administer to him any comfort. He persuaded himself, that the conditions
which Roeux had proposed, did not flow originally from Charles himself, but
were dictated by the rigorous policy of his Spanish council, and that therefore
he might hope in one personal interview with him, to do more toward hastening
his own deliverance, than could be effected by long negociations passing
through the subordinate hands of his ministers. Relying on this supposition,
which proceeded from too favorable an opinion of the Emperor's character, he
offered to visit him in Spain, and was willing to be carried thither as a
spectacle to that haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his address to confirm
him in these sentiments; and concerted with him in secret the manner of
executing this resolution. Francis was so eager on a scheme which seemed to
open some prospect of liberty, that he furnished the galleys necessary for the
voyage, Charles being at that time unable to set any fleet to sea. The viceroy,
without communicating his intentions either to Bourbon or Pescara, conducted
his prisoner toward Genoa, under pretense of transporting him by sea to Naples;
though soon after they set sail, he ordered the pilots to steer directly for
Spain; but the wind happening to carry them near the French coast, the
unfortunate Monarch had a full prospect of his own dominions, toward which he
cast many a sorrowful and desiring look. They landed, however, in a few days at
Barcelona, and soon after, Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command, in the
Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him with
as much circumspection as ever Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. l.
16. 323.
.

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, and when he began to be sensible
of his having relied without foundation on the Emperor's generosity, Henry
VIII. concluded a treaty with the Regent of France, which afforded him some
hope of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extravagant demands had been
received at Madrid with that neglect which they deserved, and which he probably
expected. Charles, intoxicated with prosperity, no longer courted him in that
respectful and submissive manner which pleased his haughty temper. Wolsey, no
less haughty than his master, was highly irritated at the Emperor's
discontinuing his wonted caresses and professions of friendship to him. These
slight offenses, added to the weighty considerations formerly mentioned,
induced Henry to enter into a defensive alliance with Louise, in which all the
differences between him and her son were adjusted; at the same time, he engaged
that he would employ his best offices in order to procure the deliverance of
his new ally from a state of captivity Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 337.
.

WHILE the open defection of such a powerful confederate affected Charles with
deep concern, a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, which threatened
him with consequences still more fatal. The restless and intriguing genius of
Morone, chancellor of Milan, gave rise to this. His revenge had been amply
gratified by the expulsion of the French out of Italy, and his vanity no less
soothed by the re-establishment of Sforza, to whose interest he had attached
himself, in the duchy of Milan. The delays, however, and evasions of the
Imperial court, in granting Sforza the investiture of his new-acquired
territories had long alarmed Morone; these were repeated so often, and with
such apparent artifice, as became a full proof to his suspicious mind, that the
Emperor intended to strip his master of that rich country which he had
conquered in his name. Though Charles, in order to quiet the Pope and the
Venetians, no less jealous of his designs than Morone, gave Sforza, at last,
the investiture which had been so long desired; the charter was clogged with so
many reservations, and subjected him to such grievous burdens, as rendered the
Duke of Milan a dependant on the Emperor, rather than a vassal of the empire,
and afforded him scarce any other security for his possessions, than the good
pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such an accession of power as would have
accrued from the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of Naples, was
considered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of Italy no less than to his own
power and importance. Full of this idea, he began to revolve in his mind the
possibility of rescuing Italy from the yoke of foreigners, the darling scheme,
as has been already observed, of the Italian politicians in that age, and which
it was the great object of their ambition to accomplish. If to the glory of
having been the chief instrument of driving the French out of Milan, he could
add that of delivering Naples from the dominion of the Spaniards, he thought
that nothing would be wanting to complete his fame. His fertile genius soon
suggested to him a project for that purpose; a difficult indeed, and daring
one, but for that very reason, more agreeable to his bold and enterprizing
temper.

BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged at Lannoy's carrying the French King
into Spain without their knowledge. The former, being afraid that the two
Monarchs might, in his absence, conclude some treaty in which his interests
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid, in order to guard against
that danger. The latter, on whom the command of the army now devolved, was
obliged to remain in Italy; but in every company, he gave vent to his
indignation against the viceroy in expressions full of rancour and contempt; he
accused him in a letter to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of danger, and
of insolence after a victory, toward the obtaining of which he had contributed
nothing either by his valor or his conduct; nor did he abstain from bitter
complaints against the Emperor himself, who had not discovered, as he imagined,
a sufficient sense of his merit, nor bestowed any adequate reward on his
services. It was on this disgust of Pescara, that Morone founded his whole
system. He knew the boundless ambition of his nature, the vast extent of his
abilities in peace as well as war, and the intrepidity of his mind capable
alike of undertaking and of executing the most desperate designs. The
cantonment of the Spanish troops on the frontier of the Milanese, gave occasion
to many interviews between him and Morone, in which the latter took care
frequently to turn the conversation to the transactions subsequent to the
battle of Pavia, a subject upon which the Marquis entered willingly and with
passion; and Morone observing his resentment to be uniform and violent,
artfully pointed out and aggravated every circumstance that could increase its
fury. He painted in the strongest colors the Emperor's want of discernment, as
well as of gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him, and in allowing that
presumptuous Fleming to dispose of the captive King without consulting the man
to whose bravery and wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory of having him in
his power. Having warmed him by such discourses, he then began to insinuate,
that now was the time to be avenged for those insults, and to acquire immortal
renown as the deliverer of his country from the oppression of strangers; that
the states of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of
Barbarians, were at last ready to combine in order to vindicate their own
independence; that their eyes were fixed on him as the only leader whose genius
and good fortune could ensure the happy success of that noble enterprise; that
the attempt was no less practicable than glorious, it being in his power so to
disperse the Spanish infantry, the only body of the Emperor's troops in Italy,
through the villages of the Milanese, that, in one night they might be
destroyed by the people, who, having suffered much from their exactions and
insolence, would gladly undertake this service; that he might then, without
opposition, take possession of the throne of Naples, the elevation destined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of liberty to Italy; that the Pope,
of whom that kingdom held, and whose predecessors had disposed of it on many
former occasion, would willingly grant him the right of investiture; that the
Venetians, the Florentines, the Duke of Milan, to whom he had communicated the
scheme, together with the French, would be the guarantees of his right; that
the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the government of one of their
countrymen, whom they loved and admired, to that odious dominion of strangers,
to which they had been so long subjected; and that the Emperor, astonished at a
blow so unexpected, would find that he had neither troops nor money to resist
such a powerful confederacy Guic. xvi. l. 325. Jovii Vita Davali. p. 417. Oeuv.
de B antome, iv. 171. Ruscelli Lettere de Princ* ii. 91. Thuani Hist. lib. i.
c. 11. P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 207.
.

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent of the scheme, listened attentively
to Morone, but with the countenance of a man lost in profound and anxious
thought. On the one hand, the infamy of betraying his Sovereign under whom he
bore such high command, deterred him from the attempt; on the other, the
prospect of obtaining a crown allured him to venture upon it. After continuing
a short space in suspense, the least commendable motives, as is usual after
such deliberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed over honor. In order,
however, to through a color of decency on his conduct, he insisted that some
learned casuists should give their opinion, "Whether it was lawful for a
subject to take arms against his immediate Sovereign, in obedience to the Lord
Paramount of whom the kingdom itself was held." Such a resolution of the case,
as he expected, was soon obtained from the divines and civilians both of Rome
and Miland; the negotiation went forward; and measures seemed to be taking with
great spirit for the speedy execution of the design.

MEANWHILE Pescara, either shocked at the treachery of the action which he was
going to commit, or despairing of its success, began to entertain thoughts of
abandoning the engagements he had come under. The indisposition of Sforza, who
happened at that time to be taken ill of a distemper which was thought mortal,
confirmed this resolution, and determined him to make known the whole
conspiracy to the Emperor, deeming it more prudent to expect the duchy of
Milan from him as the reward of this discovery, than to aim at a kingdom to be
purchased by a series of crimes. This resolution, however, proved the source of
actions scarce less criminal and ignominious. The Emperor, who had already
received full information concerning the conspiracy from other hands, seemed to
be highly pleased with Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to continue his
intrigues for some time with the Pope and Sforza, both that he might discover
their intentions more fully, and be able to convict them of the crime with
greater certainty. Pescara, conscious of guilt, as well as sensible how
suspicious his long silence must have appeared at Madrid, durst not decline
that dishonorable office; and to his eternal disgrace, was obliged to act the
meanest of all parts, that of seducing with a purpose to betray. Considering
the abilities of the persons with whom he had to deal, the part was scarce less
difficult, than base; but he acted it with such address, as to deceive even the
penetrating eye of Morone, who relying with full confidence on his sincerity,
visited him at Novara, in order to put the last hand to their machinations.
Pescara received him in an apartment where Antonio de Leyva was placed behind
the tapestry, that he might overhear and bear witness to their conversation; as
Morone was returning homewards, that officer suddenly appeared, and to his
astonishment arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name. He was conducted to
the castle of Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been his accomplice, had
now the assurance to interrogate him as his judge. At the same time, the
Emperor declared Sforza to have forfeited all right to the duchy of Milan, by
his engaging in a conspiracy against the Sovereign of whom he held; Pescara, by
his command, seized on every place in the Milanese, except the castles of
Cremona and Milan, which the unfortunate Duke attempting to defend, were
closely blockaded by the Imperial troops Guic l. 16. 329. Jovii Hist. 319.
Capella, lib. v. p. 200.
.

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, instead of stripping the Emperor of
what he already possessed in Italy, contributed to extend his dominions in that
country, it showed him the necessity of coming to some agreement with the
French King, unless he would draw on himself a confederacy of all Europe, which
the progress of his arms, and his boundless and undisguised ambition, filled
with general alarm. He had not hitherto treated Francis with the generosity
which that monarch expected, and scarce with the decency due to his station.
Instead of displaying the sentiments becoming a great Prince, he seems to have
acted with the mercenary art of a Corsair, who by the rigorous usage of his
prisoners, endeavors to draw from them an high price for their ransom. The
captive King was confined in an old castle, under a keeper whose formal
austerity of manners rendered his vigilance still more disgustful. He was
allowed no exercise but that of riding on a mule, surrounded with armed guards
on horseback. Charles, on pretense of its being necessary to attend the Cortes
assembled in Toledo, had gone to reside in that city, and suffered several
weeks to elapse without visiting Francis, though he solicited an interview with
the most pressing and submissive importunity. So many indignities made a deep
impression on an high-spirited Prince; he began to loose all relish for his
usual amusements; his natural gaiety of temper forsook him; and after
languishing for some time, he was seized with a dangerous fever, during the
violence of which he complained constantly of the unexpected and unprincely
rigor with which he had been treated, often exclaiming, that now the Emperor
would have the satisfaction of his dying in his hands, without having once
deigned to see his face. The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, and
informed the Emperor that they saw no hopes of his recovery, unless he were
gratified with regard to that point on which he seemed to be so strongly bent.
Charles, solicitous to preserve a life, with which all his prospects of farther
advantage from the victory at Pavia must have terminated, immediately consulted
his ministers concerning the course to be taken. In vain did the chancellor
Gattinara, the most able among them, represent to him the indecency of his
visiting Francis, if he did not intend to set him at liberty immediately upon
equal terms; in vain did he point out the infamy to which he would be exposed,
if motives of avarice or ambition should prevail on him to give the captive
Monarch this mark of attention and sympathy, for which humanity and generosity
had pleaded so long without effect. The Emperor, less delicate, or less
solicitous about reputation than his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his
prisoner. The interview was short; Francis being too weak to bear a long
conversation. Charles accosted him in terms full of affection and respect, and
gave him such promises of speedy deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have reflected the greatest honor upon him, if they had flowed from another
source. Francis grasped at them with the eagerness natural in his situation;
and cheared with this gleam of hope began to revive from that moment, and soon
recovered his wonted health Guic. l. 16. 339. Sandov. Hist. i. 665.
.

HE had soon the mortification to find, that his confidence in the Emperor was
not better founded than formerly. Charles returned instantly to Toledo; all
negociations were carried on by his ministers; and Francis was kept in as
strict custody as ever. A new indignity, and that very galling, was added to
all these he had already suffered. Bourbon arrived in Spain about this time,
Charles, who had so long refused to visit the King, received his rebellious
subject with the most studied respect. He met him without the gates of Toledo,
embraced him with the greatest affection, and placing him on his left hand,
conducted him to his apartment. These marks of honor to him, were so many
insults to the unfortunate Monarch; which he felt in a very sensible manner. It
afforded him some consolation, however, to observe that the sentiments of the
Spaniards differed widely from those of their Sovereign. That generous people
detested Bourbon's crime; and notwithstanding his great talents and important
services, they shunned all intercourse with him to such a degree, that Charles
having desired the Marquis de Villena to permit Bourbon to reside in his palace
while the court remained in Toledo, he politely replied, "That he could not
refuse gratifying the Emperor in that request;" but added with a Castilian
dignity of mind, "That he must not be surprised if the moment the constable
departed, he should burn to the ground a house, which having been polluted by
the presence of a traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man of honor Guic.
l. ^vi. 335.
.

THE Emperor himself, nevertheless, seemed to have it much at heart to reward
Bourbon's services in a signal manner. But as Bourbon insisted, in the first
place, on the accomplishment of his promise of giving him in marriage his
sister Eleanora, Queen Dowager of Portugal, the honor of which alliance had
been one of his chief inducements to rebel against his lawful Sovereign; as
Francis, in order to prevent such a dangerous union, had offered before he left
Italy, to marry that Princess; and as Eleanora discovered an inclination rather
to match with a powerful Monarch, than with his exiled subject; all these
interfering circumstances created great embarassment to Charles, and left him
scarce any hope of extricating himself with decency. But the death of Pescara,
who, at the age of thirty-six, left behind him the reputation of being one of
the greatest generals and ablest politicians of that century, happened
opportunely at this juncture for his relief. By that event, the command of the
army in Italy became vacant, and Charles, always fertile in his resources,
persuaded Bourbon, who was in no condition to dispute his will, to accept the
office of general in chief there, together with a grant of the duchy of Milan
forfeited by Sforza, and in return for these, to relinquish all hopes of
marrying the Queen of Portugal Sandov. Hist. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv 249.
.

THE chief obstacle that stood in the way of Francis's liberty, was the
Emperor's insisting so peremptorily on the restitution of Burgundy, as a
preliminary to that event. Francis declared that he would never consent to
dismember his kingdom; and that if even he should so far forget the duties of a
Monarch, as to come to such a resolution, the fundamental laws of the kingdom
would prevent its taking effect. On his part, he was willing to make an
absolute cession to the Emperor of all his pretensions in Italy and the
Low Countries; he promised to restore Bourbon all his lands which had been
confiscated; he renewed his proposal of marrying the Emperor's sister, the
Queen Dowager of Portugal; and engaging to pay a great sum by ransom for his
own person. But all mutual esteem and confidence between the two Monarchs were
now entirely lost; there appeared, on the one hand, a rapacious ambition,
laboring to avail itself of every favorable circumstance; on the other,
suspicion and resentment, standing perpetually on their guard; so that the
prospect of bringing their negociations to an issue, seemed to be far distant.
The Duchess of Alencon, the French King's sister, whom Charles permitted to
visit her brother in his confinement, employed all her address, in order to
procure his liberty on more reasonable terms: Henry of England interposed his
good offices to the same purpose; but both with so little success, that Francis
in despair, took suddenly the resolution of resigning his crown with all its
rights and prerogatives to his son the Dauphin, determining rather to end his
days in a prison, than to purchase his freedom by concessions unworthy of a
King. The deed for this purpose he signed with legal formality at Madrid,
empowering his sister to carry it into France, that it might be registered in
all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at the same time, intimating his
intention to the Emperor, he desired him to name the place of his confinement,
and to assign him a proper number of attendants during the remainder of his
days This paper is published in Memoires Historiques, etc. par M. l'Abbe
Raynal, tom. ii. p. 151.
.

THIS resolution of the French King had great effect; Charles began to be
sensible, that by pushing rigor to excess, he might defeat his own measures,
and instead of the vast advantages he hoped to draw from ransoming a powerful
Monarch, he might at last find in his hands a Prince without dominions or
revenues. About the same time, one of the King of Navarre's domestics happened
by an extraordinary exertion of fidelity, courage and address, to procure his
master an opportunity of escaping from the prison in which his master had been
confined ever since the battle of Pavia. This convinced the Emperor, that the
most vigilant attention of his officers might be eluded by the ingenuity or
boldness of Francis, or his attendants, and one unlucky hour might deprive him
of all the advantages which he had been so solicitous to obtain. By these
considerations, he was induced to abate somewhat of his former demands. On the
other hand, Francis's impatience under confinement daily increased; and having
received certain intelligence of a powerful league forming against his rival in
Italy, he grew more compliant with regard to concessions, trusting, that if he
could once obtain his liberty, he would soon be in a condition to resume
whatever he had yielded.

AS these were the views and sentiments of the two Monarchs, the treaty which
procured Francis his liberty was signed at Madrid on the fourteenth of January,
one thousand five hundred and twenty-six. The article with regard to Burgundy,
which had hitherto created the greatest difficulty, was compromised, Francis
engaging to restore that duchy with all its dependencies in full sovereignty
to the Emperor; and Charles consenting that this restitution should not be made
till the King was set at liberty; in order to secure the performance of this,
as well as the other conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the same
instant he himself was released, he would deliver as hostages to the Emperor,
his eldest son the Dauphin, his second son the Duke of Orleans, or in lieu of
the latter, twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by Charles. The other
articles swelled to a great number, and though not of such importance, were
extremely rigorous. Among these the most remarkable were, that Francis should
renounce all his pretensions in Italy; that he should disclaim any title which
he had to the sovereignty of Flanders and Artois; that within six weeks after
his release, he should restore to Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods,
moveable and immovable, and make them full reparation for the damages they had
sustained by the confiscation of them; that he should use his interest with
Henry D'Albret to relinquish his pretensions to the crown of Navarre, and
should not for the future assist him in any attempt to recover it; that there
should be established between the Emperor and Francis a league of perpetual
friendship and consederacy, with a promise of mutual assistance in every case
of necessity. That in corroboration of this union, Francis should marry the
Emperor's sister, the Queen Dowager of Portugal; that Francis should cause all
the articles of this treaty to be ratified by the states, and registered in the
parliaments of his kingdom; that upon the Emperor's receiving this
ratification, the hostages should be set at liberty; but in their place, the
Duke of Angouleme, the King's third son, should be delivered to Charles, that
in order to manifest, as well as to strengthen the amity between the two
Monarchs, he might be educated at the Imperial court; and that if Francis did
not, within the time limited, fulfill the stipulations in the treaty, he should
promise, upon his honor and oath, to return into Spain, and to surrender
himself again a prisoner to the Emperor Recueil des Trait. tom. ii. 112. Ulloa
Vita dell Carlo V. p. 102, etc.
.

BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that he had not only effectually
humbled his rival, but that he had taken such precautions as would for ever
prevent his reattaining any formidable degree of power. The opinion, which the
wisest politicians formed concerning it, was very different; they could not
persuade themselves that Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would execute
these articles against which he had struggled so long, and to which even amidst
the horrors of captivity he had consented with such reluctance. Ambition and
resentment, they knew, would conspire in prompting him to violate the hard
conditions to which he had been constrained to submit; nor would arguments and
casuistry be wanting to represent that which was so manifestly advantageous, to
be necessary and just. If one part of Francis's conduct had been known, at that
time, this opinion might have been founded, not in conjecture, but in
certainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, he assembled such of his
counselors as were then in Madrid, and having exacted from them a solemn oath
of secrecy, he made a long enumeration in their presence of all the
dishonorable arts, as well as unprincely rigor, which the Emperor had
employed in order to ensnare or intimidate him. For that reason, he took a
formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his consent to the treaty should
be considered as an involuntary deed, and be deemed null and void Recueil des
Trait. tom. ii. p. 107.
. By this disingenuous artifice, for which even the treatment he had received
was no apology, Francis endeavored to satisfy his honor and conscience in
signing the treaty, and providing at the same time a pretext on which to break
it.

MEANWHILE, great were the outward demonstrations of love and confidence
between the two Monarchs; they appeared often together in public; they
frequently had long conferences in private; they traveled in the same litter,
and joined in the same amusements. But amidst these signs of peace and
friendship, the Emperor still harbored suspicion in his mind. Though the
ceremonies of the marriage between Francis and the Queen of Portugal were
performed soon after the conclusion of the treaty, Charles would not permit him
to consummate it until the return of the ratification from France. Even then
Francis was not allowed to be at full liberty; his guards were still continued;
and while he was caressed as a brother-in-law, he was still watched like a
prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive observers, that an union, in the very
beginning of which, there might be discerned such symptoms of jealousy and
distrust, could not be cordial, or of long continuance Guic. l. 16. 353.
.

ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty, the Regent's ratification of it
was brought from France; and that wise Princess, preferring, on this occasion,
the public good to domestic affection, informed her son, that instead of the
twelve noblemen named in the treaty, she had sent the Duke of Orleans along
with his brother the Dauphin to the frontier, as the kingdom could suffer
nothing by the absence of a child, but must be left almost incapable of
defense, if deprived of its ablest statesmen, and most experienced generals,
whom Charles had artfully included in his nomination. At last Francis took
leave of the Emperor, whose suspicion of the King's sincerity increasing, as
the time of putting it to the proof approached, he endeavored to bind him
still faster by exacting new promises, which after those he had already made,
the French Monarch was not slow to grant. He set out from Madrid, a place which
the remembrance of many afflicting circumstances rendered peculiarly odious to
him, with the joy natural on such an occasion, and began the long-wished-for
journey toward his own dominions. He was escorted by a body of horse under the
command of Alarcon, who, as the King drew near the frontiers of France, guarded
him with more scrupulous exactness than ever. When he arrived at the river
Andaye, which separates the two kingdoms, Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank
with a guard of horse equal in number to Alarcon's. An empty bark was moored in
the middle of the stream; the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
banks; at the same instant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put off from the
Spanish, and Lautrec with the same number from the French side of the river;
the former had the King in his boat; the latter, the Dauphin and Duke of
Orleans; they met in the empty vessel; the exchange was made in a moment;
Francis, after a short embrace to his children leaped into Lautrec's boat, and
reached the French shore. He mounted that instant a Turkish horse, waved his
hand over his head, and with a joyful voice crying aloud several times, "I am
yet a King," galloped full speed to St. John de Luz, and from thence to
Bayonne. This event, no less impatiently desired by the French nation than by
their Monarch, happened on the eighteenth of March, a year and twenty-two days
after the fatal battle of Pavia Sandov. Hist. i. 735. Guic. l. 16. 355.
.

SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of Francis, and permitted him to begin
his journey toward his own dominions, he set out for Seville, in order to
solemnize his marriage with Isabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late King of
Portugal, and the sister of John III. who had succeeded him in the throne of
that kingdom. Isabella was a Princess of uncommon beauty and accomplishments;
and as the Cortes both in Castile and Aragon had warmly solicited their
Sovereign to marry, the choice of a wife so nearly allied to the royal blood of
both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable to his subjects. The Portuguese, fond
of this new connection with the first Monarch in Christendom, granted him an
extraordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting to nine hundred thousand crowns, a
sum, which, in the situation of his affairs at that juncture, was of no small
consequence to the Emperor. The marriage was celebrated with that splendour and
gaiety, which became a great and youthful Prince. Charles lived with Isabella
in perfect harmony, and treated her on all occasions with much distinction and
regard Ulloa Vita di ^arlo V. p. 106. Belcarius Com. Rer. Gallic. p. 565.
Spalatinus ap. Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. ii. 1081.
.

DURING these transactions, Charles could scarce give any attention to the
affairs of Germany, though it was torn in pieces by commotions, which
threatened the most dangerous consequences. The feudal institutions still
subsisted almost unimpaired in the empire. The property of lands was vested in
the Princes, and free-barons. Their vassals held of them by the strictest and
most limited tenures; while the great body of the people was kept in a state
but little removed from absolute servitude. In some places of Germany, people
of the lowest class were so entirely in the power of their masters, as to be
subject to personal and domestic slavery, the most rigorous form of that
wretched state. In other provinces, particularly in Bohemia and Lusatia, the
peasants were bound to remain on the lands to which they belonged, and making
part of the estate, were transferred like any other property, from one hand to
another. Even in Suabia, and the other countries on the banks of the Rhine,
where their condition was most tolerable, the peasants not only paid the full
rent of their farms to the landlord; but if they chose either to change the
place of their abode, or to follow a new profession, they were obliged to
purchase this privilege at a certain price. Besides this, all grants of lands
to peasants expired at their death, without descending to their posterity. Upon
that event, the landlord had a right to the best of their cattle, and of their
furniture; and their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of the grant, were
obliged to pay large sums by way of fine. These exactions, though grievous,
were borne with patience, because they were customary and ancient: But when the
progress of elegance and luxury, as well as the changes introduced into the art
of war came to increase the expense of government, and made it necessary for
Princes to levy occasional or stated taxes on their subjects, such impositions
being new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany, these duties being laid
chiefly upon beer, wine, and other necessaries of life, affected the common
people in the most sensible manner. The addition of such a load to their former
burdens, drove them to despair. It was to the valor inspired by resentment
against impositions of this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of their
liberty in the fourteenth century. The same cause had excited the peasants in
several other provinces in Germany to rebel against their superiors toward the
end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and though these
insurrections were not attended with like success, they could not however be
quelled without much difficulty and bloodshed Seckend. lib. ii. p. 2. 6.
.

BY these checks, the spirit of the peasants was overawed rather than subdued;
and their grievances multiplying continually, they ran to arms this year, with
the most frantic rage. Their first appearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The
peasants in the adjacent country flocked to their standard with the ardour and
impatience natural to men, who having groaned long under oppression, beheld at
last some prospect of deliverance; and the contagion spreading from province to
province, reached almost every part of Germany. Wherever they came, they
plundered the monasteries; wasted the lands of their superiors; razed their
castles; and massacred without mercy all persons of noble birth who were so
unhappy as to fall into their hands Petr. Crinitus de Bello Rusticano. ap.
Freher. Script. Rer. Germ. Argent. 1717. vol. iii. p. 243.
. Having intimidated their oppressors, as they imagined, by the violence of
these proceedings, they began to consider what would be the most proper and
effectual method of securing themselves for the future from their tyrannical
exactions. With this view, they drew up and published a memorial, containing
all their demands, and declared, that while arms were in their hands, they
would either persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full satisfaction with
regard to these. The chief articles were, that they might have liberty to choose
their own pastors; that they might be freed from the payment of all tithes but
those of corn; that they might no longer be considered as the slaves or bondmen
of their superiors; that the liberty of hunting and fishing might be common;
that the great forests might not be regarded as private property, but be open
for the use of all; that they might be delivered from the unusual burden of
taxes under which they labored; that the administration of justice might be
rendered less rigorous and more impartial; that the encroachments of the nobles
upon meadows and commons might be restrained Sleid. Hist. p. 90.
.

MANY of these demands were extremely reasonable; and being urged by such
formidable numbers, might have met with some redress. But those vast unwieldy
bodies, assembled in different places, had neither union, conduct, nor vigor.
They were led by persons of the lowest rank without skill in war, or knowledge
of what was necessary for accomplishing their designs; and all their exploits
were distinguished by a brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose this, the Princes
and nobles of Suabia and the Lower Rhine raised their vassals, and attacking
some of the mutineers with open force, and others by surprise, cut to pieces,
or dispersed all who infested those provinces; so that the peasants, after
ruining the open country, and losing upwards of twenty thousand of their
associates in the field, were obliged to return to their habitations with less
hope than ever of relief from their grievances Seckend. lib. ii. p. 10. Petr.
Gnodalius de Rusticanorum Tumultu in Germania ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p.
131, etc.
.

THESE commotions happened at first in provinces of Germany, where Luther's
opinions had made little progress; and being excited wholly by political
causes, had no connection with the disputed points in religion. But the frenzy
reaching at last those countries in which the Reformation was established,
derived new strength from circumstances peculiar to them, and rose to a still
greater pitch of extravagance. The Reformation, wherever it was received,
increased that bold and innovating spirit to which it owed its birth. Men who
had the courage to overturn a system supported by every thing which can command
respect or reverence, were not to be overawed by any authority, however great
or venerable. After having been accustomed to consider themselves as judges of
the most important doctrines in religion, to examine these freely, and to
reject, without scruple, what appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for
them to turn the same daring and inquisitive eye toward government, and to
think of rectifying whatever disorders or imperfections were discovered there.
And as religious abuses had been reformed in several places without the
permission of the magistrate, it was an easy transition to attempt the redress
of political grievances in the same manner.

NO sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break out in Thuringia, a province
subject to the Elector of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were mostly converts
to Lutheranism, than it assumed a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Muncer,
one of Luther's disciples having established himself in that country, had
acquired a wonderful ascendant over the minds of the people. He propagated
among them the wildest and most enthusiastic notions, but such as tended
manifestly to inspire them with boldness, and lead them to sedition. "Luther,"
he told them, "had done more hurt than good to religion. He had, indeed,
rescued the church from the yoke of Popery, but his doctrines encouraged, and
his life set an example of the utmost licentiousness of manners. In order to
avoid vice," says he, "men must practice perpetual mortification. They must put
on a grave countenance, speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious in
(...) ^^^tment. Such as prepare their hearts in this manner, may expect that
the Supreme Being will direct their steps, and by some visible sign discover
his will to them; if that illumination be at any time withheld, we may
expostulate with the Almighty, who deals with us so harshly, and remind him of
his promises. This expostulation and anger will be highly acceptable to God,
and will at last prevail on him to guide us with the same unerring hand that
guided the patriarchs of old. Let us beware, however, of offending him by our
arrogance; but as all men are equal in his eye, let them return to that
condition of equality in which he formed them, and having all things in common,
let them live together like brethren, without any marks of subordination or
pre-eminence Seckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Sleid. Hist. p. 83.
."

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they flattered so many passions in the human
heart, as to make a deep impression. To aim at nothing more than abridging the
power of the nobles was now considered as a trifling and partial reformation,
not worth the contending for; it was proposed to level every distinction among
mankind, and by abolishing property, to reduce them to their natural state of
equality, in which all should receive their subsistence from one common stock.
Muncer assured them, that the design was approved of by Heaven, and that the
Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its success. The peasants set about
the execution of it, not only with the rage which animated those of their order
in other parts of Germany, but with the ardour that enthusiasm inspires. They
deposed the magistrates in all the cities of which they were masters; seized
the lands of the nobles; and obliged such of them as they got into their hands,
to put on the dress commonly worn by peasants, and instead of their former
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given to people in the lowest
class of life. Vast numbers engaged in this wild undertaking; but Muncer, their
leader and their prophet, was destitute of the abilities necessary for
conducting it. He had all the extravagance, but not the courage, which
enthusiasts usually possess. It was with difficulty he could be persuaded to
take the field; and though he soon (...) together eight thousand men, he
suffered himself to be surrounded by a body of cavalry under the command of the
Elector of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, and Duke of Brunswick. These
Princes, unwilling to shed the blood of their deluded subjects, sent a young
nobleman to their camp, with the offer of a general pardon, if they would
immediately lay down their arms, and deliver up the authors of the sedition.
Muncer, alarmed at this, began to harangue them with his usual vehemence,
exhorting them not to trust these deceitful promises of their oppressors, nor
to desert the cause of God, and of Christian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger made a deeper impression on the peasants than
his eloquence, and confusion and terror were visible in every face, when a
rainbow, which was the emblem the mutineers had painted on their colors,
happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with admirable presence of mind,
laid hold of that incident, and suddenly raised his eyes and hands toward
heaven, "Behold," cries he, with an elevated voice, "the sign which God has
given. There is the pledge of your safety, and a token that the wicked shall be
destroyed." The fanatical multitude set up instantly a great shout, as if
victory had been certain; and passing in a moment from one extreme to another,
murdered the unfortunate nobleman who had come with the offer of pardon, and
demanded to be led toward the enemy. The Princes enraged at this shocking
violation of the laws of war, prevented them by beginning the attack; but the
behavior of the peasants in the combat was not such as might have been
expected either from their ferocity or confidence of success; an undisciplined
rabble was no equal match for well-trained troops; above five thousand were
slain in the field, almost without making resistance; the rest fled, and among
the foremost Muncer, their general. He was taken the next day, and being
condemned to such punishments as his crimes had deserved, he suffered them with
a poor and dastardly spirit. His death put an end to the insurrections of the
peasants which had filled Germany with such terror Sleid. Hist. p. 34. Seckend.
lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius Tumult. Rustican. 155.
; but the enthusiastic notions which he had scattered were not extirpated, and
produced, not long after, effects more memorable, as well as more extravagant.

DURING these commotions, Luther acted with exemplary prudence and moderation;
like a common parent, solicitous about the welfare of both parties, without
sparing the faults or errors of either. On the one hand, he addressed a
monitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to treat their dependants with
greater humanity and indulgence. On the other, he severely censured the
seditious spirit of the peasants, advising them not to murmur at hardships
inseparable from their condition, nor to seek for redress by any but legal
means Sleid. Hist. p. 87.
.

LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a Boria, a nun of a noble family, who
having thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister, happened this year, and
was far from meeting with the same approbation. Even his most devoted followers
thought this indecent at a time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned it with any softer appellation
than that of incestuous or profane. Luther himself was sensible of the
impression it had made to his disadvantage; but being satisfied with his own
conduct, he bore the censure of his friends, and the reproaches of his
adversaries, with his usual fortitude Seckend lib. ii. p. 15.
.

THIS year the Reformation lost its first protector, Frederick, Elector of
Saxony; but the blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was succeeded by his
brother John, a more avowed and zealous, though less able patron of Luther and
his doctrines.

ANOTHER event happened about the same time, which, as it occasioned a
considerable change in the state of Germany, must be traced back to its source.
While the frenzy of the Crusades possessed all Europe during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, several orders of relig^^ ^^nighthood were founded in
defense of the Christian (...) against Heathens and Infidels. Among these the
Teutonic order in Germany was one of the most illustrious, the knights of which
distinguished themselves greatly in all the wild enterprises carried on in the
Holy Land. Being driven at last from their settlements in the east, they were
obliged to return to their native country. Their zeal and valor, were too
impetuous to remain long inactive. They invaded, on very slight pretenses, the
province of Prussia, the inhabitants of which were still idolaters; and having
completed the conquest of it about the middle of the thirteenth century, held
it many years as a fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce contests arose
during this period, between the grand-masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former struggling for independence, while the latter asserted their
right of sovereignty with great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the house or
Brandenburgh, who was elected grand-master in the year one thousand five
hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, maintained a long war with
Sigismund, King of Poland; but having become an early convert to Luther's
doctrines, this gradually lessened his zeal for the interests of his
fraternity, so that he took the opportunity of the confusions in the empire,
and the absence of the Emperor, to conclude a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to
his private emolument. By it, that part of Prussia which belonged to the
Teutonic order, was erected into a secular and hereditary duchy, and the
investiture of it granted to Albert, who, in return, bound himself to do homage
for it to the Kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately after this, he made
public profession of the reformed religion, and married a Princess of Denmark.
The Teutonic knights exclaimed so loudly against the treachery of their
grandmaster, that he was put under the ban of the empire; but he still kept
possession of the province he had usurped, and transmitted it to his posterity.
In process of time this rich inheritance fell to the Electoral branch of the
family, all dependence on the crown of Poland was shaken off, and the Margraves
of Brandenburgh, having assumed the title of Kings of Prussia, have not only
risen to an equality with the first Princes in Germany, but take their rank
among the great Monarchs of Europe Sl^id. Hist. p. 98. Pseffel Abrege de Phist.
de droit Publ. p. 605, etc.
.

UPON the return of the French King to his dominions, the eyes of all the
powers in Europe were fixed upon him, that by observing his first motions, they
might form a judgment concerning his subsequent conduct. They were not held
long in suspense. Francis, as soon as he arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King
of England, thanking him for his zealous and affectionate interposition in his
favor, to which he acknowledged that he owed the recovery of his liberty. Next
day the Emperor's ambassadors demanded audience, and in their master's name,
required him to issue such orders as were necessary for carrying the treaty of
Madrid into full and immediate execution; he coldly answered, That though for
his own part he determined religiously to perform all he had promised, the
treaty contained so many articles relative not to himself alone, but affecting
the interests of the French monarchy, that he could not take any farther step
without consulting the states of his kingdom, and that some time would be
necessary in order to reconcile their minds to the hard conditions which he had
consented to ratify Mem. de Bellay, p 97.
. This reply was considered as no obscure discovery of his being resolved to
elude the treaty; and the compliment paid to Henry, appeared a very proper step
toward securing the assistance of that Monarch in the war with the Emperor, to
which such a resolution would certainly give rise. These circumstances, added
to the explicit declarations which Francis made in secret to the ambassadors
from several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied them that their conjectures
with regard to his conduct had been just, and that instead of intending to
execute an unreasonable treaty, he was eager to seize the first opportunity of
revenging those injuries which had compelled him to feign an approbation of it.
Even the doubts, and fears, and scruples which used on other occasions, to hold
Clement in a state of uncertainty, were dissipated by Fran^^s seeming imparte
(...) to break through all his engagements with the ^mperor. The situation,
indee^^ of affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the Pope to hesitate
long. Sforza was still besieged by the Imperialists in ^^stic of Milan. That
feeble Prince, deprived now of Morone's advice, and unprovided with every thing
necessary for defense, found means to inform Clement and the Venetians that he
must soon surrender, if they did not come to his relief. The Imperial troops,
as they had received no pay since the battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in
the Milanese, levying such exorbitant contributions in that duchy, as
amounted, if we may rely on Guiccardini's calculation, to no less a sum than
five thousand ducats a day Guic. l. 17. 360.
; nor was it to be doubted, but that the soldiers, as soon as the castle should
submit, would choose to leave a ruined country, which scarce afforded them
subsistence, that they might take possession of more comfortable quarters in
the fertile and untouched territories of the Pope and Venetians. The assistance
of the French King was the only thing which could either save Sforza, or enable
them to protect their own dominions from the insults of the Imperial troops.

FOR these reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, and Duke of Milan were equally
impatient to come to (...) agreement with Francis, who, on his part, was no
less desirous of acquiring so considerable an accession both of strength and
reputation as such a confederacy would bring along with it. The chi^ objects of
this alliance, which was concluded at Cognac on the twenty-second of May,
though kept secret for some time, were to oblige the Emperor to set at liberty
the French King's sons, upon payment of a reasonable ransom, and to
re-establish Sforza in the quiet possession of the Milanese. If Charles should
refuse either of these, the contracting parties bound themselves to bring into
the field an army of thirty-five thousand men, with which, after driving the
Spaniards out of the Milanese, they would attack the kingdom of Naples. The
King of England was declared protector of this league, which they dignified
with the name of Holy, because the Pope was at the head of it; and, in order to
allure Henry more effectually, a principality in the kingdom of Naples, of
thirty-thousand ducats yearly revenue, was to be settled on him; and lands to
the value of ten thousand ducats on Wolsey, his favorite P. Heuter. Rer.
Austr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Receuil des Trait. ii. 124.
.

NO sooner was this league concluded, than Clement, by the plenitude of his
papal power, absolved Francis from the oath he had taken to observe the treaty
of Madrid Goldast. Polit. Imperial. p. 1002. Palav. Hist. p. 70.
. This right, how pernicious soever to morals, and destructive of that
integrity which is the basis of all transactions amongst men, was the natural
consequence of the powers which the Popes arrogated as infallible vicegerents
of Christ upon earth; and they having, in virtue of these, often dispensed with
obligations which were held sacred, the interest of some men, and the credulity
of others, led them to imagine, that the decisions of a sovereign Pontiff
authorized or justified actions which would, otherwise, have been criminal and
unbecoming.

MEANWHILE, the discovery of Francis's intention to elude the treaty of Madrid,
filled the Emperor with a variety of disquieting thoughts. He had treated an
unfortunate Prince with the most ungenerous rigor; he had displayed an
insatiable ambition in all his negociations with his prisoner: He knew what
censures the former had drawn upon him, and what apprehensions the latter had
excited in every court of Europe; nor had he reaped from the measures he
pursued, any of those advantages which politicians are apt to consider as an
excuse for the most criminal conduct, and a compensation for the severest
reproaches. Francis was now out of his hands, and not one of all the mighty
consequences which he expected from the treaty that set him at liberty, was
likely to take place. His rashness in relying so far on his own judgment as to
trust to the sincerity of the French King, in opposition to the sentiments of
his wisest ministers, was now apparent; and he easily conjectured, that the
same confederacy, the dre^^ of which had induced him to set Francis at liberty,
would now be formed against him with that gallant and incensed Monarch at its
head. Self-condemnation and shame, on account of what was past, with anxious
apprehensions concerning what might happen, were the necessary result of these
reflections on his own conduct and situation. Charles, however, was naturally
firm and inflexible in all his measures. To have ^eceded suddenly from any
article in the treaty of Madrid, would have been a plain confession of
imprudence, and a palpable symptom of fear; he determined therefore, that it
was most suitable to his dignity, to insist, whatever might be the
consequences, on the strict execution of the treaty, and particularly not to
accept of any thing which might be offered as an equivalent for the restitution
of Burgundy Guic. l xvii. 366.
.

IN consequence of this resolution, he appointed Lannoy and Alarcon, to repair,
as his ambassadors to the court of France, and formally to summon the King
either to execute the treaty with the sincerity that became him, or to return,
according to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid. Instead of giving them an
immediate answer, Francis admitted the deputies of the states of Burgundy to an
audience in their presence. They humbly represented to him, that he had
exceeded the powers vested in a King of France when he consented to alienate
their country from the crown, the domains of which he was bound by his
coronation oath to preserve entire and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and entreated them, though very
faintly, to remember the obligations which he lay under to fulfill his
engagements with the Emperor. The deputies assuming an higher tone, declared
they would not obey commands which they considered as illegal; and if he should
abandon them to the enemies of France, they had resolved to defend themselves
to the best of their power, with a firm purpose rather to perish than to submit
to a foreign dominion. Upon which Francis turning toward the Imperial
ambassadors, represented to them the impossibility of performing what he had
undertaken, and offered in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two millions of
crowns. The viceroy and Alarcon, who easily perceived that the scene to which
they had been witnesses, was concerted between the King and his subjects in
order to impose on them, signified to him their master's fixed resolution not
to depart in the smallest point from the terms of the treaty, and withdrew
Belcar. Comment. de Reb. Gal. 573. Mem. de Bellay, 97.
. Before they left the kingdom, they had the mortification to hear the holy
league against the Emperor published with great solemnity.

CHARLES no sooner received an account of this confederacy than he exclaimed in
the most public manner, and in the harshest terms, against Francis, as a
Prince void of faith, or of honor. He complained no less of Clement, whom he
solicited in vain to abandon his new allies; he accused him of ingratitude; he
taxed him with an ambition unbecoming his character; he threatened him not only
with all the vengeance which the power of an Emperor can inflict, but by
appealing to a general council, called up before him all the terrors arising
from the authority of those assemblies so formidable to the papal see. It was
necessary, however, to oppose something else than reproaches and threats to the
powerful combination formed against him; and the Emperor, prompted by so many
passions, did not fail to exert himself with unusual vigor, in order to send
supplies not only of men, but of money, which was still more needed, into Italy.

ON the other hand, the efforts of the confederates bore no proportion to that
animosity against the Emperor with which they seemed to enter into the holy
league. Francis, it was thought, would have infused spirit and vigor into the
whole body. He had his lost honor to repair, many injuries to revenge, and the
station among the Princes of Europe, from which he had fallen, to recover. From
all these, added to the natural impetuosity of his temper, a war more fierce
and bloody than any he had hitherto made upon his rival, was expected. But
Francis had gone through such a scene of distress, and the impression it had
made was still so fresh in his memory, that he was become diffident of himself,
distrustful of fortune, and desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release of
his sons, and to avoid the restitution of Burgundy by paying some reasonable
equivalent, were his chief objects, and for the sake of these, he would
willingly have sacrificed Sforza and the liberties of Italy to the Emperor. He
flattered himself, that the dread alone of such a confederacy would induce
Charles to listen to what was equitable; and was afraid of employing any
considerable force for the relief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he had
often found to be more attentive to their own interest, than punctual in
fulfilling their engagements, should abandon him as soon as the Imperialists
were driven out of that country, and deprive his negotiations with the Emperor
of that weight which they derived from his being at the head of a powerful
league. Meanwhile, the castle of Milan was pressed more closely than ever, and
Sforza was now reduced to the last extremity. The Pope and Venetians, trusting
to Francis's concurrence, commanded their troops to take the field, in order to
relieve him; and an army more than sufficient for that service was soon formed.
The Milanese, passionately attached to their unfortunate Duke, and no less
exasperated against the Imperialists, who had oppressed them so cruelly, were
ready to aid the confederates in all their enterprises. But the Duke d'Urbino,
their general, naturally slow and indecisive, and restrained, besides, by his
ancient enmity to the family of Medici, from taking any step that might
aggrandize or add reputation to the Pope Guic. l. 17. 382.
, lost some opportunities, and refused to improve others, of attacking the
Imperialists, and raising the siege. These delays gave Bourbon time to bring up
a reinforcement of fresh troops, and a supply of money. He immediately took the
command of the army, and pushed on the siege with such vigor, as quickly
obliged Sforza to surrender, who retiring to Lodi, which the confederates had
surprised, left Bourbon in fu^ possession of the rest of the duchy, the
investiture of which the Emperor had promised to grant him Guic. l. 17. 376,
etc.
.

THE Italians began now to perceive the game which Francis had played, and to
be sensible, that, notwithstanding all their address, and refinements in
negotiation, which they boasted of as talents peculiarly their own, they had
for once been overreached in those very arts by a tramontane Prince. He had
hitherto thrown almost the whole burden of the war upon them, taking advantage
of their efforts, in order to enforce the proposals which he often renewed at
the court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty of his sons. The Pope and
Venetians expostulated and complained Ruscelli Lestere de Principi ii. 1^7,
etc. 159, 160 -- 166.
, but as they were not able to rouse Francis from his inactivity, their own
zeal and vigor gradually abated, and Clement having already gone farther than
his timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse himself of rashness, and to
relapse into his natural state of doubt and uncertainty.

ALL the Emperor's motions depending on himself alone, were more brisk and
better concerted. The narrowness of his revenues, indeed, did not allow him to
make any sudden or great effort in the field, but he abundantly supplied that
defect by his intrigues and negociations. The family of Colonna, the most
powerful of all the Roman barons, had adhered uniformly to the Ghibeline or
Imperial faction, during these fierce contentions between the Popes and
Emperors, which for several ages, filled Italy and Germany with discord and
bloodshed. Though the causes which at first gave birth to these destructive
factions existed no longer, and the rage with which they had been animated was
in a great measure spent, the Colonnas still retained their attachment to the
Imperial interest, and by placing themselves under the protection of the
Emperors, secured the quiet possession of their own territories and privileges.
The Cardinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and ambitious temper, at that
time the head of the family, had long been Clement's rival, to whose influence
in the last conclave he imputed the disappointment of all his schemes for
attaining the papal dignity, of which, from his known connection with the
Emperor, he thought himself secure. This was too great an injury to an aspiring
mind ever to be forgiven; and though he had dissembled his resentment so far as
to vote for Clement at his election, and to accept of great offices in his
court, he waited with the utmost impatience for an opportunity of being
revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the Imperial ambassador at Rome, who was no
stranger to these sentiments, easily persuaded him that now was the time, while
all the papal troops were employed in Lombardy, to attempt something which
would, at once, avenge his own wrongs, and be of essential service to the
Emperor his patron. The Pope, however, whose timidity rendered him
quick-sighted, was so attentive to their operations, and began to be alarmed so
early, that he might have drawn together troops sufficient to have disconcerted
all Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused him so artfully with negociations,
promises, and false intelligence, that he lulled asleep all his suspicions, and
prevented his taking any of the precautions necessary for his safety; and, to
the eternal disgrace of a Prince possessed of great power, as well as renowned
for political wisdom, Colonna at the head of three thousand men, seized one of
the gates of his capital, while he imagined himself to be in perfect security,
and was altogether unprepared for resisting such a feeble enemy. The
inhabitants of Rome permitted Colonna's troops, from whom they apprehended no
injury, to advance without opposition; the Pope's guards were dispersed in a
moment; and Clement himself terrified at the danger, ashamed of his own
credulity and deserted by almost every person, fled with precipitation into the
castle of St. Angelo, which was immediately invested. The palace of the
Vatican, the church of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's ministers and
servants, were plundered in the most licentious manner; the rest of the city
was left unmolested. Clement, destitute of every thing necessary either for
subsistence or defense, was soon obliged to demand a capitulation: and Moncada
being admitted into the castle, prescribed to him with all the haughtiness of a
conqueror, conditions which it was not in his power to reject. The chief of
these was, That Clement should not only grant a full pardon to the Colonnas,
but receive them into favor, and immediately withdraw all the troops in his
pay from the army of the confederates in Lombardy Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. p.
Guic. l. 17. 407. Ruscelli Lettere de Principi i. p. 104.
.

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than of deposing Clement, and of
placing Pompeo, their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St. Peter, exclaimed
loudly against a treaty which left them at the mercy of a Pontiff justly
incensed against them. But Moncada, attentive only to his master's interest,
paid little regard to their complaints, and by this fortunate measure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered such a considerable diminution,
the Imperialists received two great reinforcements; one from Spain, under the
command of Lannoy and Alarcon, which amounted to six thousand men. The other
was raised in the empire by George Frondsperg, a German nobleman, who having
served in Italy with great reputation, had acquired such influence and
popularity, that multitudes of his countrymen, fond on every occasion of
engaging in military enterprises, and impatient at that juncture to escape from
the oppression of their superiors both in religious and civil matters, crowded
to his standard; so that without any other gratuity than the payment of a crown
to each man, fourteen thousand enlisted in his service. To these the Archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in the Austrian dominions. But
although the Emperor had raised troops, he could not remit the sums necessary
for their support. His ordinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of Princes,
during the infancy of commerce, was not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile,
though every art had been tried to gain them, and some innovations had been
made in the constitution in order to secure their concurrence, peremptorily
refused to grant Charles any extraordinary supply Sandov. i. 8^4
; so that the more his army increased in number, the more were his generals
embarassed and distressed. Bourbon, in particular, was involved in such
difficulties, that he stood in need of all his address and courage in order to
extricate himself. Vast sums were due to the Spanish troops already in the
Milanese, when Frondsperg arrived with sixteen thousand hungry Germans,
destitute of every thing. Both made their demands with equal fierceness; the
former claiming their arrears, and the latter the pay which had been promised
them on their entering Lombardy: Bourbon was altogether incapable of giving
satisfaction to either. In this situation, he was constrained to commit acts of
violence extremely shocking to his own nature, which was gentle and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Milan, and by threats, and even torture,
forced from them a considerable sum; he rifled the churches of all their plate
and ornaments; the inadequate supply which these afforded, he distributed among
the soldiers, with so many soothing expressions of his sympathy and affection,
that, though it fell far short of the sums due to them, it appeased their
present murmurs Ripamont. Hist. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.
.

AMONG other expedients for raising money, Bourbon granted his life and liberty
to Morone, who having been kept in prison since his intrigue with Pescara, had
been condemned to die by the Spanish judges empowered to try him. For this
remission he paid twenty thousand ducats; and such were his singular talents,
and the wonderful ascendant he acquired over the minds of those to whom he had
access, that in a few days, from being Bourbon's prisoner, he became his prime
confident, with whom he consulted in all affairs of importance. To his
insinuations must be imputed the suspicions which Bourbon began to entertain,
that the Emperor had never intended to grant him the investiture of Milan, but
had appointed Leyva, and the other Spanish generals, rather to be spies on his
conduct, than to cooperate heartily toward the execution of his schemes. To
him likewise, as he still retained at the age of fourscore all the enterprizing
spirit of youth, may be attributed the bold and unexpected measure on which
Bourbon soon after ventured Guic l. 17. 419.
.

SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Imperial troops in the Milanese, that
it became indispensably necessary to take some immediate step for their relief.
The arrears of the soldiers increased daily; the Emperor made no remittances to
his generals; and the utmost rigor of military extortion could draw nothing
more from a country entirely drained and ruined. In this situation there was no
choice left, but either to disband the army, or to march for subsistence into
the enemy's country. The territories of the Venetians lay nearest at hand; but
they, with their usual foresight and prudence, had taken such precautions as
secured them from any insult. Nothing therefore remained, but to invade the
dominions of the church, or of the Florentines; and Clement had of late acted
such a part, as merited the severest vengeance from the Emperor. No sooner did
the troops return to Rome after the insurrection of the Colonnas, than, without
paying any regard to the treaty with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal Colonna,
excommunicated the rest of the family, seized their places of strength, and
wasted their lands with all the cruelty which the smart of a recent injury
naturally excites. After this, he turned his arms against Naples, and as his
operations were seconded by the French fleet, he made some progress toward the
conquest of that kingdom; the viceroy being no less destitute than the other
Imperial generals, of the money requisite for a vigorous defense Jovii Vita
Pomp. Colon. Guic. l. 18. 424.
.

THESE proceedings of the Pope, justified in appearance, the measures which
Bourbon's situation rendered necessary; and he set about executing them under
such disadvantages, as furnish the strongest proof, both of the despair to
which he was reduced, and of the greatness of his abilities which were able to
surmount so many obstacles. Having committed the government of Milan to Leyva,
whom he was not unwilling to leave behind; he began his march in the depth of
winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand men, composed of nations differing
from each other in language and manners; without money, without magazines,
without artillery, without carriages; in short, without any of those things
which are necessary to the smallest party, and which seem essential to the
existence and motions of a great army. His rout lay through a country cut by
rivers and mountains, in which the roads were almost impracticable; as an
addition to his difficulties, the enemy's army, superior to his own in number,
was at hand to watch all his motions, and to improve every advantage. But his
troops, impatient of their present hardships, and allured by the hopes of
obtaining an immense booty, did not consider how ill provided they were for a
march, and followed him with great cheerfulness. His first scheme was to have
made himself master of Placentia, and to have gratified his soldiers with the
plunder of that city; but the vigilance of the confederate generals rendered
the design abortive; nor had he better success in his project for the reduction
of Bologna, which was seasonably supplied with as many troops as secured it
from the insults of an army which had neither artillery nor ammunition. Having
failed in both these attempts to become master of some great city, he was under
a necessity of advancing. But he had now been two months in the field; his
troops had suffered every calamity which a long march, together with the
uncommon rigor of the season could bring upon men destitute of all necessary
accommodations, in an enemy's country; the magnificent promises to which they
trusted, had proved altogether vain; they saw no prospect of relief; their
patience, tried to the utmost, failed at last, and they broke out into open
mutiny. Some officers, who rashly attempted to restrain them, fell victims to
their fury; Bourbon himself, not daring to appear during the first transports
of their rage, was obliged to fly secretly from his quarters Guic. l. 18. 434.
Jovii Vit. Colon. 163.
. But this sudden ebullition of wrath began at last to subside; when Bourbon,
who possessed in a wonderful degree, the art of governing the minds of
soldiers, renewed his promises with more confidence than formerly, and assured
them that they would be soon accomplished. He endeavored to render their
hardships more tolerable by partaking of them himself; he fared no better than
the meanest sentinel; he marched along with them on foot; he joined them in
singing their camp-ballads, in which, with high praises of his valor, they
mingled many strokes of military raillery on his poverty; and wherever they
came, he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he had promised, to plunder the
adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged by all these soothing arts, they
entirely forgot their sufferings and complaints, and followed him with the same
implicit confidence as formerly Oeuvres de Brant. tom iv. 246, etc.
.

BOURBON, meanwhile, carefully concealed his intentions. Rome and Florence, not
knowing on which the blow would fall, were held in the most disquieting state
of suspense. Clement, equally solicitous for the safety of both, fluctuated in
more than his usual uncertainty; and while the rapid approach of danger called
for prompt and decisive measures, he spent the time in deliberations which came
to no issue, or in taking resolutions, which next day, his restless mind, more
sagacious in discerning than in obviating difficulties, overturned, without
being able to fix on what should be substituted in their place. At one time, he
determined to unite himself more closely than ever with his allies, and to push
the war with vigor; at another, he inclined to bring all differences to a
final accommodation by a treaty with Lannoy, who knowing his passion for
negotiation, solicited him incessantly with proposals for that purpose. His
timidity at length prevailed; and led him to conclude an agreement with Lannoy,
of which the following were the chief articles: That a suspension of arms
should take place between the Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
That Clement should advance sixty thousand crowns toward satisfying the
demands of the Imperial army; That the Colonnas should be absolved from
censure, and their former dignities and possessions be restored to them; That
the viceroy should come to Rome, and prevent Bourbon from approaching nearer to
that city, or to Florence Guic. l. 18. 436.
. On this sudden treaty, which deprived him of all hopes of assistance from his
allies, without affording him any solid foundation of security, Clement relied
so firmly, that like a man extricated at once out of all difficulties, he was
at perfect ease, and in the fullness of his confidence disbanded all his troops,
except as many as were sufficient to guard his own person. This amazing
confidence of Clement's, who on every other occasion was fearful and suspicious
to excess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciardini, who being at that time
the pontifical commissary-general and resident in the confederate army, had
great opportunity as well as great abilities for observing how chimerical all
his hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's conduct, at this juncture, wholly to
infatuation, which those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid Guic. l. 18. 446.
.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have executed the treaty with great
sincerity; and having detached Clement from the confederacy, wished to turn
Bourbon's arms against the Venetians, who, of all the powers at war with the
Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigor. With this view he dispatched a
courier to Bourbon, informing him of the suspension of arms, which in the name
of their common master, he had concluded with the Pope. Bourbon had other
schemes; and he had prosecuted them now too far to think of retreating. To have
mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would have been dangerous; his command was
independent on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man whom he had many reasons
to hate; for these reasons, without paying the least regard to the message, he
continued to ravage the ecclesiastical territories, and to advance toward
Florence. Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning with new force,
he had recourse to Lannoy, and entreated and conjured him to put a stop to
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly set out for his camp, but durst not
approach it; Bourbon's soldiers having got notice of the truce, raged and
threatened, demanding the accomplishment of the promises to which they had
trusted; their general himself could scarce restrain them; every person in
Rome, perceived that nothing remained but to prepare for resisting a storm
which it was now impossible to dispel. Clement alone, relying on some ambiguous
and deceitful professions which Bourbon made of his inclination toward peace,
sunk back into his former security Guic. l. 18. 437, etc. Mem. de Bellay, p.
100.
.

BOURBON, on his part, was far from being free from solicitude. All his
attempts on any places of importance had hitherto miscarried; and Florence,
toward which he had been approaching for some time, was, by the arrival of the
Duke d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his power at defiance. As it
now became necessary to change his rout, and to take instantly some new
resolution; he fixed without hesitation on one no less daring in itself, than
it was impious according to the opinion of that age. This was to assault and
plunder Rome. Many reasons, however, prompted him to it. He was fond of
thwarting Lannoy, who had undertaken for the safety of that city; he imagined
that the Emperor would be highly pleased to see Clement, the chief author of
the league against him, humbled; he flattered himself, that by gratifying the
rapacity of his soldiers with such immense booty, he would attach them for ever
to his interest; or (which is still more probable than any of these) he hoped
that by means of the power and splendor he would acquire from the conquest of
the first city in Christendom, he might lay the foundation of an independent
power; and that after shaking off all connection with the Emperor, he might
take possession of Naples, or of some of the Italian states in his own name
Brant. 4. 271. 6. 189. Belcarii Comment. 594.
.

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed his resolution with a rapidity equal to
the boldness with which he had formed it. His soldiers, now that they had their
prey in full view, complained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay.
No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany toward Rome, than the Pope,
sensible at last how fallacious the hopes had been on which he reposed, started
from his security. But no time now remained, even for a bold and decisive
Pontiff, to have taken proper measures, or to have formed any effectual plan of
defense. Under Clement's feeble conduct, all was consternation, disorder and
irresolution. He collected, however, such of his disbanded soldiers as still
remained in the city; he armed the artificers of Rome, and the footmen and
train-bearers of the cardinals; he repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun
to erect new works; he excommunicated Bourbon and all his troops, branding the
Germans with the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards with that of Moors
Seckend. Lib. ii. 68.
. Trusting to these ineffectual military preparations, or to his spiritual
arms, which were still more despised by rapacious soldiers, he seems to have
laid aside his natural timidity, and contrary to the advice of all his
counselors, determined to wait the approach of an enemy, whom, by a timely
retreat, he might easily have avoided.

BOURBON, who saw the necessity of dispatch, now that his intentions were
known, advanced with such speed, that he gained several marches on the Duke
d'Urbino's army, and encamped in the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth
of May. From thence he showed his soldiers the palaces and churches of that
city, into which, as the capital of the Christian commonwealth, the wealth of
all Europe had flowed during many centuries, without having been once violated
by any hostile hand; and commanding them to refresh themselves that night, as a
preparation for the assault next day, promised them in reward of their toils
and valor, the possession of all the treasures accumulated there.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had determined to distinguish that day
either by his death, or the success of his enterprise, appeared at the head of
his troops, clad in complete armor, above which he wore a vest of white
tissue, that he might be more conspicuous both to his friends and to his
enemies; and as all depended on one bold impression, he led them instantly to
scale the walls. Three distinct bodies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different nations of whom the army was
composed, were appointed to this service; a separate attack was assigned to
each; and the whole army advanced to support them as occasion should require. A
thick mist concealed their approach until they reached almost the brink of the
ditch which surrounded the suburbs; having planted their ladders in a moment,
each brigade rushed on to the assault, with an impetuosity heightened by
national emulation. They were received at first with fortitude equal to their
own; the Swiss in the Pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who had been
assembled, fought with a courage becoming men to whom the defense of the
noblest city in the world was entrusted. Bourbon's troops, notwithstanding all
their valor, gained no ground, and even began to give way; when their leader,
perceiving that on this critical moment the fate of the day depended, threw
himself from his horse, pressed to the front, snatched a scaling ladder from a
soldier, planted it against the wall, and began to mount it, encouraging his
men with his voice and hand, to follow him, but at that very instant, a musket
bullet from the ramparts pierced his groin with a wound, which he immediately
felt to be mortal; but he retained so much presence of mind as to desire those
who were near him to cover his body with a cloak, that his death might not
dishearten his troops; and soon after he expired with a courage worthy of a
better cause, and which would have entitled him to the highest praise, if he
had thus fallen in defense of his country, not at the head of its enemies Mem.
de Bellay, 101. Guic. I. 18. p. 445, etc. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 257, etc.
.

IT was impossible, to conceal this fatal event from the army; the soldiers
soon missed their general, whom they were accustomed to see in every time of
danger; but instead of being disheartened by their loss, it animated them with
new valor; the name of Bourbon resounded along the line, accompanied with the
cry of blood and revenge. The veterans who defended the walls, were soon
overpowered by numbers; the untrained body of city recruits fled at the sight
of danger, and the enemy with irresistible violence rushed into the town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed at the altar of St. Peter's in
offering up to heaven unavailing prayers for victory. No sooner was he informed
that his troops began to give way than he fled with precipitation; and, with an
infatuation still more amazing than any thing already mentioned, instead of
making his escape by the opposite gate where there was no enemy to oppose it,
he shut himself up, together with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambassadors,
and many persons of distinction, in the castle of St. Angelo, which, from his
late misfortune, he might have known to be an insecure retreat. In his way from
the Vatican to that fortress, he saw his troops flying before an enemy who
pursued without giving quarters; he heard the cries and lamentations of the
Roman citizens, and beheld the beginning of those calamities which his own
credulity and ill conduct had brought upon his subjects Jov. Vit. Colon. 165.
.

IT is impossible to describe, or even to imagine the misery and horror of that
scene which followed. Whatever a city taken by storm can dread from military
rage, unrestrained by discipline; whatever excesses the ferocity of the
Germans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the licentiousness of the Italians
could commit, these the wretched inhabitants were obliged to suffer. Churches,
palaces, and the houses of private persons were plundered without distinction.
No age, or character, or sex was exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles,
priests, matrons, virgins, were all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of
men deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did these outrages cease, as is usual in
towns which are carried by assault, when the first fury of the storm was over;
the Imperialists kept possession of Rome several months; and during all that
time the insolence and brutality of the soldiers scarce abated. Their booty in
ready money alone amounted to a million of ducats; what they raised by ransoms
and exactions far exceeded that sum. Rome, though taken several different times
by the northern nations, who overran the empire in the fifth and sixth
centuries, was never treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous and heathen
Huns, Vandals or Goths, as now by the bigoted subjects of a Catholic Monarch
Jov. Vit. Colon. 166. Guic. l 18. ^^^, etc. Comment. de capta urbe Roma ap.
^^^^llum 2. 23^. Ull^^ V^^d^^. Carlo V. p. 110, etc. Cianonne Hist. of (...).
xxx^ (...) p. (...).
.

AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of the Imperial army devolved on Philibert
de Chalons Prince of Orange, who with difficulty prevailed on as many of his
soldiers to desist from the pillage, as were necessary to invest the castle of
St. Angelo. Clement was immediately sensible of his error in having retired
into that ill provided and untenable fort. But as the Imperialists, scorning
discipline, and intent only on plunder, pushed the siege with little vigor, he
did not despair of holding out until the Duke d'Urbino should come to his
relief. That general advanced at the head of an army composed of Venetians,
Florentines, and Swiss in the pay of France, of sufficient strength to have
delivered Clement from the present danger. But d'Urbino, perferring the
indulgence of his hatred against the family of Medici to the glory of
delivering the capital of Christendom, and the head of the church, pronounced
the enterprise to be too hazardous; and having from an exquisite refinement in
revenge, marched forward so far, that his army being seen from the ramparts of
St. Angelo, flattered the Pope with the prospect of certain relief, he
immediately retired Guic. l. 18. 450.
. Clement, deprived of every resource, and reduced to such extremity of famine
as to feed on asses flesh Jov. Vit. Colon ^67.
, was obliged to capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors were pleased
to prescribe. He agreed to pay four hundred thousand ducats to the army; to
surrender to the Emperor all the places of strength belonging to the church;
and besides giving hostages, to remain a prisoner himself until the chief
articles were performed. He was committed to the care of Alarcon, who, by his
severe vigilance in guarding Francis, had given full proof of his being
qualified for that office; and thus, by a singular accident, the same man had
the custody of the two most illustrious personages who had been made prisoners
in Europe during several ages.

THE account of this extraordinary and unexpected event was no less surprising
than agreeable to the Emperor. But in order to conceal his joy from his
subjects, who were filled with horror at the success and crimes of their
countrymen, and to lessen the indignation of the rest of Europe, he declared
that Rome had been assaulted without any order from him; he wrote to all the
Princes with whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his having had any knowledge
of Bourbon's intention Ruscelli Lettere di Principi, ii. 234.
; he put himself and court into mourning; commanded the rejoicings which had
been ordered for the birth of his son Philip to be stopped; and employing an
artifice no less hypocritical than gross, he appointed prayers and processions
throughout all Spain for the recovery of the Pope's liberty, which by an order
to his generals he could have immediately granted him Sleid. 109. i. 822.
Maurec. Hist. Veneta. lib. iii. 220.
.

THE good fortune of the house of Austria was no less conspicuous in another
part of Europe. Solomon having invaded Hungary with an army three hundred
thousand strong, Lewis II. King of that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and
unexperienced Prince, advanced rashly to meet him with a body of men which did
not amount to thirty thousand. With an imprudence still more unpardonable, he
gave the command of these troops to Paul Tomorri, a Franciscan monk, archbishop
of Golocza. This awkward general, in the dress of his order, girt with its
cord, marched at the head of the troops; and hurried on by his own presumption,
as well as by the impetuosity of nobles who despised danger, but were impatient
of long service, fought the fatal battle of Monacz, in which the King, the
flower of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty thousand men fell the
victims of his folly and ill conduct. Solomon, after his victory, seized and
kept possession of several towns of greatest strength in the southern provinces
of Hungary, and overrunning the rest of the country, carried near two hundred
thousand persons into captivity. As Lewis was the last male of the royal family
of Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdinand claimed both his crowns. This claim was
founded on a double title; the one derived from the ancient pretensions of the
house of Austria to both kingdoms; the other from the right of his wife, the
only sister of the deceased Monarch, The feudal institutions, however,
subsisted both in Hungary and Bohemia in such vigor, and the nobles possessed
such extensive power, that the crowns were still elective, and Ferdinand's
rights, if they had not been powerfully supported, would have met with little
regard. But his own personal merit; the respect due to the brother of the
greatest Monarch in Christendom; the necessity of choosing a Prince able to
afford his subjects some additional protection against the Turkish arms, which,
as they had felt their weight so lately, they greatly dreaded; together with
the intrigues of his sister, who had been married to the late King, overcame
the prejudices which the Hungarians had conceived against: the Archduke as a
foreigner; and though a considerable party voted for the Waywode of
Transylvania, at length secured Ferdinand the throne of that kingdom. The
states of Bohemia imitated the example of their neighbor kingdom; but, in
order to ascertain and secure their own privileges, they obliged Ferdinand,
before his coronation, to subscribe a deed which they term a Reverse, declaring
that he held that crown not by any previous right, but by their gratuitous and
voluntary election. By such a vast accession of territories, the hereditary
possession of which they secured in process of time to their family, the
Princes of the house of Austria attained that pre-eminence in power which has
rendered them so formidable to the rest of Germany Steph. Broderick
Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in Campo Mohacz ap. Scardium 2. 218. P. Baire
Hist. d'Allemagne, tom. viii. part i. p. 198.
.

THE dissensions between the Pope and Emperor proved extremely favorable to
the progress of Lutheranism. Charles, exasperated by Clement's conduct, and
fully employed in opposing the league which he had formed against them, had
little inclination and less leisure to take any measures for suppressing the
new opinions in Germany. In a Diet of the empire held at Spires, the state of
religion came to be considered, and all that the Emperor required of the
Princes was, that they would wait patiently, and without encouraging
innovations, for the meeting of a general council, which he had demanded of the
Pope. They, in return, acknowledged the convocation of a council to be the
proper and regular step toward reforming abuses in the church; but contended
that a national council held in Germany would be more effectual for that
purpose than what he had proposed. To this advice, concerning the
discouragement of innovations, they paid so little regard, that even during the
meeting of the Diet at Spires, the divines who attended the Elector of Saxony
and Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel thither, preached publicly, and administered the
sacraments according to the rites of the reformed church Sleid. 103.
. The Emperor's own example emboldened the Germans to treat the papal authority
with little reverence. During the heat of his resentment against Clement, he
had published a long reply to an angry brief which the Pope had intended as an
apology for his own conduct. In this manifesto, the Emperor, after having
enumerated many instances of that Pontiff's ingratitude, deceit and ambition,
all which he painted in the strongest and most aggravated colors, he appealed
from him to a general council. At the same time, he wrote to the college of
cardinals, complaining of Clement's partiality and injustice; and requiring
them, if he refused or delayed to call a council, to manifest their concern for
the peace of the Christian church, so shamefully neglected by its chief pastor,
by summoning that assembly in their own name Goldast. Polit. Imper. p. 984.
. This manifesto, scarce inferior in virulence to the invect* as of Luther
himself, was dispersed over Germany with great industry, and being eagerly read
by persons of every rank, did much more than counterbalance the effect of all
Charles's declarations against the new opinions.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK V.
THE account of the cruel manner in which the Pope had been treated, filled all
Europe with astonishment and horror. To see a Christian Emperor, who, by
possessing that dignity, ought to have been the protector and advocate of the
holy see, lay violent hands on him who represented Christ on earth, and detain
his sacred person in a rigorous captivity, was considered as an impiety that
merited the severest vengeance, and which called for the immediate
interposition of every dutiful son of the church. Francis and Henry, alarmed at
the progress of the Imperial arms in Italy, had, even before the taking of
Rome, entered into a closer alliance; and in order to give some check to the
Emperor's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous diversion in the
Low Countries 1527. The force of every motive which had influenced them at that
time, was now increased; and to these were added, the desire of rescuing the
Pope out of the Emperor's hands, a measure no less political, than it appeared
to be pious. This, however, rendered it necessary to abandon their designs on
the Low Countries, and to make Italy the seat of war, as it was by vigorous
operations in that country, they might promise most certainly upon delivering
Rome, and set^^ng Clement at liberty. Francis being now sensible, that in his
system with regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an excess of remissness, he had allowed
Charles to attain advantages which he might easily ^^ve prevented, was eager to
make reparation for an ^^or for which he was not often guilty, by an activity
more suitable to his temper. Henry thought his in^erposition necessary, in
order to hinder the Emperor ^om becoming master of all Italy, and acquiring by
that means such superiority of power, as would enable him, for the future, to
dictate without control to the other Princes of Europe. Wolsey, whom Francis
had taken care to secure by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favor, neglected nothing that could incense his master against the
Emperor. Besides all these public considerations, Henry was influenced by one
of a more private nature; having begun about this time to form his great scheme
of divorcing Catharine of Aragon, toward the execution of which he knew that
the sanction of Papal authority would be necessary, he was desirous to acquire
as much merit as possible with Clement, by appearing to be the chief instrument
of his deliverance.

THE negotiation, between Princes thus disposed, was not tedious. Wolsey
himself conducted it, on the part of his sovereign, with unbounded powers.
Francis treated with him in person at Amiens, July 11, where the Cardinal
appeared, and was received with royal magnificence. A marriage between the duke
of Orleans and the princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of the confederacy;
it was resolved that Italy should be the theater of war; the strength of the
army which should take the field, and the contingent of troops or of money
which each Prince should furnish, were settled; and if the Emperor did not
accept of the proposals they were jointly to make him, they bound themselves
immediately to declare war, and to begin hostilities, Aug. 18. Henry, who took
every resolution with impetuosity, entered so eagerly into this new alliance,
that in order to give Francis the strongest proof of his friendship and
respect, he formally renounced the ancient claim of the English Monarchs to the
crown of France, which had long been the pride and ruin of the nation; as a
full compensation for which, he accepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns, to
be paid annually to himself and his successors Herbert, 83, etc. Rym. Foeder
14. 203.
.

MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfill the conditions of his capitulation,
remained a prisoner under the severe custody of Alarcon. The Florentines no
sooner heard of what had happened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a
tumultuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di Cortona, who governed their city in
the Pope's name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke in pieces the statutes
of Leo and Clement; and declaring themselves a free state, re-established their
ancient popular government. The Venetians, taking advantage of the calamity of
their ally the Pope, seized Ravenna, and other places belonging to the church,
under pretext of keeping them in deposite. The dukes of Urbino and Ferrara,
laid hold likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
considered as irretrievably ruined Guic. l. 18. 453.
.

LANNOY, on the other hand, labored to derive some solid benefit from that
unforeseen event, which gave such splendor and superiority to his master's
arms. For this purpose he marched to Rome, together with Moncada, and the
marquis del Guasto, at the head of all the troops they could assemble in the
kingdom of Naples. The arrival of this reinforcement brought new calamities on
the unhappy citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the wealth of their
companions, imitated their license, and with the utmost rapacity gathered the
gleanings, which had escaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans. There
was not now any army in Italy capable of making head against the Imperialists;
and nothing more was requisite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns in the
ecclesiastical state, than to have appeared before them. But the soldiers
having been so long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an entire relaxation of
discipline, and having tasted the sweets of living at discretion in a great
city, almost without the control of a superior, were become so impatient of
military subordination, and so averse to service, that they refused to leave
Rome, unless all their arrears were paid; a condition which they knew to be
impossible; and declared that they would not obey any other person than the
prince of Orange, whom the army had chosen general. Lannoy, finding that it was
no longer safe for him to remain among licentious troops, who despised his
dignity, and hated his person, returned to Naples; soon after the marquis del
Guasto and Moncada thought it prudent to quit Rome for the same reason. The
Prince of Orange, a general only in name, and by the most precarious of all
tenures, the good will of soldiers whom success and license had rendered
capricious, was obliged to pay more attention to their humors, than they did
to his commands. Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping any of the advantages he
might have expected from the reduction of Rome, had the mortification to see
the most formidable body of troops he had ever brought into the field, continue
in a state of inactivity from which it was impossible to rouse them Guic. l.
18. 454.
.

THIS gave the King of France and the Venetians leisure to form new schemes,
and to enter into new engagements for the delivering the Pope, and preserving
the liberties of Italy. The newly restored republic of Florence very
imprudently joined with them, and Lautrec, of whose abilities the Italians
entertained a much more favorable opinion than his own master, was, in order
to gratify them, appointed generalissimo of the league. It was with the utmost
reluctance he undertook that office, being unwilling to expose himself a second
time to the difficulties and disgraces which the negligence of the King, or the
malice of his favorites might bring upon him. The best troops in France
marched under his command, and the King of England, though he had not yet
declared war against the Emperor, advanced a considerable sum toward carrying
on the expedition. Lautrec's first operations were prudent, vigorous, and
successful. By the assistance of Andrew Doria, the ablest sea officer of that
age, he rendered himself master of Genoa, and re-established in that republic
the faction of the Fregosi, together with the dominion of France. He obliged
Alexandria to surrender after a short siege, and reduced all the country on
that side of the Tesino. He took Pavia, which had so long resisted the arms of
his sovereign, by assault, and plundered it with (...); cruelty which the
memory of the fatal disaster that had befallen the French nation before its
walls naturally inspired. All the Milanese, which Antonia de Leyva defended
with a small body of troops kept together and supported by his own address and
industry, must have soon submitted to his power, if he had continued to bend
the force of his arms against that country. But Lautrec durst not complete a
conquest which would have been so honorable to himself, and of such advantage
to the league. Francis knew his confederates to be more desirous of
circumscribing the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new territories
for him, and was afraid that if Sforza were once re-established in Milan, they
would second but coolly the attack which he intended to make on the kingdom of
Naples. For this reason he instructed Lautrec not to push his operations with
too much vigor in Lombardy; and happily the importunities of the Pope, and the
solicitations of the Florentines, the one for relief, and the other for
protection, were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext to march forward
without yielding to the entreaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who insisted on
his laying siege to Milan Guic l. xviii. p. 461. de Bellay, 170, etc. Mauroc.
Hist. Venet. lib. iii. 238.
.

WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly toward Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate
concerning the disposal of the Pope's person, who still remained a prisoner in
the castle of St. Angelo. Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion with
which he usually endeavored to cover his actions. Charles in many instances
appears to have been but little under the influence of religious
considerations, and had frequently on this occasion expressed an inclination to
transport the Pope into Spain, that he might indulge his ambition with the
spectacle of the two most illustrious personages in Europe successively
prisoners in his court. But the fear of giving new offense to all Christendom,
and of filling his own subjects with horror, obliged him to forego that
satisfaction Guic. l. 18. 457.
. The progress of the confederates made it now necessary either to set the Pope
at liberty, or to remove him to some place of confinement more secure than the
castle of St. Angelo. Many considerations induced him to prefer the former,
particularly his want of the money requisite as well for recruiting his army,
as for paying off the vast arrears due to it. In order to obtain this he had
assembled the Cortes of Castile at Valladolid about the beginning of the year,
and having laid before them the state of his affairs, and represented the
necessity of making great preparations to resist the enemies, whom envy at the
success which had crowned his arms would unite against him, he demanded a large
supply in the most pressing terms. But the Cortes, as the nation was already
exhausted by extraordinary donativ^s, refused to load it with any new burden,
and in spite of all his endeavors to gain or to intimidate the members,
persisted in this resolution Sandov. i. p. 814.
. No resource, therefore remained but the extorting from Clement, by way of
ransom, a sum sufficient for discharging what was due to his troops, without
which it was vain to mention to them their leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inactive on his part, or his intrigues unsuccessful toward
hastening such a treaty. By slattery, and the appearance of unbounded
confidence, he disarmed the resentment of the cardinal Colonna, and wrought
upon his vanity, which made him desirous of showing the world that as his power
had at first depressed the Pope, it would now raise him to his former dignity.
By favors and promises he gained Morone, who, by one of those whimsical
revolutions which occur so often in his life, and which so strongly display his
character, had now recovered his credit and authority with the Imperialists.
The address and influence of two such men easily removed all the difficulties
of the Emperor's ambassadors, and brought to a conclusion the treaty for
Clement's liberty, upon conditions hard indeed, but not more intolerable than a
Prince in his situation had reason to expect. He was obliged to advance in
ready money an hundred thousand crowns for the use of the army; to pay the same
sum at the distance of a fortnight; and at the end of three months, an hundred
and fifty thousand more. He engaged not to take part in the war against
Charles, either in Lombardy or in Naples; he granted him a cruzado, and the
tenth of ecclesiastical revenues in Spain; and he not only gave hostages, but
put the Emperor in possession of several towns, as security for the performance
of these articles Guic. l. 18. 467, etc.
. Having raised the first moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and
benefices, and other expedients equally uncannonical, a day was fixed for
delivering him from imprisonment, December. 6. But Clement, impatient to be free,
after a tedious confinement of six months, as well as full of the suspicion and
distrust natural to the unfortunate, was so much afraid that the Imperialists
might still throw in obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he disguised
himself the preceding night in the habit of a merchant, and Alarcon having
remitted somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclusion of the treaty, he made
his escape undiscovered. He arrived before next morning, without any attendants
but a single officer, at Orvieto; and from thence wrote a letter of thanks to
Lautrec, as the chief instrument of procuring him liberty Guic. l. 51. 467,
etc. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc. His^ Venet. lib. iii. 151.
.

DURING these transactions, the ambassadors of France and England repaired to
Spain, in consequence of the treaty which Wolsey had concluded with the French
King. The Emperor, unwilling to draw on himself the united forces of the two
Monarchs, discovered an inclination to relax somewhat the rigor of the treaty
of Madrid, to which hitherto, he had adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept
of the two millions of crowns which Francis had proposed to pay as an
equivalent for the duchy of Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty on
condition that he would recall his army out of Italy, and restore Genoa together
with the other conquests he had made in that country. With regard to Sforza, he
insisted that his fate should be determined by the judges appointed to enquire
into his crimes. These propositions being made to Henry, he transmitted them to
his ally the French King, whom it more nearly concerned to examine, and to
answer them; and if Francis had been sincerely sollicitous either to conclude
peace, or preserve consistency in his own conduct, he ought instantly to have
closed with overtures which differed but little from the propositions he
himself had formerly made Recueil des Traitez, 2. 249.
. But his views were now much changed; his alliance with Henry; Lautrec's
progress in Italy, and the superiority of his army there above that of the
Emperor, scarce left him room to doubt of the success of his enterprise against
Naples. Full of these sanguine hopes, he was at no loss to find pretexts for
rejecting or evading what the Emperor had proposed. Under the appearance of
sympathy with Sforza, for whose interests he had not hitherto discovered much
solicitude, he again demanded the full and unconditional re-establishment of
that unfortunate prince in his dominions. Under color of its being imprudent
to rely on the Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons should be set at
liberty before the French troops left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The
unreasonableness of these demands, as well as the reproachful insinuation with
which they were accompanied, irritated Charles to such a degree that he could
scarce listen to them with patience; and repenting of his moderation which had
made so little impression on his enemies, declared that he would not depart in
the smallest article from the conditions he had now offered. Upon this the
French and English ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn unaccountably to
concur with Fracis in these strange proportions, demanded and obtained their
audience of leave Rym. 14. 200. Herbert 85. Guic. l. 18. 471.
.

NEXT day January 22. 1528 two heralds who had accompanied the ambassadors on
purpose, though they had hitherto concealed their character, having assumed the
ensigns of their office, appeared in the Emperor's court, and being admitted
into his presence, they in the name of their respective masters, and with all
the solemnity customary on such occasions, denounced war against him. Charles
received both with a dignity suitable to his own rank, but spoke to each in a
tone adapted to the sentiments which he entertained of their sovereigns. He
accepted the defiance of the English Monarch with a firmness tempered by some
degree of decency and respect. His reply to the French King abounded with that
acrimony of expression, which personal rivalship, exasperated by the memory of
many injuries inflicted as well as suffered, naturally suggests. He desired the
French herald to acquaint his sovereign, that he would henceforth consider him
as a base violator of public faith, and a stranger to the honor and integrity
becoming a gentleman. Francis, too high spirited to bear such an imputation,
had recourse to an uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his character. He
instantly sent back the herald with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the
Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to single combat, requiring him to name
the time and place of the encounter, and the weapons with which he chose to
fight. Charles, as he was no^ inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery,
readily accepted the challenge; but after several messages concerning the
arrangement of all the circumstances relative to the combat, accompanied with
mutual reproaches, bordering on the most indecent scurrility, all thoughts of
this duel, more becoming the heroes of romance than the two greatest Monarchs
of their age, were entirely laid aside Recueil des Traitez 2. Mem. de Bellay,
103, etc. Sandov. Hist. 1. 837.
.

THE example, of two personages so illustrious drew such general attention, and
carried along with it so much authority, as gave rise to an important change in
manners all over Europe. Duels, as has already been observed, had long been
permitted by the laws of all the European nations, and forming a part of their
jurisprudence, were authorized by the magistrate on many occasions as the most
proper method of terminating questions with regard to property, or of deciding
in those which respected crimes. But single combats being considered as solemn
appeals to the omniscience and justice of the supreme Being, they were allowed
only in public causes, according to the prescription of law, and carried on in
a judicial form. Men accustomed to this manner of decision in courts of
justice, were naturally led to apply it to personal and private quarrels.
Duels, which at first could be appointed by the civil judge alone, were fought
without the interposition of his authority, and in cases to which the laws did
not extend. The transaction between Charles and Francis strongly countenanced
this practice. Upon every affront, or injury which seemed to touch his honor,
a gentleman thought himself entitled to draw his sword, and to call on his
adversary to make reparation. Such an opinion introduced among men, of fierce
courage, of high spirit, and of rude manners, when offense was often given, and
revenge was always prompt, produced most fatal consequences. Much of the best
blood in Christendom was shed; many useful lives were sacrificed; and at some
periods, war itself has scarce been more destructive than these contests of
honor. So powerful, however, is the dominion of fashion, that neither the
terror of penal laws, nor reverence for religion have been able entirely to
abolish a practice unknown among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reason; though at the same time it must be admitted, that to this
absurd custom, we must ascribe in some degree the extraordinary gentleness and
complaisance of modern manners, and that respectful attention of one man to
another, which, at present, render the social intercourses of life far more
agreeable and decent than among the most civilized nations of antiquity.

WHILE the two monarchs seemed so eager to terminate their quarrel by a
personal combat, Lautrec continued his operations which promised to be more
decisive. His army, which was now increased to thirty-five thousand men,
advanced by great marches toward Naples. The terror of their approach, as well
as the remonstrances and the entreaties of the prince of Orange, prevailed at
last on the Imperial troops, though with difficulty to quit Rome, of which they
had kept possession during ten months. But of that flourishing army which had
entered the city, scarce one half remained; the rest, cut off by the plague, or
wasted by diseases, the effects of their inactivity, intemperance, and
debauchery, fell victims to their own crimes Guic. l. 18. 487.
. Lautrec made the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat toward the
Neapolitan territories, which would have finished the war at one blow. But the
prudence of their leaders disappointed all his measures, and conducted them
with little loss to Naples. The people of that kingdom, always the prey of
every invader, extremely impatient to shake off the Spanish yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared to take possession; and Gaeta and
Naples excepted, scarce any place of importance remained in the hands of the
Imperialists. The preservation of the former was owing to the strength of its
fortifications, that of the latter to the presence of the Imperial army.
Lautrec, however sat down before Naples, but finding it vain to think of
reducing by force a city defended by so many troops, he was obliged to employ
the slower, but less dangerous method of blockade; and having taken measures
which appeared to him effectual, he confidently assured his master, that famine
would soon compel the besieged to capitulate. These hopes were strongly
confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous attempt made by the enemy in order to
recover the command of the sea. The galleys of Andrew Doria, under the command
of his nephew Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbor. Moncada, who had
succeeded Lannoy in the viceroyalty, rigged out a number of galleys superior to
Doria's, and going on board himself with the Marquis del Gausto, and the flower
of the Spanish officers and soldiers, attacked Doria before the arrival of the
Venetian and French fleets. But Doria, by his superior skill in naval
operations, easily triumphed over the valor and number of the Spaniards. The
viceroy was killed, most of his fleet destroyed, and Gausto, with many officers
of distinction being taken prisoners, were put on board the captive galleys,
and sent by Philippino, as trophies of his victory, to his uncle Guic. l. 19.
487. P. Heuter. lib. x. c. 2. p. 231.
.

BUT notwithstanding this flattering prospect of success, many circumstances
concurred to frustrate Lautrec's expectations. Clement, though he always
acknowledged his being indebted to Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and
often complained of the cruel treatment he had met with from the Emperor, was
not influenced at this juncture by principles of gratitude, nor which was more
extraordinary, was he swayed by the desire of revenge. His past misfortunes
rendered him more cautious than ever, and his recollection of the errors which
he had committed, increased the natural irresolution of his mind. While he
amused Francis with promises, he secretly negociated with Charles; and being
sollicitous, above all things, to re-establish-his family in Florence with
their ancient authority which he could not expect from Francis, who had entered
into strict alliance with the new republic, he leaned rather toward the side
of his enemy than that of his benefactor, and gave Lautrec no assistance
toward carrying on his operations. The Venetians, viewing with jealousy the
progress of the French arms, were intent only on recovering such maritime towns
in the Neapolitan dominions as were to be possessed by their republic, while
they were altogether careless about the reduction of Naples, on which the
success of the common cause depended Guic. l. xix. 491.
. The King of England, instead of being able, as had been projected, to
embarrass the Emperor by attacking his territories in the Low Countries, found
his subjects so averse to an unnecessary war, which would have ruined the trade
of the nation, that in order to silence their clamours, and put a stop to the
insurrections ready to break out among them, he was compelled to conclude a
truce for eight months with the governess of the Netherlands Herbert, 90.
Rymer, 14. ^^8.
. Francis himself, with the same unpardonable inattention of which he had
formerly been guilty, and for which he had suffered so severely, neglected to
make proper remittances to Lautrec for the support of his army Guic. l. xviii.
478.
.

THESE unexpected events retarded the progress of the French, and discouraged
both the general and his troops; but the revolt of Andrew Doria proved a fatal
blow to all their measures. That gallant officer, the citizen of a republic,
and trained up from his infancy in the sea-service, retained the spirit of
independance natural to the former, and the plain liberal manners peculiar to
the latter. A perfect stranger to the arts of submission or flattery necessary
in courts, and conscious at the same time of his own merit and importance, he
always offered his advice with freedom, and often preferred his complaints and
remonstrances with boldness. The French ministers, unaccustomed to such
liberties, determined to ruin a man who treated them with so little deference;
and though Francis himself had a just sense of Doria's services, as well as an
high esteem for his character, the courtiers, by continually representing him
as a man haughty, intractable, and more sollicitous to aggrandize himself, than
to promote the interest of France, gradually undermined the foundations of his
credit, and filled the King's mind with suspicion and distrust. From thence
proceeded several affronts and indignities put upon Doria. His appointments
were not regularly paid; his advice, even in naval affairs, was often slighted;
an attempt was made to seize the prisoners taken by his nephew in the sea-sight
off Naples; all which he bore with abundance of ill humor. But an injury
offered to his country, transported him beyond all bounds of patience. The
French began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbor, and removing thither some
branches of trade carried on at Genoa, plainly showed that they intended to
render that town, long the object of jealousy and hatred to the Genoese, their
rival in wealth and commerce. Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal for the
honor and interest of his country, remonstrated against this in the highest
tone, not without threats, if the measure were not instantly abandoned. This
bold action, aggravated by the malice of the courtiers, and placed in the most
odious light, irritated Francis to such a degree, that he commanded Barbesieux,
whom he appointed admiral of the Levant, to sail directly to Genoa, with the
French fleet, to arrest Doria, and to seize his galleys. This rash order, of
which the most profound secrecy alone could have secured the execution, was
concealed with so little care, that Doria got timely intelligence of it, and
retired with all his galleys to a place of safety. Gausto his prisoner, who had
long observed and fomented his growing discontent, and had often allured him by
magnificent promises to enter into the Emperor's service, laid hold on this
favorable opportunity. While his indignation and resentment were at their
height, he prevailed on him to dispatch one of his officers to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The negotiation was not long; Charles
fully sensible of the importance of such an acquisition, granted him whatever
terms he required. Doria sent back his commission, together with the collar of
St. Michael to Francis, and hoisting the Imperial colors, sailed with all his
galleys toward Naples, not to block up the harbor of that unhappy city as he
had formerly engaged, but to bring them protection and deliverance.

HIS arrival opened the communication with the sea, and restored plenty in
Naples, which was now reduced to the last extremity; and the French, having
lost their superiority at sea, were soon reduced to great straits for want of
provisions. The prince of Orange, who succeeded the viceroy in the command of
the Imperial army, showed himself by his prudent conduct worthy of that honor
which his good fortune and the death of his generals had twice acquired him.
Beloved by the troops, who remembering the prosperity they had enjoyed under
his command, served him with the utmost alacrity, he let slip no opportunity of
harassing the enemy, and by continual alarms or sallies, fatigued and weakened
them Jovii Hist. lib. 36. p. 31, etc. Sigonii Vita Doriae, p. 1139. Bellay,
^14, etc.
. As an addition to all these misfortunes, the diseases common in that country
during the sultry months, began to break out among the French troops. The
prisoners communicated to them the pestilence which the Imperial army had
brought to Naples from Rome, and it raged with such violence, that few, either
officers or soldiers, escaped the infection. Of the whole army, not four
thousand men, a number scarce sufficient to defend the camp, were capable of
doing duty Bellay, 117, etc.
; and being now besieged in their turn, they suffered all the miseries of which
the Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after struggling long with so many
disappointments and calamities, which preyed on his mind at the same time that
the pestilence wasted his body, died, August 15, lamenting the negligence of
his sovereign, and the infidelity of his allies, to which so many brave men had
fallen victims P. He^ter. Rerum Aus^. lib. x. c. 2. 231.
. By his death, and the indisposition of the other generals, the command
devolved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer altogether unequal to such a
trust. He, with troops no less dispirited than reduced, retreated in disorder
to Aversa; which town being invested by the prince of Orange, Saluces was under
the necessity of consenting, that he himself should remain a prisoner of war,
that his troops should lay down their arms and colors, give up their baggage,
and march under a guard to the frontiers of France. By this ignominious
capitulation, the wretched remains of the French army were saved; and the
Emperor by his own perseverance and the good conduct of his generals, acquired
once more the superiority in Italy Bellay, 117, etc. Jovii Hist. lib. 25, 26.
.

THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon the ruin of the army in Naples. To
deliver his country from the dominion of foreigners was Doria's highest
ambition, and had been his principal inducement to quit the service of France,
and enter into that of the Emperor. A most favorable opportunity for executing
this honorable enterprise now presented itself. The city of Genoa, afflicted
by the pestilence, was almost deserted by its inhabitants: the French garrison
being neither regularly paid nor recruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable
number; Doria's emissaries found that such of the citizens as remained, being
weary alike of the French and Imperial yoke, the rigor of which they had
alternately felt, were ready to welcome him as their deliverer, and to second
all his measures. Things wearing this promising aspect, he sailed toward the
coast of Genoa; on his approach the French galleys retired; a small body of men
which he landed, surprised one of the gates of Genoa in the night time;
Trivulci, the French governor, with his feeble garrison, Sept. 12, shut
himselfup in the citadel, and Doria took possession of the town without
bloodshed or resistance. Want of provisions quickly obliged Trivulci to
capitulate; the people, eager to abolish such an odious monument of their
servitude, ran together with a tumultuous violence, and levelled the citadel
with the ground.

IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered himself the sovereign of his
country, which he had so happily freed from oppression. The fame of his former
actions, the success of his present attempt, the attachment of his friends, the
gratitude of his countrymen, together with the support of the Emperor, all
conspired to facilitate his attaining the supreme authority, and invited him to
lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which there are few examples, he
sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing himself to the virtuous satisfaction of
establishing liberty in his country, the highest object at which ambition can
aim. Having assembled the whole body of the people in the court before his
palace, he assured them, that the happiness of seeing them once more in
possession of freedom, was to him a full reward for all his services; that more
delighted with the name of citizen than of sovereign, he claimed no preeminence
or power above his equals; but remitted entirely to them the right of settling
what form of government they would now choose to be established among them. The
people listened to him with tears of admiration, and of joy. Twelve persons
were elected to new-model the constitution of the republic. The influence of
Doria's virtue and example, communicated itself to his countrymen; the factions
which had long torn and ruined the state, seemed to be forgotten; prudent
precautions were taken to prevent their reviving; and the same form of
government which has subsisted with little variations since that time in
Genoa, was established with universal applause. Doria, lived to a great age,
beloved, respected and honored by his countrymen; and adhering uniformly to
his professions of moderation, without arrogating any thing unbecoming a
private citizen, he preserved a great ascendant over the councils of the
republic, which owed its being to his generosity. The authority he possessed
was more flattering as well as more satisfactory, than that derived from
sovereignty; a dominion founded in love and in gratitude; and upheld by
veneration for his virtues, not by the dread of his power. His memory is still
reverenced by the Genoese, and he is distinguished in their public monuments,
and celebrated in the works of their historians by the most honorable of all
appellations, THE FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND THE RESTORER OF ITS LIBERTY Guic.
l. 19. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doriae, p. 1146. Jovii Hist. lib. 26. p. ^6, etc.
.

FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of his arms, discredited by so
many losses, made new efforts in the Milanese, (1529.) But the Count of St.
Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to whom he gave the command, was no
match for Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial generals. He, by his
superior skill in war, checked with a handful of men, the brisk, but
ill-concerted motions of the French; and though so infirm himself that he was
carried constantly in a litter, he surpassed them when occasion required, no
less in activity than in prudence. By an unexpected march he surprised,
defeated, and took the Count of St. Pol, and ruined the French army in the
Milanese as entirely as the prince of Orange had ruined that which besieged
Naples Guic. l. 19. 520. P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 233. Mem. de
Bellay, 121.
.

AMIDST these vigorous operations in the field each party discovered an
impatient desire of peace and continual negociations were carried on for that
purpose. The French King discouraged, and almost exhausted by so many
unsuccessful enterprises, was reduced now to think of obtaining the release of
his sons by concessions, not by the terror of his arms. The Pope hoped to
recover by a treaty whatever he had lost in the war. The Emperor,
notwithstanding the advantages which he had gained, had many reasons to make
him wish for an accommodation; Solomon, having overrun Hungary, was ready to
break in upon the Austrian territories with the whole force of the East; the
Reformation gained ground daily in Germany, the princes who favored it entered
into a confederacy, which he thought dangerous to the tranquillity of the
Empire; the Spaniards murmured at a war the weight of which rested chiefly on
them; the variety and extent of his operations, far exceeded what his revenues
could support; his success hitherto had been owing chiefly to his own good
fortune, and to the abilities of his generals, nor could he flatter himself
that they with troops destitute of every thing necessary, would always triumph
over enemies still in a condition to renew their attacks. All parties, however,
were at equal pains to conceal, or to dissemble their real sentiments. The
Emperor, that his inability to carry on the war might not be suspected,
insisted on high terms in the tone of a conqueror. The Pope, solicitous not to
lose his present allies, before he came to any agreement with Charles,
continued to make a thousand protestations of fidelity to the former, while he
privately negociated with the latter. Francis, afraid that his confederates
might prevent him by treating for themselves with the Emperor, had recourse to
many dishonorable artifices in order to turn their attention from the measures
which he was taking to adjust all differences with his rival.

IN this situation of affairs, when all the contending powers wished for peace,
but durst not venture too hastily on the steps necessary for attaining it, two
ladies undertook to procure this blessing so much desired by all Europe. These
were Margaret of Austria, dowager of Savoy, the Emperor's aunt, and Louise
Francis's mother. They agreed on an interview at Cambray, and being lodged in
two adjoining houses between which a communication was opened, met together
without ceremony or observation, and held daily conferences to which no person
whatever was admitted. As both were profoundly skilled in business, thoroughly
acquainted with the secrets of their respective courts, and possessed with
perfect confidence in each other, they soon made great progress toward a final
accommodation; and the ambassadors of all the confederates waited in anxious
suspense to know their fate, the determination of which was entirely in their
hands P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib x. c. 3. p. 133. Mem. de Bellay, p. 122.
.

BUT whatever diligence they used to hasten forward a general peace, the Pope
had the address and industry to get the start of his allies, by concluding at
Barcelona a particular treaty for himself, (June 20.) The Emperor, impatient to
visit Italy in his way to Germany; and desirous of re-establishing tranquillity
in the one country, before he attempted to compose the disorders which abounded
in the other, found it necessary to secure at least one alliance on which he
might depend, among the Italian states. That with the Pope, who courted it with
unwearied importunity, seemed more proper than any other. Charles being
extremely sollicitous to make some reparation for the insults which he had
offered to his sacred character, and to redeem past offenses by new merit,
granted Clement, after all his misfortunes, terms more favorable than he could
have expected after a continued series of success. Among other articles, he
engaged to restore all the territories belonging to the ecclesiastical state;
to re-establish the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give his natural
daughter in marriage to Alexander the head of that family; and to put it in the
Pope's power to decide concerning the fate of Sforza, and the possession of the
Milanese. In return for these ample concessions, Clement gave the Emperor the
investiture of Naples without the reserve of any tribute, but the present of a
white steed in acknowledgement of his sovereignty; absolved all who had been
concerned in assaulting and plundering Rome; and permitted Charles and his
brother Ferdinand to levy the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues throughout
their dominions Guic. l. 19. 522.
.

THE account of this transaction, quickened the negociations at Cambray, and
brought Margaret and Louise to an immediate agreement, (August 5.) The treaty
of Madrid served as the basis of that which they concluded; the latter being
intended to mitigate the ^igour of the former. The chief articles were, That
the Emperor should not, for the present, demand the restitution of Burgundy,
reserving however, in full force, his rights and pretensions to that duchy;
That Francis should pay two millions of crowns as the ransom of his sons, and,
before they were set at liberty, should restore such towns as he still held in
the Milanese; That he should resign the sovereignty of Flanders and Artois,
that he should renounce all his pretensions to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every
other place beyond the Alps, that he should immediately consummate the marriage
concluded between him and the Emperor's sister Eleanora P. Heuter. Rer. Austr.
lib. x. c. 3. p. 234. Sandov. Hist. dell. Empor. Carl. V. ii. 28.
.

THUS Francis, chiefly from his impatience to procure liberty to his sons,
sacrificed every thing which had at first prompted him to take arms, or which
had induced him, by continuing hostilities, during nine successive campaigns,
to protract the war at a length scarce known in Europe before the establishment
of standing armies, and the impositions of exorbitant taxes became universal.
The Emperor, by this treaty, was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy; he
delivered his territories in the Netherlands from an ignominious badge of
subjection; and after having baffled his rival in the field, he prescribed to
him the conditions of peace. The different conduct and spirit with which the
two Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led naturally to such an issue
of it. Charles, inclined by temper, as well as obliged by his situation,
concerted all his schemes with caution, pursued them with perseverance; and
observing circumstances and events with attention, let none escape that could
be improved to advantage. Francis, more enterprising than steady, undertook
great designs with warmth, but executed them with remissness; and, diverted by
his pleasures, or deceived by his favorites, he often lost the most promising
opportunities of success. Nor had the character of the two rivals themselves
greater influence on the operations of the war, than the opposite qualities of
the generals whom they employed. Among the Imperialists, valor tempered with
prudence; fertility of invention aided by experience; sagacity to penetrate the
designs of their enemies, as well as to conduct their own, with all the talents
that form great commanders and ensure victory, were conspicuous. Among the
French, these qualities were either wanting, or the very reverse of them
abounded; nor could they boast of one man (unless we except Lautrec, who was
always unfortunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara, Leyva, Guasto, the
prince of Orange, and other leaders whom Charles had to set in opposition to
them. Bourbon, Morone, and Doria, who might have been capable of balancing by
their abilities and conduct the superiority which the Imperialists had
acquired, were lost through the carelessness of the King, and the malice or
injustice of his counselors; and the most fatal blows given to France during
the progress of the war, proceeded from the despair and resentment of these
three persons, who were forced to abandon her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obliged to submit, were not the most
afflicting circumstance to him in the treaty of Cambray. He lost his reputation
and the confidence of all Europe, by abandoning his allies to his (...).
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary (...) adjusting their interests,
or afraid that whatever he claimed for them must have been purchased by farther
concessions on his own part, he gave them up in a body; and without the least
provision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the Florentines, the duke of
Ferrara, together with such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his army, to
the mercy of the Emperor. They exclaimed loudly against this base and
perfidious action, of which Francis himself was so much ashamed, that, in order
to avoid the pain of hearing from their ambassadors the reproaches which he
justly merited, it was some time before he would consent to allow them an
audience. Charles, on the other hand, was attentive to the interest of every
person who had adhered to him; the rights of some of his Flemish subjects, who
had estates or pretensions in France, were secured; one article was inserted,
obliging Francis to restore the blood and memory of the Constable Bourbon; and
to grant his heirs the possession of his lands which had been forfeited;
another, by which indemnification was stipulated for those French gentlemen who
had accompanied Bourbon in his exile Guic. l. 19. p. 525. P. Heuter. Rer,
Austr. lib. x. c. 4. p. 235.
. This conduct, laudable in itself, and placed in the most striking light by a
comparison with that of Francis, gained Charles as much esteem as the success
of his arms had acquired him glory.

FRANCIS, did not treat the King of England with the same neglect as his other
allies. He communicated to him all the steps of his negotiation at Cambray, and
luckily found that Monarch in a situation which left him no choice, but to
approve implicitly of his measures, and to concur with them. Henry had been
soliciting the Pope for some time, in order to obtain a divorce from Catharine
of Aragon his Queen. Several motives combined in prompting the King to urge
this suit; as he was powerfully influenced at some seasons by religious
considerations, he entertained many scruples concerning the legitimacy of his
marriage with his brother's widow; his affections had long (...) estranged from
the Queen, who was older than himself, and had lost all the charms she
possessed in the earlier part of her life; he was passionately desirous of
having male issue; Wolsey artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged his
hopes, that he might widen the breach between him and the Emperor, Catharine's
nephew; and, what was more forcible perhaps in its operation than all these
united, the King had conceived a violent love for the celebrated Anne Boleyn, a
young lady of great beauty, and of greater accomplishments, whom, as he found
it impossible to gain her on other terms, he determined to raise to the throne.
The Papal authority had often been interposed to grant divorces for reasons
less specious than those which Henry produced. When the matter was first
proposed to Clement, during his imprisonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as
his hopes of recovering liberty depended entirely on the King of England, and
his ally of France, he expressed the warmest inclination to gratify him. But no
sooner was he set free, than he discovered other sentiments. Charles, who
espoused the protection of his aunt with zeal inflamed by resentment, alarmed
the Pope on the one hand with threats which made a deep impression on his timid
mind; and allured him on the other with those promises in favor of his family,
which he afterward accomplished. Upon the prospect of these Clement not only
forgot all his obligations to Henry, but ventured to endanger the interest of
the Romish religion in England, and to run the risk of alienating that kingdom
for ever from the obedience of the Papal see. After amusing Henry during two
years, with all the subtleties and chicane which the court of Rome can so
dexterously employ to protract or defeat any cause; after displaying the whole
extent of his ambiguous and deceitful policy, the intricacies of which the
English historians, to whom it properly belongs, have found it no easy matter
to trace and unravel; he, at last, recalled the powers of the delegates whom he
had appointed to judge in the point, avocated the cause to Rome, leaving the
King no other hope of obtaining a divorce but from the personal decision of the
Pope himself. As Clement was now in strict alliance with the Emperor, who had
purchased his friendship by such exorbitant concessions, Henry despaired of
procuring any sentence from the former, but what was dictated by the latter.
His honor, however, and passions concurred in preventing him from
relinquishing his scheme of a divorce, which he determined to accomplish by
other means, and at any rate; and the continuance of Francis's friendship being
necessary to counterbalance the Emperor's power, he, in order to secure that,
not only offered no remonstrances against the total neglect of their allies, in
the treaty of Cambray, but made Francis the present of a large sum, as a
brotherly contribution toward the payment of the ransom for his sons Herbert.
Mem. de Bellay, p. 122.
.

MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy with a numerous train of the Spanish
nobility, and a considerable body of troops. He left the government of Spain
during his absence to the Empress Isabella. By his long residence in that
country, he had acquired such thorough knowledge of the character of the
people, that he could perfectly accommodate the maxims of his government to
their genius. He could even assume, upon some occasions, such popular manners,
as gained wonderfully upon the Spaniards. A striking instance of his
disposition to gratify them had occurred a few days before he embarked for
Italy: He was to make his public entry into the city of Barcelona; and some
doubts having arisen among the inhabitants, whether they should receive him as
Emperor, or as Count of Barcelona, Charles instantly decided in favor of the
latter, declaring that he was more proud of that ancient title, than of his
Imperial crown. Soothed with this flattering expression of his regard, the
citizens welcomed him with acclamations of joy, and the states of the province
swore allegiance to his son Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona. A
similar oath had been taken in (...) kingdoms of Spain, with equal satisfaction
Sandov. ii. p. 50. Ferrer. ix. 116.
.

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp and power of a conqueror; and
ambassadors from all the princes and states of that country attended his court
waiting to receive his decision with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where he
first landed, he was received with the acclamations due to the protector of
their liberties. Having honored Doria with many marks of distinction, and
bestowed on the republic several new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the
place fixed upon for his interview with the Pope. He affected to unite in his
public entry into that city the state and majesty that suited an Emperor, with
the humility becoming an obedient son of the church; and while at the head of
twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able to give law to all Italy, he kneeled
down to kiss the feet of that very Pope whom he had so lately detained a
prisoner. The Italians, after suffering so much from the ferocity and
licentiousness of his armies, and after having been long accustomed to form in
their imagination a picture of Charles which bore some resemblance to that of
the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths or Huns, who had formerly afflicted their
country with the like calamities, were surprised to see a prince of a graceful
appearance, affable and courteous in his deportment, of regular manners, and of
exemplary attention to all the offices of religion Sandov. Hist. d^^i Emp.
Charl. V. ii. 50, 53, etc.
. They were still more astonished when he settled all the concerns of the
princes and states which now depended upon him, with a degree of moderation and
equity much beyond what they had expected.

CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain, far from intending to give any
such extraordinary proof of this self-denial, seems to have been resolved to
avail himself to the utmost of the superiority which he had acquired in Italy.
But various circumstances concurred in pointing out the necessity of pursuing a
very different course. The progress of the Turkish Sultan, who, after
overrunning Hungary, had penetrated into Austria, and laid siege to Vienna
with an army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, (September 13,) loudly
called on him to collect his whole force to oppose that torrent; and though the
valor of the Germans, the prudent conduct of Ferdinand, together with the
treachery of the Vizier soon obliged Solomon to abandon that enterprise with
infamy and loss, (October 16,) the religious disorders still growing in Germany
made the Emperor's presence highly necessary there Sleidan. 121. Guic l. xx.
550.
: The Florentines, instead of giving their consent to the re-establishment of
the Medici, which by the treaty of Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to
procure, were preparing to defend their liberty by force of arms; the vast
preparations for his journey had involved him in unusual expenses; and on this,
as well as many other occasions, the multiplicity of affairs, and the
narrowness of his revenues obliged him to contract his vast schemes of
ambition, and to forego present and certain advantages, that he might guard
against more remote but unavoidable dangers. Charles, from all these
considerations, finding it necessary to assume an air of moderation, acted his
part with a good grace. He admitted Sforza into his presence, and not only gave
him a full pardon of all past offenses, but granted him the investiture of the
duchy together with his neice the King of Denmark's daughter in marriage. He
allowed the duke of Ferrara to keep possession of all his dominions, adjusting
the points in dispute between him and the Pope with an impartiality not very
agreeable to the latter. He came to a final accommodation with the Venetians
upon the reasonable condition of their restoring whatever they had usurped
during the late war, either in the Neapolitan or papal territories. In return
for so many concessions he exacted considerable sums from each of the powers
with whom he treated, which they paid without reluctance, and which afforded
him the means of proceeding on his journey toward Germany with a manificence
suitable to his dignity Sandov. ii. 55, etc.
.

THESE treaties, (1530,) which restored tranquillity to Italy after a tedious
war, the calamities of which had chiefly affected that country, were published
at Bologna with great solemnity on the first day of the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty, amidst the universal acclamations of the people, app^^^ng
the Emperor to whose moderation and generosity they ascribed the blessings of
peace which they had so long desired. The Florentines alone did not partake of
this general joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty more laudable than prudent,
they determined to oppose the restoration of the Medici. The Imperial army had
already entered their territories, and formed the siege of their capital. But
though deserted by all their allies, and left without any hope of succor, they
defended themselves many months with an obstinate valor worthy of better
success, and even when they surrenderd, they obtained a capitulation which gave
them hopes of securing some remains of their liberty. But the Emperor, from his
desire to gratify the Pope, frustrated all their expectations, and abolishing
their ancient form of government, raised Alexander Medici to the same absolute
dominion over that state which his family have retained to the present times.
Philibert de Chalons prince of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed during
this siege. His estate and titles descended to his sister Claude de Chalons,
who was married to Rene count of Nassau, and she transmitted to her posterity
of the house of Nassau the title of Princes of Orange which they have rendered
so illustrious Guic. l. xx. p. 541 etc. P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib. x. c. 4. p.
236.
.

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna, and the ceremony of his
coronation as King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, which the Pope
performed with the accustomed formalities, (February 22,) nothing detained
Charles in Italy H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Coronatione Car. V. ap Scard.
ii. 266.
; and he began to prepare for his journey to Germany. His presence became every
day more necessary in that country, and was solicited with equal importunity by
the catholics and by the favorers of the new doctrines. During that long
interval of tranquillity which the absence of the Emperor, the contests between
him and the Pope, and his attention to the war with France afforded them, the
latter had gained much ground. Most of the princes who had embraced Luther's
opinions, had not only established in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed the rites of the Romish church.
Many of the free cities had imitated their conduct. Almost one half of the
Germanick body had revolted from the papal see, and its dominion, even in that
part which had not hitherto shaken off the yoke, was considerably weakened by
the example of the neighboring states, or by the secret progress of those
doctrines which had undermined it among them. Whatever satisfaction the
Emperor, while he was at open enmity with the sea of Rome, might have felt in
those events that tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope, he could not help
perceiving now, that the religious divisions in Germany would, in the end;
prove extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority. The weakness of former
Emperors had suffered the great vassals of the Empire to make such successful
encroachments upon their power and prerogative, that during the whole course of
a war, which had often required the exertion of his utmost strength, Charles
scarce drew any effectual aid from Germany, and found that magnificent titles
or obsolete pretensions were almost the only advantages which he had gained by
swaying the Imperial scepter. He now became fully sensible that if he did not
recover in some degree the prerogatives which his predecessors had lost, and
acquire the authority, as well as possess the name of head of the Empire, his
high dignity would contribute more to obstruct than to promote his ambitious
schemes. Nothing, he saw, was more essential toward attaining this than to
suppress opinions which might form new bonds of confederacy among the princes
of the Empire, and unite them by ties stronger and more sacred than any
political connection. Nothing seemed to lead more certainly to the
accomplishment of his designs, than to employ zeal for the established
religion, of which he was the natural protector, as the instrument of extending
his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a prospect no sooner opened of coming to an accommodation with
the Pope, than by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of the Empire was held at
Spires, (March 15, 1529,) in order to take into consideration the state of
religion. The decree of the diet assembled there in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty six, which was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offense to the rest of Christendom. The greatest
delicacy of address, however, was requisite in proceeding to any decision more
rigorous. The minds of men kept in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on during twelve years without intermission of debate, or abatement of zeal,
were now inflamed to an high degree. They were accustomed to innovations, and
saw the boldest of them succeseful. Having not only abolished old rites, but
substituted new forms in their place, they were influenced as much by
attachment to the system which he had embraced, as by aversion to that which
they had abandoned. Luther himself, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to become remiss upon success, continued
the attack with as much vigor as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom many
equalled him in zeal, and some surpassed him in learning, were no less capable
than their master to conduct the controversy in the properest manner. Many of
the laity, and even of the princes, trained up amidst these incessant
disputations, and in the habit of listening to the arguments of the contending
parties who alternately appealed to them as judges, came to be profoundly
skilled in all the questions which were agitated, and, upon occasion, could
show themselves not in expert in any of the arts with which these theological
encounters were managed. It was obvious from all these circumstances, that any
violent decision of the diet must have immediately precipitated matters into
confusion, and have kindled in Germany the flames of a religious war. All,
therefore, that the Archduke, and the other commissioners appointed by the
Emperor demanded of the diet, was, to enjoin those states of the Empire who had
hitherto obeyed the decree issued against Luther at Worms in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-four, to persevere in the observation of it,
and to prohibit the other states from attempting any farther innovation in
religion, particularly from abolishing the Mass, before the meeting of a
general council. After much dispute, a decree to that effect was approved of by
a majority of voices Sleid. Hist. 117.
.

THE Elector of Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse,
the dukes of Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together with the deputies of
fourteen Imperial or free cities The fourteen cities were Strasburg, Nuremberg,
Ulm, Constance, Reutlingen, Windsheim, Meinengen, Lindaw, Kempten, Hailbron,
Isna, Weissemburgh, Nordlingen, and St. Gal.
, entered a solemn protest against this decree, as unjust and impious, (April
19.) On that account they were distinguished by the name of PROTESTANTS Sleid.
Hist. 119. F. Paul, Hist. p. 45. Seckend. ii. 127.
, an appellation which has since become better known, and more honorable, by
its being applied indiscriminately to all the sects of whatever denomination
which have revolted from the Roman see. Not satisfied with this declaration of
their dissent from the decree of the diet, the Protestants sent ambassadors
into Italy to lay their grievances before the Emperor, from whom they met with
the most discouraging reception. Charles was at that time in close union with
the Pope, and sollicitous to attach him inviolably to his interest. During
their long residence at Bologna, they held many consultations concerning the
most effectual means of extirpating the heresies which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and tim^d mind the proposal of a general
council filled with horror, even beyond that which Popes, the constant enemies
of such assemblies, usually feel, employed every argument to dissuade the
Emperor from consenting to that measure. He represented general councils as
factious, ungovernable, presumptuous, formidable to civil authority, and too
slow in their operations to remedy disorders which required an immediate cure.
Experience, he said, had now taught both the Emperor and himself, that
forbearance and lenity exasperated the spirit of innovation which they ought to
have mollified; it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous
methods which such a desperate case required; Leo's sentence of
excommunication, and the decree of the diet at Worms should be carried into
execution, and it was incumbent on the Emperor to employ his whole power, in
order to overawe those on whom the reverence due either to ecclesiastical or
civil authority had no longer any influence. Charles, whose views were very
different from the Pope's. and who became daily more sensible how obstinate and
deep rooted the evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants by means less
violent, and considered the convocation of a council as no improper expedient
for that purpose; but promised, if these gentler arts failed of success, that
then he would exert himself with vigor to reduce those stubborn enemies of the
Catholic faith F. Paul, 47 Seck. l. ii. 142. Hist, de Confessed. d'Auxbourg, par
D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.
.

SUCH were the sentiments with which the Emperor set out for Germany, having
already appointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Ausburg, (March 22, 1530.)
In his journey toward that city, he had many opportunities of observing the
disposition of the Germans with regard to the points in controversy, and found
their minds every where so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced him that
nothing tending to severity or rigor ought to be attempted, till all other
measures proved ineffectual. He made his public entry into Augsburg with
extraordinary pomp, (June 15;) and found there such a full assembly of the
members of the diet as was suitable both to the importance of the affairs which
were to come under their consideration, and to the honor of an Emperor, who,
after a long absence, returned to them crowned with reputation and success. His
presence seems to have communicated to all parties an unusual spirit of
moderation and desire of peace. The Elector of Saxony would not permit Luther
to accompany him to the diet, lest he should offend the Emperor by bringing
into his presence a person excommunicated by the Pope, and the ^^thor of all
those dissensions which it now appeared so difficult to compose. At the
Emperor's desire, all the Protestant princes forbad the divines who accompanied
them to preach in public during their residence at Augsburg. For the same
reason they employed Melancthon, the man of the greatest learning, as well as
of the most pacific and gentle spirit among the Reformers, to draw up a
confession of their faith, expressed in terms as little offensive to the Roman
Catholics, as a regard for truth would permit. Melancthon, who seldom suffered
the rancour of controversy to envenom his style, even in writings purely
polemical, executed a task so agreeable to his natural disposition with great
moderation and success. The Creed which he composed, known by the name of the
Confession of Augsburg, from the place where it was presented, was read
publicly in the diet; some Popish divines were appointed to examine it; they
brought in their animadversions; a dispute ensued between them and Melancthon,
seconded by some of his brethren; but though Melancthon softened some articles,
made concessions with regard to others, and put the least exceptionable sense
upon all; though the Emperor himself labored with great earnestness to
reconcile the contending parties; so many marks of distinction were now
established, and such insuperable barriers placed between the two churches,
that all hopes of bringing about a coalition seemed utterly desperate Seckond.
lib. il. 159, etc. Abr. Sculteti Annals Evangelici ap. Herm. Von der Hard.
Hist. Liter. Reform. Lips. 1717. fol. p. 159.
.

FROM the divines, among whom his endeavors had been so unsuccessful, Charles
turned to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find them, how desirous soever
of accommodation, or willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed than the
former to renounce their opinions. At that time, zeal for religion took
possession of the minds of men to a degree which can scarce be conceived by
those who live in an age when the passions excited by the first manifestation
of truth, and the first recovery of liberty, have in great measure ceased to
operate. This zeal was then of such strength as to overcome attachment to their
political interest, which is commonly the predominant motive among princes. The
Elector of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, and other chiefs of the Protestants,
though solicited separately by the Emperor, and allured by the promise or
prospect of those advantages which it was known they were most solicitous to
attain, refused, with a fortitude highly worthy of imitation, to abandon what
they deemed the cause of God, for the sake of an earthly acquisition Sleid.
132. Scultet. Annal. 158.
.

EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Protestant party proving
abortive, nothing now remained for the Emperor but to take some vigorous
measures toward asserting the doctrines and authority of the established
church. These, Campeggio, the Papal nuncio, had always recommended as the only
proper and effectual course of dealing with such obstinate heretics. In
compliance with his opinions and remonstrances, the diet issued a decree
(November 19,) condemning most of the peculiar tenets held by the Protestants;
forbidding any person to protect or tolerate those who taught them; enjoining a
strict observance of the established rites; and prohibiting any further
innovation under severe penalties. All orders of men were required to assist
with their persons and fortunes in carrying this decree into execution; and
such as refused to obey it were declared incapable of acting as judges, or of
appearing as parties in the Imperial chamber, the supreme court of judicature
in the Empire. To all which was subjoined a promise that an application should
be made to the Pope, requiring him to call a general council within six months,
in order to terminate all controversies by its sovereign decisions Sleid. 139.
.

THE severity of this decree, which they considered as a prelude to the most
violent persecutions, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced them that the
Emperor was resolved on their destruction. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the feeble spirit of Melancthon;
and as if the the cause had already been desperate, he gave himself up to
melancholy and lamentation. But Luther, who during the meeting of the diet
endeavored to confirm and animate his party by several treatises which he
addressed to them, was not disconcerted or dismayed at the prospect of this new
danger. He comforted Melancthon and his other desponding disciples, and
exhorted the princes not to abandon those truths which they had lately asserted
with such laudable boldness Seck. ii. 180. Sleid. 140.
. His exhortations made the deeper impression upon them as they were greatly
alarmed at that time by the account of a combination among the Popish princes
of the Empire for the maintenance of the established religion, to which Charles
himself had acceded Seck. ii. 200. iii. 11.
. This convinced them that it was necessary to stand on their guard; and that
their own safety as well as the success of their cause depended on union.
Filled with this dread of the adverse party, and with these sentiments
concerning the conduct proper for themselves, they assembled at Smalkalde.
There, they concluded a league of mutual defense against all aggressors Sleid.
Hist. 142.
(December 22,) by which they formed the Protestant states of the Empire into
one regular body, and beginning already to consider themselves as such, they
resolved to apply to the Kings of France and England, and to implore them to
assist and patronize their new confederacy.

AN affair not connected with religion furnished them with a pretense for
courting the aid of foreign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views enlarged in
proportion to the increase of his power and grandeur, had formed a scheme of
continuing the Imperial crown in his family, by procuring his brother Ferdinand
to be elected King of the Romans. The present juncture was favorable for the
execution of that design. The Emperor's arms had been every where victorious;
he had given law to all Europe at the late peace; no rival now remained in a
condition to balance or to control him; and the Electors, dazzled by the
splendor of his success, or overawed by the greatness of his power, durst
scarce dispute the will of a prince whose solicitations carried with them the
authority of commands. Nor did he want plausible reasons to enforce the
measure. The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said, obliged him to be often
absent from Germany; the growing disorders occasioned by the controversies
about religion, as well as the formidable neighborhood of the Turks, who
continually threatened to break in with their desolating armies into the heart
of the Empire, required the constant presence of a prince, endowed with
prudence capable of composing the former, and with power and valor sufficient
to repel the latter. His brother Ferdinand possessed these qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany, he had acquired a thorough
knowledge of their constitution and manners; having been present almost from
the first rise of their religious dissensions, he knew what remedies were most
proper, what they could bear, and how to apply them; as his own dominions lay
on the Turkish frontier, he was the natural defender of Germany against the
invasions of the Infidels, being prompted by interest no less than he would be
bound in duty to oppose them.

THESE arguments made little impression on the Protestants. Experience taught
them, that nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed progress of their
opinions, than the interregnum after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness in the reins of government which these occasioned;
after deriving such advantages from a state of anarchy, they were extremely
unwilling to give themselves a new and a fixed master. They perceived clearly
the extent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at rendering the Imperial crown
hereditary in his family, and would of course establish in the Empire an
absolute dominion, to which elective princes could not have aspired with equal
facility. They determined therefore to oppose Ferdinand's election with the
utmost vigor, and to rouse their countrymen by their example and exhortations,
to withstand this encroachment on their liberties. The Elector of Saxony
accordingly, not only refused to be present in the electoral college, which the
Emperor summoned to meet at Cologne (January 5, 153^) but instructed his eldest
son to appear there, and to protest against the election as informal, illegal,
contrary to the articles of the golden bull, and subversive of the liberties of
the Empire. But the other Electors, whom Charles had been at great pains to
gain, without regarding either his absence, or protest, chose Ferdinand King of
the Romans; who a few days after was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle Sleid. 142.
Seck. iii. 1. P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib. x. c. 6. p. 240.
.

THE account of this transaction, as well as of the commencement of some
prosecutions against them on account of their religious principles, in the
Imperial chamber, being brought to the Protestants, who were assembled a second
time at Smalkalde, they thought it necessary both to renew their former
confederacy, and immediately to dispatch their ambassadors into France and
England (Febru. 29). Francis had observed, with all the jealousy of a rival,
the reputation which the Emperor had acquired by his seeming disinterestedness
and moderation in settling the affairs of Italy; and beheld with great concern,
the successful step which he had taken toward perpetuating and extending his
authority in Germany by the election of a King of the Romans. Nothing however,
would have been more impolitic than to precipitate into a new war his kingdom
exhausted by extraordinary efforts, and discouraged by ill success, before it
had got time to recruit its strength, or to forget past misfortunes. Nor could
he, when no provocation had been given, and scarce a pretext had been afforded
him, violate a treaty of peace which he himself had so lately solicited,
without forfeiting the esteem of all Europe, and being detested as a prince
void of probity and honor. He observed, with great joy, powerful factions
beginning to form in the Empire; he listened with the utmost eagerness to the
complaints of the Protestant princes; and without seeming to countenance their
religious opinions, determined secretly to cherish those sparks of political
discord which might be afterward kindled into a flame. For this purpose, he
sent William de Bellay, one of the ablest negociators in France, into Germany,
who visiting the courts of the malcontent prince, and heightened their ill
humor by various arts, concluded an alliance between them and his master
Bellay, 129, a. 130, b. Seck. iii. 14.
, which though concealed at that time, and productive of no immediate effects,
laid the foundation of an union fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambitious
projects; and showed the discontented princes of Germany, where they might, for
the future, find a protector no less powerful than willing to undertake their
defense against the encroachments of the Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against Charles, in complaisance to whom,
the Pope had long retarded, and now openly opposed his divorce, was no less
disposed than Francis to strengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the Emperor. But his favorite project of the divorce led him
into such a labyrinth of schemes and negociations, and he was, at the same
time, so intent on abolishing the papal jurisdiction in England, that he had no
leisure for foreign affairs; and was obliged to satisfy himself with giving
general promises, together with a small supply in money to the confederates of
Smalkalde Herbert, 152, 154.
.

MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced Charles that this was not a juncture
when the extirpation of heresy was to be attempted by violence and rigor;
that, in compliance with the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded with
imprudent precipitation; and that it was more his interest to consolidate
Germany into one united and vigorous body, than to divide and enfeeble it by a
civil war. The Protestants, already considerable by their numbers, and their
zeal, had now acquired additional weight and importance by their joining in
that confederacy into which the rash steps taken at Augsburg had forced them.
Having now discovered their ^wn strength, they despised the decisions of the
Imperial chamber; and being secure of foreign protection, were ready to set the
head of the Empire at defiance. At the same time his peace with France was
precarious, the friendship of an irresolute and interested pontiff was not to
be relied on; and Solomon, in order to repair the infamy and loss which his
arms had sustained in the former campaign, was preparing to enter Austria with
more numerous forces. On all these accounts, especially the last, a speedy
accommodation with the malecontent princes, was necessary not only for the
accomplishment of his future schemes, but for ascertaining his present safety.
Negociations were, accordingly, carried on by his direction with the Elector of
Saxony and his associates, (1532;) after many delays occasioned by their
jealousy of the Emperor, and of each other, after innumerable difficulties
arising from the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which cannot admit of
being altered, modified, or relinquished in the same manner as points of
political interest, terms of pacification were agreed upon at Nuremberg, (July
23) and ratified solemnly in the Diet at Ratisbon (August 3). In this treaty,
it was stipulated, That universal peace be established in Germany, until the
meeting of a general council, the convocation of which within six months the
Emperor shall endeavor to procure; That no person be molested on account of
religion; That a stop be put to all processes begun by the Imperial chamber
against Protestants, and the sentences already passed to their detriment be
declared void. On their part, the Protestants engaged to assist the Emperor
with all their forces in resisting the invasion of the Turks Du Mont Corpse
Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87, 89.
. Thus by their firmness in adhering to their principles, by the unanimity with
which they urged all their claims, and by their dexterity in availing
themselves of the Emperor's situation, the Protestants obtained terms which
amounted almost to a toleration of their religion; all the concessions were
made by Charles, none by them; even the favorite point of approving his
brother's election was not mentioned; and the Protestants of Germany, who had
hitherto been viewed only as a religious sect, came henceforth to be considered
as a political body of no small consequence Sleid. 149, etc. Seck. iii. 18.
.

THE intelligence which Charles received of Solyman's having entered Hungary at
the head of three hundred thousand men cut short the deliberations of the Diet
at Ratisbon; the contingent both of troops and money which each prince was to
furnish toward the defense of the Empire having been already settled. The
Protestants as a testimony of their gratitude to the Emperor, exerted
themselves with extraordinary zeal, and brought into the field forces that
exceeded in number the quota imposed on them; and the Catholics imitating their
example, one of the greatest and best appointed armies that had ever been
levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Being joined by a body of Spanish and
Italian veterans under the marquis del Guasto; by some heavy armed cavalry from
the Low Countries; and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in Bohemia,
Austria and his other territories, it amounted in all to ninety thousand
disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a prodigious swarm of
irregulars. Of this vast army, worthy the first Prince in Christendom, the
Emperor took the command in person; and mankind waited in suspense the issue of
a decisive battle between the two greatest Monarchs in the world. But each of
them dreading the other's power and good fortune, they both conducted their
operations with such excessive caution, that a campaign, for which such immense
preparations had been made, ended without any memorable event. Solomon finding
it impossible to gain ground upon an enemy always attentive, and on his guard,
marched back to Constantinople toward the end of autumn Jovii. Hist. lib. 30
p. 100, etc. Bar Hist. de l Empire, i. 8. 347.
. It is remarkable that in such a martial age, when every gentleman was a
soldier, and every prince a general, this was the first time that Charles, who
had already carried on such extensive wars, and gained so many victories,
appeared at the head of his troops. In this first essay of his arms, to have
opposed such a leader as Solomon, was no small honor; to have obliged him to
retreat merited very considerable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, (August 16.) the Elector of Saxony died,
and was succeeded by his son John Frederick. The Reformation rather gained than
lost by that event; the new Elector, no less attached than his predecessors to
the opinions of Luther* occupied the station which they held at the head of the
Protestant party, and defended, with the boldness and zeal of youth, the cause
which they had fostered and reared with the caution of old age.

IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks, Charles, impatient to revisit
Spain, set out, on his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely desirous of
an interview with the Pope, they met a second time at Bologna, with the same
external demonstrations of respect and friendship, but with little of that
confidence which had subsisted between them during their late negotiations
there. Clement was much dissatisfied with the Emperor's proceedings at
Augsburg; his concessions with regard to the speedy convocation of a council,
having more than cancelled all the merit of the severe decree against the
doctrines of the Reformers. The toleration granted to the Protestants at
Ratisbon, and the more explicit promise concerning a council with which it was
accompanied, had irritated him still farther. Charles, however, partly from
conviction that the meeting of a council would be attended with salutary
effects, and partly from his desire to please the Germans, having solicited him
by his ambassadors to call that assembly without delay, and now urging the same
thing in person, Clement was greatly embarassed what reply he should make to a
request, which it was indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He
endeavored at first to divert Charles from the measure, but finding him
inflexible, he had recourse to artifices which he knew would delay, if not
entirely defeat the calling of that assembly. Under the plausible pretext of
its being previously necessary to settle, with all parties concerned, the place
of the council's meeting; the manner of its proceedings; the right of the
persons who should be admitted to vote; and the authority of their decisions;
he dispatched a nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from the Emperor, to the
Elector of Saxony, as the head of the Protestants. With regard to each of these
articles, inextricable difficulties and contests arose. The protestants
demanded a council to be held in Germany; the Pope insisted that it should meet
in Italy; they contended that a^ points in dispute should be determined by the
words of the holy scripture alone; he considered the decrees of the church, and
the opinions of fathers and doctors as of equal authority; they required a free
council in which the divines commissioned by different churches should be
allowed a voice; he aimed at modelling the council in such a manner as would
render it entirely dependent on his pleasure: Above all, the Protestants
thought it unreasonable that they should bind themselves to submit to the
decrees of a council, before they knew on what Principles these decrees were to
be founded, by what persons they were to be pronounced, and what forms of
proceeding they would observe. The Pope maintained it to be altogether
unnecessary to call a council, if those who demanded it did not not previously
declare their resolution to acquiesce in its decrees. In order to adjust such a
variety of points, many expedients were proposed, and the negociations spun out
to such a length, as effectually answered Clement's purpose of putting off the
meeting of a council, without drawing on himself the whole infamy of
obstructing a measure which all Europe deemed so essential to the good of the
church F. Paul. Hist. 61. Seckend iii. 73.
.

TOGETHER with this negotiation about calling a council, the Emperor carried on
another which he had still more at heart, for securing the peace established in
Italy. As Francis had renounced his pretensions in that country with great
reluctance, Charles made no doubt but that he would lay hold on the first
pretext afforded him, or embrace the first opportunity which presented itself
of recovering what he had lost. It became necessary, on this account, to take
measures for assembling an army able to oppose him. As his treasury, drained by
a long war, could not supply the sums requisite for keeping such a body
constantly on foot, he attempted to throw that burden on his allies, and to
provide for the safety of his own dominions at their expense, by proposing that
the Italian states should enter into a league of defense against all invaders;
that, on the first appearance of danger, an army should be raised and
maintained at the common charge; and that Antonio de Leyva should be appointed
the generalissimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable to Clement, though for a
reason very different from that which induced the Emperor to make it, (1533.)
He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver Italy from the German and Spanish
veterans which had so long filled all the powers in that country with terror,
and still kept them in subjection to the Imperial yoke. A league was
accordingly concluded (Feb. 24); all the Italian states, the Venetians
excepted, acceded to it; the sum which each of the contracting parties should
furnish toward maintaining the army was fixed; the Emperor agreed to withdraw
the troops which gave so much umbrage to his allies, and which he was unable
any longer to support. Having disbanded part of them, and removed the rest to
Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board Doria's galleys, and arrived at
Barcelona, (April 22) Guic. l. xx. 551. Ferreras, ix. 149.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for securing the peace of Germany and
maintaining that system which he had established in Italy, the Emperor became
every day more and more apprehensive that both would be soon disturbed by the
intrigues or arms of the French King. His apprehensions were well founded, as
nothing but the desperate situation of his affairs could have brought Francis
to give his consent to a treaty so dishonorable and disadvantageous as that of
Cambray: He at the very time of ratifying it, had formed a resolution to
observe it no longer than necessity compelled him, and took a solemn protest,
though with the most profound secrecy, against several articles in the treaty,
particularly that whereby he renounced all pretensions to the duchy of Milan,
as unjust, injurious to his heirs, and invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by
his command, entered a protest to the same purpose, and with the like secrecy,
when the ratification of the treaty was registered in the parliament of Paris
Du Mont. Corpse Diplom. tom. iv. part. 2. p. 52.
; and Francis seems to have thought that, by employing an artifice unworthy of
a King, destructive of public faith, and of the ^^^tual confidence on which all
transactions between nations are founded, he was released from any obligations
to perform the most solemn promises, or to adhere to the most sacred
engagements. From the moment he concluded the peace of Cambray, he wished and
watched for an opportunity of violating it with safety. He endeavored for that
reason to strengthen his alliance with the King of England, whose friendship he
cultivated with the greatest assiduity. He put the military force of his own
kingdom on a better and more respectable footing than ever. He artfully
fomented the jealousy and discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis labored to break the strict confederacy which
subsisted between Charles and Clement; and he had soon the satisfaction to
observe appearances of disgust and alienation arising in the mind of that
suspicious and interested Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union would
not be lasting. As the Emperor's decision in favor of the Duke of Ferrara had
greatly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the injustice of that
proceeding, and flattered him that the Papal see would find in him a more
impartial and no less powerful protector. As the importunity with which Charles
demanded a council was extremely offensive to the Pope, Francis artfully
created obstacles to prevent it, and attempted to divert the German princes,
his allies, from insisting so obstinately on that point Bellay, 141, etc. Seck.
iii. 48. (...) Paul, 63.
. As the Emperor had gained such an ascendant over Clement by contributing to
aggrandize his family, Francis endeavored to allure him by the same
irresistible bait, proposing a marriage between his second son Henry duke of
Orleans, and Catharine, the daughter of the Pope's cousin Laurence di Medici.
On the first overtures of this match, the Emperor could not persuade himself
that Francis really intended to debase the royal blood of France by an alliance
with Catharine, whose ancestors had been so lately private citizens (...)
merchants in Florence, and believed that he mean^ only to flatter or amuse the
ambitious Pontiff. He thought it necessary, however to eface the impression
which such a dazzling offer might have made, by promising to break off the
marriage which had been agreed to between his own niece the King of Denmark's
daughter, and the Duke of Milan, and to substitute Catherine in her place. But
the French ambassadors producing unexpectedly full powers to conclude the
marriage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this expedient had no effect, Clement
was so highly pleased with an honor which added such luster and dignity to the
house of Medici, that he offered to grant Catharine the investiture of
considerable territories in Italy by way of portion; he seemed ready to support
Francis in prosecuting his ancient claims in that country, and consented to a
personal interview with that Monarch Guic. l. xx. 551. 533. Belay, 138.
.

CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent a meeting, in which nothing was
likely to pass but what would be of detriment to him; nor could he bear, after
he had twice condescended to visit the Pope, in his own territories, that
Clement should bestow such a mark of distinction on his rival, as to venture on
a voyage by sea, at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court to Francis in
the French dominions. But the Pope's eagerness to accomplish the match overcame
all scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which must have influenced him on
any other occasion. The interview notwithstanding several artifices of the
Emperor to prevent it, took place at Marseilles with extraordinary pomp, and
demonstrations of confidence on both sides; and the marriage, which the
ambition and abilities of Catharine rendered in the sequel as fatal to France,
as it was then thought dishonorable, was consummated, (1534). But whatever
schemes may have been secretly concerted by the Pope and Francis in favor of
the duke of Orleans, to whom his father proposed to make over all his rights in
Italy, so careful were they to avoid giving any cause of offense to the
Emperor, that no treaty was concluded between them Guic. l. 20. 555.
; and even in the marriage articles, Catharine renounced all claims and
pretensions in Italy, except to the duchy of (...) Du Mont Corpse Diplom. iv.
p. ii. 101.
.

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on these negociations, and forming
this connection with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to the Emperor, such
was the artifice and duplicity of Clement's character that he suffered the
latter to direct all his proceedings with regard to the King of England, and
was no less attentive to gratify him in that particular, than if the most
cordial union had still subsisted between them. Henry's suit for a divorce had
now continued near six years; during all which period the Pope negociated,
promised, retracted, and concluded nothing. After bearing repeated delays and
disappointments, longer than could have been expected from a prince of such a
choleric and impetuous temper, his patience was at last so much exhausted,
that he applied to another tribunal for that decree which he had solicited in
vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the
authority of Universities, Doctors, and Rabbis, who had been consulted with
respect to the point, annulled the King's marriage with Catharine; her daughter
was declared illegitimate; and Anne Boleyn acknowledged as Queen of England. At
the same time Henry began to neglect and to threaten the Pope whom he had
hitherto courted, and to make innovations in the church, of which he had
formerly been such a zealous defender. Clement, who had already seen so many
provinces and kingdoms revolt from the Holy see, became apprehensive at last
that England would imitate their example, and partly from his solicitude to
prevent that fatal blow, partly in compliance with the French King's
solicitations, determined to give Henry such satisfaction as might still retain
him within the bosom of the church. But the violence of the Cardinals, devoted
to the Emperor, did not allow the Pope leisure for executing this prudent
resolution, and hurried him with a precipitation fatal to the Roman see, to
issue a bull (March 23,) rescinding Cranmer's sentence, confirmed Henry's
marriage with Catharine, and declaring ^im excommunicated, if, within a time
specified, he did not abandon the wife he had taken, and return to her whom he
had deserted. Enraged at this unexpected decree, Henry kept no longer any
measures with the court of Rome; his subjects seconded his resentment and
indignation; an act of parliament was passed, abolishing the papal power and
jurisdiction in England; by another, the King was declared supreme head of the
church, and all the authority of which the Pope^ were deprived was vested in
him. That vast fabric of ecclesiastical dominion which had been raised with
such art, and whose foundations seemed so deep, being no longer supported by
the veneration of the people, was overturned in a moment. Henry himself, with
the caprice peculiar to his character, continued to defend the doctrines of the
Romish church as fiercely as he attacked its jurisdiction. He alternately
persecuted the Protestants for rejecting the former, and the Catholics for
acknowledging the latter. But his subjects being once permitted to enter into
new paths, did not choose to stop short at the precise point prescribed by him.
Having been encouraged by his example to break some of their fetters, they were
so impatient to shake off all that remained Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform.
, that in the following reign, with the general applause of the nation, a total
separation was made from the church of Rome in articles of doctrine, as well as
in matters of discipline and jurisdiction.

A SHORT delay might have saved the Sea of Rome from all the unhappy
consequences of Clement's rashness. Soon after his sentence against Henry, he
fell into a languishing distemper, which gradually wasting his constitution,
put an end to his Pontificate, (September 25) the most unfortunate, both during
its continuance, and by its effects, that the church had known for many ages.
The very day (Octo. 13) on which the Cardinals entered the conclave, they
raised to the Papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred college, and
the eldest member of that body, who assumed the name of Paul III. The account
of his promotion was received with extraordi^ acclamations of joy by the people
of Rome, highly pleased, after an interval of more than an hundred years, to
see the crown of St. Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen. Persons more
capable of judging, formed a favorable presage of his administration, from the
experience which he had acquired under four pontificates, as well as the
character of prudence and moderation which he had uniformly maintained in a
station of great eminence, and during an active and difficult juncture that
required both talents and address Guic. l. 20. 556. F. Paul. 64.
.

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance of its peace to the death of
Clement; for although no traces remain in history of any league concluded
between him and Francis, it is scarce to be doubted but that he would have
seconded the operations of the French arms in Italy, that he might have
gratified his ambition by seeing one of his family possessed of the supreme
power in Florence, and another in Milan. But upon the election of Paul III. who
had hitherto adhered uniformly to the Imperial interest, Francis found it
necessary to suspend his operations for some time, and to put off the
commencement of hostilities against the Emperor, on which he was fully
determined.

WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to renew a war which had hitherto
proved so fatal to himself and his subjects, a transaction of a very singular
nature was carried on in Germany. Among many beneficial and salutary effects of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause, it was attended, as must be the
case, in all actions and events wherein men are concerned, with some
consequences of an opposite nature. When the human mind is rouzed by grand
objects, and agitated by strong passions, its operations acquire such force,
that they are apt to become irregular and extravagant. Upon any great
revolution in religion, such irregularities abound most, at that particular
period, when men having thrown off the authority of their ancient principles,
do not yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obligation of those new
ones which they have embraced. The mind, in that situation, pushing forward
with the boldness which prompted it to reject established opinions, and not
guided by a clear knowledge of the system substituted in their place, disdains
all restraint, and runs into wild notions that often lead to scandalous or
immoral conduct. Thus, in the first ages of the Christian church, many of the
new converts, having renounced their ancient Creeds, and being but imperfectly
acquainted with the doctrines and precepts of Christianity, broached the most
extravagant opinions equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which errors
disappeared or were exploded when the knowledge of religion increased, and came
to be more generally dissused. In like manner soon after Luther's appearance,
the rashness or ignorance of some of his disciples led them to publish absurd
and pernicious tenets, which being proposed to men extremely illiterate, but
fond of novelty, and at a time when their minds were turned wholly toward
religious speculations, gained too easy credit and authority among them. To
these causes must be imputed the extravagancies of Munster, in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as well as the rapid progress which they
made among the peasants; but though the insurrection excited by that Fanatic was
soon suppressed, several of his followers lurked in different places, and
endeavored privately to propagate his opinions.

IN those provinces of Upper Germany, which had already been so cruelly wasted
by their enthusiastic rage, the magistrates watched their motions with such
severe attention, that many of them found it necessary to retire into other
countries, some were punished, others driven into exile, and their errors were
entirely rooted out. But in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where the
pernicious tendency of their opinions was more unknown, and guarded against
with less care, they got admittance into several towns, and spread the
infection of their principles. The most remarkable of their religious tenets
related to the Sacrament of Baptism, which as they contended, ought to be
administered only to persons grown up to years of understanding, and should be
performed not by sprinkling them with water, but by dipping them in it: For
this reason they condemned the baptism of infants, and rebaptizing all whom
they admitted into their society, the sect came to be distinguished by the name
of Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion concerning baptism, which has the
appearance of being founded on the practice of the church in the apostolic age,
and contains nothing inconsistent with the peace and order of human society,
they added other principles of a most enthusiastic, as well as dangerous
nature. They maintained that, among Christians who had the precepts of the
gospel to direct, and the spirit of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecessary, but an unlawful encroachment on their spiritual
liberty; that the distinctions occasioned by birth, or rank, or wealth, being
contrary to the spirit of the gospel, which considers all men as equal, should
be entirely abolished; that all Christians throwing their possessions into one
common stock, should live together in that state of equality which becomes
members of the same family; that as neither the laws of nature, nor the
precepts of the New Testament had placed any restraints upon men with regard to
the number of wives which they might marry they should use that liberty which
God himself had granted to the patriarchs.

SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained with enthusiastic zeal and boldness,
were not long of producing the violent effects natural to them. Two Anabaptist
prophets, John Matthias, a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or Beukels, a
journeyman tailor of Leyden, possessed with the rage of making proselytes,
fixed their residence at Munster, an Imperial city in Westphalia, of the first
rank, under the sovereignty of its bishop, but governed by its own senate and
consuls. As neither of these Fanatics wanted the talents necessary for such an
undertaking, great resolution, the appearance of sanctity, bold pretensions to
inspiration, and a confident and plausible manner of discoursing, they soon
gained many converts. Among these were Rothman, who had first preached the
Protestant doctrine in Munster, and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good birth, and
considerable eminence. Emboldened by the countenance of such disciples, they
openly taught their opinions; and not satisfied with that liberty, they made
several attempts, though without success, to seize the town, in order to get
their tenets established by public authority. At last, having secretly called
in their associates from the neighboring country, they suddenly took
possession of the arsenal and senate house in the night time, and running
through the streets with drawn swords, and horrible howlings, cried out
alternately, "Repent, and be baptized," and "Depart ye ungodly." The senators,
the canons, the nobility, together with the more sober citizens, whether
Papists or Protestants, terrified at their threats and outcries, fled in
confusion, and left the city under the dominion of a frantic multitude,
consisting chiefly of strangers. Nothing now remaining to overawe or control
them, they set about modelling the government according to their own wild
ideas; and though at first they showed so much reverence for the ancient
constitution, as to elect senators of their own sect; and to appoint
Cnipperdoling and another proselyte consuls, this was nothing more than form;
for all their proceedings were directed by Matthias, who in the style, and with
the authority of a prophet, uttered his commands, which it was instant death to
disobey. Having begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage the churches,
and deface their ornaments; he enjoined them to destroy all books except the
Bible, as useless or impious; he appointed the estates of such as fled to be
confiscated, and sold to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered
every man to bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effects, and to lay
them at his feet; the wealth amassed by these means, he deposited in a public
treasury, and named deacons to dispense it for the common use of all. The
members of his commonwealth being thus brought to a perfect equality, he
commanded all of them to eat at tables prepared in public, and even prescribed
the dishes which were to be served up each day. Having finished his plan of
Reformation, his next care was to provide for the defense of the city; and he
took measures for that purpose with a prudence which favored nothing of
fanaticism. He collected vast magazines of every kind; he repaired and extended
the fortifications, obliging every person without distinction to work in his
turn; he formed such as were capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavored to add the vigor of discipline to the impetuosity of enthusiasm.
He sent emissaries to the Anabaptists in the Low Countries, inviting them to
assemble at Munster, which he dignified with the name of Mount-Sion, that from
thence they might set out to reduce all the nations of the earth under their
dominion. He himself was unwearied in attending to every thing necessary for
the security or increase of the sect; animating his disciples by his own
example to refuse no labor, as well as to repine at no hardship; and their
enthusiastic passions being kept from subsiding by a perpetual succession of
exhortations, revelations and prophecies, they seemed ready to untertake or to
suffer any thing in maintenance of their opinions.

MEANWHILE, the bishop of Munster having assembled a considerable army,
advanced to besiege the town. On his approach, Matthias sallied out at the head
of some chosen troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced it, and after
great slaughter, returned to the city loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated
with this success, he appeared next day brandishing a spear, and declared, that
in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth with a handful of men and smite the
host of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he named, followed him without
hesitation in this wild enterprise, and rushing on the enemy with a frantic
courage were cut off to a man. The death of their prophet occasioned at first
great consternation among his disciples, but Boccold, by the same gifts and
pretensions which had gained Matthias credit, soon revived their spirits and
hopes to such a degree, that he succeeded him in the same absolute direction of
all their affairs. As he did not possess that enterprizing courage which
distinguished his predecessor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
defensive war, and without attempting to annoy the enemy by sallies, he waited
for the succors he expected from the Low Countries, the arrival of which was
often foretold and promised by their prophets. But though less daring in action
than Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and of more unbounded ambition. Soon
after the death of his predecessor, having by obscure visions, and prophesies,
prepared the multitude for some extraordinary event, he stripped himself naked,
and marching through the streets, proclaimed with a loud voice, "That the
kingdom of Sion was at hand; that whatever was highest on earth should be
brought low, and whatever was lowest should be exalted." In order to fulfill
this, he commanded the churches, as the most lofty buildings in the city, to be
levelled with the ground; he degraded the senators chosen by Matthias, and
depriving Cnipperdoling of the consulship, the highest office in the
commonwealth, he appointed him to execute the the lowest and most infamous,
that of common hangman, to which strange transition the other agreed, not only
without murmuring, but with the utmost joy; and such was the despotism and
rigor of Boccold's administration, that he was called almost every day to
perform some duty or other of his wretched function. In place of the deposed
senators, he named twelve judges, according to the number of tribes in Israel,
to preside in all affairs; retaining to himself the same authority which Moses
anciently possessed as legislator of that people.

NOT satisfied, however, with power or titles which were not supreme, a
prophet, whom he had gained and tutored, having called the multitude together,
declared it to be the will of God, that John Boccold should be King of Sion,
and sit on the throne of David. John kneeling down, accepted of the heavenly
call, which he solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to himself, and
was immediately acknowledged as Monarch by the deluded multitude, (June 24).
From that moment he assumed all the state and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown
of gold, and the richest and most sumptuous garments. A Bible was carried on
his one hand, a naked sword on the other. A great body of guards accompanied
him when he appeared in public. He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his household and kingdom, among whom
Cnipperdoling was nominated governor of the city, as a reward for his former
submission.

HAVING now attained the height of power, Boccold began to discover passions,
which he had hitherto restrained or indulged only in secret. As the excesses of
enthusiasm have been observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifications,
the same constitution that is susceptible of the former, being remarkably prone
to the latter, he instructed the prophets and teachers to harrangue the people
for several days concerning the lawfulness, and even necessity of taking more
wives than one, which they asserted to be one of the privileges granted by God
to the saints. When their ears were once accustomed to this licentious
doctrine, and their passions inflamed with the prospect of such unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of using what he called their
Christian liberty, by marrying at once three wives, among which the widow of
Matthias, a woman of singular beauty was one. As he was allured by beauty, or
the love of variety, he gradually added to the number of his wives until they
amounted to fourteen, though the widow of Matthias was the only one dignified
with the title of Queen, or who shared with him the splendor and ornaments of
royalty. After the example of their prophet, the multitude gave themselves up
to the most licentious and uncontrouled gratification of their desires. No man
remained satisfied with a single wife. Not to use their Christian liberty was
deemed a crime. Persons were appointed to search the houses for young women
grown up to maturity, whom they instantly compelled to marry. Together with
polygamy, freedom of divorce, its inseparable attendant, was introduced, and
became a new source of corruption. Every excess was committed, of which the
passions of men are capable, when restrained neither by the authority of laws
nor the sense of decency Prophetae and concionatorum autoritate juxta et
exemplo, tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quasque faeminas discursum est.
Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum turba, fere ulla reperta est supra
animum decimum quartum, quae stuprum passa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortens. p. 303.
Vulgo viris quinas esse uxoris, pluribus senas, nonnullis septenas and octonas.
Puellas supra duodecimum aetatis annum statim amarc. Id. 305. Nemo una
contentus fuit, neque cuiquam extra effaetas and viris immaturas continenti
este licuit. Id. 307. Tacc^o hic, ut sit suus honor auribus, quanta barbary et
malitia usi sunt in puellis vitiandis nondum aptis matrimoniae, id quod mihi
neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi sermonibus haustum est, sed ex ea vetula, cui
cura sic vitiatarum demandato fuit, audi^um. Joh. Corvinus, 316.
; and by a monstrous and almost incredible conjunction, voluptuousness was
engrafted on religion, and dissolute riot accompanied the austerities of
fanatical devotion.

MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly offended at the insult offered to
their dignity by Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal honors; and the
profligate manners of his followers, which were a reproach to the Christian
name, filled men of all professions with horror. Luther, who had testified
against this fanatical spirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented its
progress, and exposing the delusion with great strength of argument, as well as
acrimony of style, called loudly on all the states of Germany to put a stop to
a phrensy no less pernicious to society, than fatal to religion. The Emperor,
occupied with other cares and projects, had no leisure to attend to such a
distant object. But the princes of the Empire, assembled by the King of the
Romans, voted a supply of men and money to the bishop of Munster, who being
unable to keep a sufficient army on foot, had converted the siege of the town
into a blockade. The forces raised in consequence of this resolution, were put
under the command of an officer of experience, who approaching the town toward
the end of spring in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-five,
pressed it more closely than formerly, but found the fortifications so strong,
and so diligently guarded, that he durst not attempt an assault. It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptists had established their dominion in
Munster; they had during that time undergone prodigious fatigue in working on
the fortifications, and performing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent
attention of their King to provide for their subsistence, and his frugal and
regular economy in their public meals, they began to feel the approach of
famine. Several small bodies of their brethren, who were advancing to their
assistance from the Low Countries, had been intercepted, and cut to pieces; and
while all Germany was ready to combine against them, they had no prospect of
succor. But such was the ascendant which Boccold had acquired over the
multitude, and so powerful the fascination of enthusiasm, that their hopes were
as sanguine as ever, and they hearkened withimplicit credulity to the visions
and predictions of their prophets, which assured them, that the Almighty would
speedily interpose, in order to deliver the city. The faith, however, of some
few, shaken by the violence and length of their sufferings, began to fail; but
being suspected of an inclination to surrender to the enemy, they were punished
with immediate death, as guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of God. One
of the King's wives, having uttered certain words that implied some doubt
concerning his divine mission, he instantly called the whole number together,
and commanding the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel down, cut off her
head with his own hands; and so far were the rest from expressing any horror at
this cruel deed, that they joined him in dancing with a frantic joy around the
bleeding body of their companion.

BY this time, the besieged endured the utmost rigor of famine; (June 1.) but
they chose rather to suffer hardships, the recital of which is shocking to
humanity, than to listen to the terms of capitulation offered them by the
bishop. At last, a deserter, whom they had taken into their service, being
either less intoxicated with the fumes of enthusiasm, or unable any longer to
bear such distress, made his escape to the enemy. He informed their general of
a weak part in the fortifications which he had observed, and assuring him that
the besieged, exhausted with hunger and fatigue, kept watch there with little
care, he offered to lead a party thither in the night. The proposal was
accepted, and a chosen body of troops appointed for the service; who, scaling
the walls unperceived, seized one of the gates, and admitted the rest of the
army (June 24). The Anabaptists, though surprised, defended themselves in the
market place with valor, heightened by despair; but being overpowered by
numbers, and surrounded on every hand, most of them were slain, and the
remainder taken prisoners. Among the last were the King and Cnipperdoling. The
King, loaded with chains, was carried from city to city as a spectacle to
gratify the curiosity of the people, and was exposed to all their insults. His
spirit, however, was not broken or humbled by this sad reverse of his
condition; and he adhered with unshaken firmness to the distinguishing tenets
of his sect. After this, he was brought back to Munster, the scene of his
royalty and crimes, and put to death with the most exquisite and lingering
tortures, all which he bore with astonishing fortitude. This extraordinary man,
who had been able to acquire such amazing dominion over the minds of his
followers, and to excite commotions so dangerous to society, was only
twenty-six years of age Sleid. 190, etc. Tumultuum Anabaptistarum Liber unus.
Ant. Lamberto Hortensio auctore ap. Scardium vol. 2. p. 298, etc. De Miserabili
Monasteriensium obsidion^, etc. libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 313.
Annals Anabaptistici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Basileae, 1672. Cor
Heersbachius Hist. Anab. Edit. 1637, p. 140.
.

TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom of the Anabaptists came to an end.
Their principles having taken deep root in the Low Countries, the party still
subsists there, under the name of Mennonites; but by a very singular
revolution, this sect, so mutinous and sanguinary at its first origin, has
become altogether innocent and pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage war, or to
accept of civil offices, they devote themselves entirely to the duties of
private citizens, and by their industry and charity endeavor to make
reparation to human society for the violence committed by their founders Bail
Diction. Art. Anabaptists.
. A small number of this sect which is settled in England, retain its peculiar
tenets concerning baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of enthusiasm.

THE mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it drew general attention, did not so
entirely engross the princes of Germany, as not to allow leisure for other
transactions. The alliance between the French King and the confederates at
Smalkalde, began about this time to produce great effects. Ulric, Duke of
Wurtemberg, having been expelled his dominions in the year one thousand five
hundred and nineteen, on account of his violent and oppressive administration,
the house of Austria had got possession of his duchy. That prince having now
by along exile atoned for the errors in his conduct, which were the effect
rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical disposition, was become the object
of general compassion. The Landgrave of Hesse, in particular, his near
relation, warmly espoused his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance. But the king of the Romans obstinately refused to
relinquish a valuable acquisition which his family had made with so much ease.
The Landgrave, unable to compel him, applied to the King of France his new
ally. Francis, eager to embrace any opportunity of distressing the house of
Austria, and desirous of wresting from it a territory, which gave it footing
and influence in a part of Germany at a distance from its other dominions,
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and secretly supplied him with a large
sum of money. This he employed to raise troops, and marching with great
expedition toward Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated, and dispersed a considerable
body of Austrians, entrusted with the defense of the country. All the Duke's
subjects hastened, with emulation, to receive their native Prince, and
re-invested him with that authority which is still enjoyed by his defendants.
At the same time the exercise of the Protestant religion was established in his
dominions Sleid. 172. Bellay, 159, etc.
.

FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this unexpected blow, not daring to attack a
prince whom all the Protestant powers in Germany were ready to support, judged
it expedient to conclude a treaty with him, by which he recognized in the most
ample form his title to the duchy. The success of the Landgrave's operations
in behalf of the duke of Wurtemberg, having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture
with a league so formidable as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the
utmost care, he entered likewise into a negotiation with the Elector of Saxony,
the head of that union, and by some concessions in favor of the Protestant
religion, and others of advantage to the Elector himself, he prevailed on him,
together with his confederates to acknowledge his title as King of the Romans.
At the same time, in order to prevent any such precipitate or irregular
election in times to come, it was agreed that no persons should hereafter be
promoted to that dignity without the unanimous consent of the Electors; and the
Emperor soon after confirmed this stipulation Sleid. 173. Corpse Diplom. tom.
iv. p. 2. 119.
.

THESE acts of indulgence toward the Protestants, and the close union into
which the King of the Romans seemed to be entering with the Princes of that
party, gave great offense at Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from a
resolution of his predecessor, never to consent to the calling of a general
council, and had promised in the first consistory held after his election, that
he would convoke that assembly so much desired by all Christendom, was no less
enraged than Clement at the innovations in Germany, and no less averse to any
schemes for reforming either the doctrines of the church, or the abuses in the
court of Rome: But having been a witness of the universal censure which Clement
had incurred by his obstinacy with regard to these points, he hoped to avoid
the same reproach by the seeming alacrity with which he proposed a council;
flattering himself, however, that such difficulties would arise concerning the
time and place of meeting, the persons who had a right to be present, and the
order of their proceedings, as would effectually defeat the intention of those
who demanded that assembly, without exposing himself to any imputation for
refusing to call it. With this view he dispatched nuncios to the several
courts, in order to make known his intention, and that he had fixed on Mantua
as a proper place in which to hold the council. Such difficulties as the Pope
had foreseen, immediately presented themselves in great number. The French King
did not approve of the place which Paul had chosen, as the Papal and imperial
influence would necessarily be too great in a town situated in that part of
Italy. The King of England not only concurred with Francis in urging that
objection, but refused, besides, to acknowledge any council called in the name
and by the authority of the Pope (Dec. 12). The German Protestants having met
together at Smalkalde, insisted on their original demand of a council to be
held in Germany, and pleading the Emperor's promise, as well as the agreement
at Ratisbon to that effect, declared that they would not consider an assembly
held at Mantua as a legal or free representative of the church. By this
diversity of sentiments and views, such a field for intrigue and negotiation
opened, as made it easy for the Pope to assume the merit of being eager to
assemble a council, while at the same time he could put off its meeting at
pleasure. The Protestants on the other hand suspecting his designs, and
sensible of the importance which they derived from their union, renewed for ten
years the league of Smalkalde, which now became stronger and more formidable by
the accession of several new members This league was concluded December, one
thousand five hundred and thirty five, but not extended or signed in form till
September in the following year. The Princes who acceded to it were John
Elector of Saxony, Earnest Duke of Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of ^^esse, Ulric
Duke of Wurtemberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pomerania, John George, and
Joachim Princes of Anhalt, Gebhard and Albert Counts of Mansfield, William
Count of Nassau. The cities, Strasburg, Nuremberg, Constance, Ulm, Magdeburg,
Bremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Memmengen, Lindaw, C^mpen, Ifna, Bibrac,
Windsheim, Augsburg, Franckfort, Es^ing, Brunswick, Goslar, Hanover, Gottingen,
Eimbeck, Hamburg, Minden.
.

DURING these transactions in Germany, the Emperor undertook his famous
enterprise against the piratical states in Africa. That part of the African
continent lying along the coast of the Mediterranean sea, which anciently
formed the kingdoms of Mauritania and Massylia, together with the republic of
Carthage, and which is now known by the general name of Barbary, had undergone
many revolutions. Subdued by the Romans, it became a province of their empire.
Conquered afterward by the Vandals, they erected a kingdom there. That being
overturned by Belisarius, the country continued subject to the Greek Emperors,
until it was overrun toward the end of the seventh century, by the rapid and
irresistible arms of the Arabs. It remained for sometime a part of that vast
empire of which the Caliphs were the head. Its immense distance, however, from
the seat of government, encouraged the descendants of those leaders, who had
subdued the country, or the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to
throw off the yoke, and to set up for independance. The Caliphs, who derived
their authority from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for making conquests
than for preserving them, were obliged to connive at acts of rebellion which
they could not prevent; and Barbary was divided into several kingdoms, of which
Morocco, Algiers and Tunis were the most considerable. The inhabitants of these
kingdoms were a mixed race, Arabs, Negroes from the southern provinces, and
Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had been expelled out of Spain; all
zealous professors of the Mohammedan religion, and inflamed against Christianity
with a bigoted hatred proportional to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

AMONG these people, no less daring, inconstant and treacherous, than the
ancient inhabitants of the same country described by the Roman historians,
frequent seditions broke out, and many changes in government took place. These,
as they affected only the internal state of a country so barbarous are but
little known, and deserve to be so. But about the beginning of the sixteenth
century a sudden revolution happened, which by rendering the states of Barbary
formidable to the Europeans, has made their history worthy of more attention.
This revolution was brought about by persons born in a rank of life which
entitled them to act no such illustrious part. Horuc and Hayradin, the sons of
a potter in the isle of Lesbos, prompted by a restless and enterprizing spirit,
forsook their father's trade, ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates. They
soon distinguished themselves by their valor and activity, and becoming
masters of a small brigantine, carried on their infamous trade with such
conduct and success, that they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys, besides
many vessels of smaller force. Of this fleet Horuc, the elder brother, called
Barbarossa from the red color of his beard, was admiral, and Hayradin second
in command, but with almost equal authority. They called themselves the friends
of the sea, and the enemies of all who sail upon it; and their names soon
became terrible from the Straits of the Dardanelles to those of Gibraltar.
Together with their fame and power, their ambitious views opened and enlarged,
and while acting as Corsairs they adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents
of conquerors. They often carried the prizes which they took on the coasts of
Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and enriching the inhabitants by the
sale of their booty, and the thoughtless prodigality of their crews, were
welcome guests in every place at which they touched. The convenient situation
of these harbors lying so near the greatest commercial states at that time in
Christendom, made the brothers wish for an establishment in that country. An
opportunity of accomplishing this quickly presented itself, which they did not
suffer to pass unimproved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having attempted several
times, without success, to take a fort which the Spanish governors of Oran had
built not far from his capital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid to
Barbarossa, whose valor the Africans considered as irresistible. The active
Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation, and leaving his brother Hayradin
with the fleet, marched at the head of five thousand men to Algiers, where he
was received as their deliverer. Such a force gave him the command of the town;
and observing that the Moors neither suspected him of any bad intention, nor
were capable with their light-armed troops of opposing his disciplined
veterans, he secretly murdered the Monarch whom he had come to assist, and
caused himself to be proclaimed King of Algiers in his stead. The authority
which he had thus boldly usurped, he endeavored to establish by arts suited to
the genius of the people whom he had to govern; by liberality, without bounds
to those who favored his promotion, and by cruelty no less unbounded toward
all whom he had any reason to distrust. Not satisfied with the throne which he
had acquired, he attacked the neighboring King of Tremecen, and having
vanquished him in battle, added his dominions to those of Algiers. At the same
time, he continued to infest the coasts of Spain and Italy with fleets which
resembled the armaments of a great Monarch, rather than the light squadrons of
a Corsair. The devastations which these committed obliged Charles about the
beginning of his reign, to furnish the marquis de Comares, governor of Oran,
with troops sufficient to attack him. That officer, assisted by the dethroned
King of Tremecen, executed the commission with such spirit, that Barbarossa's
troops being beat in several encounters, he himself was shut up in Tremecen;
after defending it to the last extremity, he was overtaken in attempting to
make his escape, and slain while he fought with an obstinate valor, worthy of
his former fame and exploits.

HIS brother Hayradin, known likewise by the name of Barbarossa, assumed the
scepter of Algiers with the same ambition and abilities, but with better
fortune. His reign being undisturbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European powers, he regulated with
admirable prudence the interior police of his kingdom, carried on his naval
operations with great vigor, and extended his conquests on the continent of
Africa. But, perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted to his government
with the utmost impatience, and being afraid that his continual depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the Christians, he put his dominions
under the protection of the Grand Seignior, and received from him a body of
Turkish soldiers sufficient for his security against his domestic as well as
his foreign enemies. At last, the same of his exploits daily increasing,
Solomon offered him the command of the Turkish fleet, as the only person whose
valor and skill in naval affairs entitled him to command against Andrew Doria,
the greatest sea-officer of that age. Proud of this distinction, Barbarossa
repaired to Constantinople, and with a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling
the arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair, gained the entire
confidence both of the Sultan and his Vizier. To them he communicated a scheme
that he had formed of making himself master of Tunis, the most flourishing
kingdom, at that time, on the coast of Africa; which being approved of by them,
he obtained whatever he demanded for carrying it into execution.

HIS hopes of success in this undertaking were founded on the intestine
divisions in the kingdom of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that country,
having thirty-four sons by different wives, named Muley-Hascen, one of the
youngest among them, his successor. That weak Prince, who owed his preference
not to his own merit, but to the ascendant which his mother had acquired over
an old doting monarch, first poisoned his father in order to prevent him from
altering his destination; and then, with the babarous policy which prevails
wherever polygamy is permitted, and the right of succession is not precisely
fixed, he put to death all his brothers whom he could get into his power.
Alraschid, one of the eldest, was so fortunate as to escape his rage; and
finding a retreat among the wandering Arabs, made several attempts, by the
assistance of some of their chiefs, to recover the throne, which of right
belonged to him. But these proving unsuccessful, and the Arabs, from their
natural levity, being ready to deliver him up to his merciless brother, he fled
to Algiers, the only place of refuge remaining, and implored the protection of
Barbarossa; who, discerning at once all the advantages that might be gained by
supporting his title, received him with every possible demonstration of
friendship and respect. Being ready, at that time, to set sail for
Constantinople, he easily persuaded Alraschid, whose eagerness to obtain a
crown disposed him to believe or undertake, any thing, to accompany him
thither, promising him effectual assistance from Solomon, whom he represented
to be the most generous, as well as most powerful Monarch in the world. But no
sooner were they arrived at Constantinople, than the false Corsair, regardless
of all his promises to him, opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering Tunis,
and annexing it to the Turkish empire, by making use of the name of this exiled
Prince, and by means of the party ready to declare in his favor. Solomon
approved with too much facility, of this persidious proposal, extremely
suitable to the character of its author, but altogether unworthy of a great
Prince. A powerful fleet and numerous army were soon assembled; at the sight of
which the credulous Alraschid flattered himself, that he would soon enter his
capital in triumph.

BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going to embark, he was arrested by order
of the Sultan, shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard of more. Barbarossa
sailed with a fleet of two hundred and fifty vessels toward Africa. After
ravaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror through every part of that
country, he appeared before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out that he came
to assert the right of Alraschid, whom he pretended to have left sick on board
the Admiral galley. The sort of Goletta which commands the bay, soon fell into
his hands, partly by his own address, partly by the treachery of its commander;
and the inhabitants of Tunis, weary of Muley-Hascen's government, took arms,
and declared for Alraschid with such zeal and unanimity, as obliged the former
to fly so precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind him. The gates
were immediately set open to Barbarossa, as the restorer of their lawful
sovereign. But when Alraschid himself did not appear, and when instead of his
name, that of Solomon alone was heard among the acclamations of the Turkish
soldiers marching into the town, the people of Tunis began to suspect the
Corsair's treachery; and their suspicions being soon converted into certainty,
they ran to arms with the utmost fury, and surrounded the citadel, into which
Barbarossa had led his troops. But having foreseen such a revolution, he was
not unprepared for it; he immediately turned against them the artillery on the
ramparts, and by one brisk discharge of it, and of his small arms, he dispersed
the numerous but undirected assailants, and forced them to acknowledge Solomon
as their sovereign, and to submit to himself as his viceroy.

HIS first care was to put the kingdom of which he had thus got possession, in
a proper posture of defense. He strengthened the citadel which commands the
town; and fortifying the Goletta in a regular manner at vast expense, made it
the principal station for his fleet, and his great arsenal both for military
and naval stores. Being now possessed of such extensive territories, he carried
on his depredations against the Christian states to a greater extent, and with
more destructive violence than ever. Daily complaints of the outrages committed
by his cruizers were brought to the Emperor by his subjects, both in Spain and
Italy. All Christendom seemed to expect from him, as its greatest and most
fortunate Prince, that he would put an end to this new and odious species of
oppression. At the same time Muley-Hascen, the exiled king of Tunis, finding
none of the Mohammedan Princes in Africa willing or able to assist him in
recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the only person who could assert
his rights in opposition to such a formidable usurper. The Emperor, equally
desirous of delivering his dominions from the dangerous neigbourhood of
Barbarossa; of appearing as the protector of an unfortunate Prince; and of
acquiring the glory annexed in that age, to every expedition against the
Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with Muley-Hascen, (April 21, 1553) and
began to prepare for invading Tunis. Having made trial of his own abilities for
war in the late campaign in Hungary, he was now become so fond of the military
character, that he determined to command on this occasion in person. The united
strength of his dominions was called out upon an enterprise in which the
Emperor was about to hazard his glory, and which drew the attention of all
Europe. A Flemish fleet carried from the ports of the Low Country a body of
German infantry Hardi Annals Brabant. i 599.
; the galleys of Naples and Sicily took on board the veteran bands of Italians
and Spaniards, which had distinguished themselves by so many victories over the
French; the Emperor himself embarked at Barcelona with the flower of the
Spanish nobility, and was joined by a considerable squadron from Portugal,
under the command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's brother; Andrew Doria
conducted his own galleys, the best appointed at that time in Europe, and
commanded by the most skilful officers: the Pope furnished all the assistance
in his power toward such a pious enterprise; and the order of Malta, the
perpetual enemies of the Infidels, equipped a small squadron, but formidable by
the valor of the knights who served on board it. The port of Cagliari in
Sardinia was the general place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed High Admiral
of the fleet; the command in chief of the land forces was given to the marquis
di Guasto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting of near five hundred vessels,
having on board above thirty thousand regular troops, set sail from Cagliari,
and after a prosperous navigation, landed within sight of Tunis. Barbarossa
having early intelligence of the Emperor's immense armament, and suspecting its
destination, prepared with equal prudence and vigor for the defense of his new
conquest. He called in all his corsairs from their different stations; he drew
from Algiers what forces could be spared; he dispatched messengers to all the
African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs, and by representing Muley-Hascen as an
infamous apostate, prompted by ambition and revenge not only to become the
vassal of a Christian Prince, but to conspire with him to extirpate the
Mahomedan faith, he enflamed those ignorant and bigoted chiefs to such a
degree, that they took arms as in a common cause. Twenty thousand horse
together with a vast body of foot, soon assembled at Tunis; and Barbarossa, by
a proper distribution of presents among them from time to time, kept the ardour
which had bro't them together from subsiding. But as he was too well acquainted
with the enemy whom he had to oppose, to think that these light troops could
resist the heavy armed cavalry and veteran infantry which composed the Imperial
army, his chief confidence was in the strength of the Goletta, and in his body
of Turkish soldiers who were armed and disciplined after the European fashion.
Six thousand of these, under the command of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest
and most experienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort, which the
Emperor immediately invested. As Charles had the command of the sea, his camp
was so plentifully supplied not only with the necessaries, but with all the
luxuries of life, that Muley-Hascen, who had not been accustomed to see war
carried on with such order and magnificence, was filled with admiration of the
Emperor's power. His troops animated by his presence, and considering it as
meritorious to shed their blood in such a pious cause, contended with each
other for the posts of honor and danger. Three separate attacks were
concerted, and the Germans, Spaniards and Italians, having one of these
committed to each of them, pushed them forward with the eager courage which
national emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution and skill becoming the
confidence which his master had put in him; the garrison performed the hard
service on which they were ordered with great fortitude. But though he
interrupted the besiegers by frequent sallies; though the Moors and Arabs
alarmed the camp with their continual incursions; the breaches soon became so
considerable toward the land, while the fleet battered the fortifications
which it could approach, with no less fury and success, that an assault being
given on all sides at once, the place was taken by storm (July 25). Sinan, with
the remains of his garrison, retiring, after an obstinate resistance, over a
shallow part of the bay toward the city. By the reduction of the Goletta, the
Emperor became master of Barbarossa's fleet, consisting of eighty-seven galleys
and galliots, together with his arsenal, and three hundred cannon mostly brass,
which were planted on the ramparts; a prodigious number in that age, and a
remarkable proof of the strength of the fort, as well as of the greatness of
the corsair's power, The Emperor marched into the Goletta through the breach,
and turning to Muley-Hascen who attended him, "Here," says he, is a gate open
to you, by which you shall return to take possession of your dominions.

BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight of the blow which he had received,
did not, however, lose courage, or abandon the defense of Tunis. But as the
walls were of great extent, and extremely weak; as he could not depend on the
fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the Moors and Arabs would sustain
the hardships of a siege, he boldly determined to advance with his army, which
amounted to fifty thousand men Epistres de Princes, par Ruscelli, p. 119, etc.
, toward the Imperial camp, and to decide the fate of his kingdom by the issue
of a battle. This resolution he communicated to his principal officers, and
representing to them the fatal consequences which might follow, if ten thousand
Christian slaves, whom he had shut up in the citadel, should attempt to mutiny
during the absence of the army, he proposed as a necessary precaution for the
public security, to massacre them without mercy before he began his march. They
all approved warmly of his intention to fight; but inured as they were, in
their piratical depredations, to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty, the barbarity
of his proposal concerning the slaves filled them with horror; and Barbarossa,
rather from the dread of irritating them, than swayed by motives of humanity,
consented to spare the lives of the slaves.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to advance toward Tunis; and though his
troops suffered inconceivable hardships in their march over burning sands,
destitute of water, and exposed to the intolerable heat of the sun, they soon
came up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs, emboldened by their vast
superiority in number, immediately rushed on to the attack with loud shouts,
but their undisciplined courage did not stand one moment the shock of regular
battalions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable presence of mind, and by
exposing his own person to the greatest dangers, endeavored to rally them, the
rout became so general, that he himself was hurried along with them in their
flight back to the city. There he found every thing in the utmost confusion;
some of the inhabitants flying with their families and effects; others ready to
set open their gates to the conqueror; the Turkish soldiers preparing to
retreat; and the citadel, which in such circumstances might have afforded him
some refuge, already in the possession of the Christian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had laid hold on the opportunity
which Barbarossa dreaded. As soon as his army was at some distance from the
town, they gained two of their keepers, by whose assistance, knocking off their
fetters, and bursting open their prisons, they overpowered the Turkish
garrison, and turned the artillery of the fort against their former masters.
Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged, exclaimed sometimes against the false
compassion of his officers, and sometimes condemning his own imprudent
compliance with their opinion, fled precipitately to Bona.

MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy and almost bloodless victory which
he had gained, and advancing slowly with the precaution necessary in an enemy's
country, did not yet know the whole extent of his own good fortune. But at
last, a messenger dispatched by the slaves acquainted him with the success of
their noble effort for the recovery of their liberty; and at the same time
deputies arrived from the town, in order to present him the keys of their
gates, and to implore his protection from military violence. While he was
deliberating concerning the proper measures for this purpose, the soldiers
fearing that they would be deprived of the booty which they had expected, broke
suddenly, and without orders, into the town, and began to kill and plunder
without distinction. It was then too late to restrain their cruelty, their
avarice, or licentiousness. All the outrages of which soldiers are capable in
the fury of a storm, all the excesses of which men can be guilty when their
passions are heightened by the contempt and hatred which difference in manners
and religion inspire, were committed. Above thirty thousand of the innocent
inhabitants perished on that unhappy day, and ten thousand were carried away as
slaves. Muley-Hascen took possession of a throne surrounded with carnage,
abhorred by this subjects on whom he had brought such calamities, and pitied
even by those whose rashness had been the occasion of them. The Emperor
lamented the fatal accident which had stained the luster of his victory; and
amidst such a scene of horror there was but one spectacle that afforded him any
satisfaction. Ten thousand Christian slaves, among whom were several persons of
distinction, met him as he entered the town; and falling on their knees,
thanked and blessed him as their deliverer.

AT the same time that Charles accomplished his promise to the Moorish King of
re-establishing him in his dominions, he did not neglect what was necessary for
bridling the power of the African corsairs, for the security of his own
subjects, and for the interest of the Spanish crown: In order to gain these
ends, he concluded a treaty with Muley-Hascen on the following conditions; that
he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain, and do homage
to the Emperor as his liege lord; that all the Christian slaves now within his
dominions, of whatever nation, should be set at liberty without ransom; that no
subject of the Emperor's should for the future be detained in servitude; that
no Turkish corsair should be admitted into the ports of his dominions; that
free trade, together with the public exercise of the Christian religion,
should be allowed to all the Emperor's subjects; that the Emperor should not
only retain the Goletta, but all the other seaports in the kingdom which were
fortified, should be put into his hands; that Muley-Hascen should pay annually
twelve thousand crowns for the subsistence of the Spanish garrison in the
Goletta; that he should enter into no alliance with any of the Emperor's
enemies, and should present to him every year, as an acknowledgement of his
vassalage, six Moorish horses, and as many hawks Du Monts Corpse Diplomat. ii.
128. Summonte Hist. di Napoli, iv. 89.
. Having thus settled the affairs of Africa; chastised the insolence of the
corsairs; secured a safe retreat for the ships of his subjects, and a proper
station for his own fleets, on that coast from which he was most infested by
piratical depredations; Charles embarked again for Europe (August 17) the
tempestuous weather, and sickness among his troops, not permitting him to
pursue Barbarossa Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetanae ap. Scard. v. ii.
p. 320, etc. Jovii Histor. lib. xxxiv. 153, etc. Sandov. ii. 154, etc. Vertot.
Hist. de Cheval. de Malthe. Epistress des Princes, par Ruscelli, traduites par
Bellefor, p. 119, 120, etc.
.

BY this expedition, the merit of which seems to have been estimated in that
age, rather by the apparent generosity of the undertaking, the magnificence
wherewith it was conducted, and the success which crowned it, than by the
importance of the consequences that attended it, the Emperor attained a greater
height of glory than at any other period of his reign, Twenty thousand slaves
whom he freed from bondage either by his arms, or by his treaty with
Muley-Hascen Summonte Hist. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.
, each of whom he clothed and furnished with the means of returning to their
respective countries, spread all over Europe the fame of their benefactor's
munificence, extolling his power and abilities with the exaggeration flowing
from gratitude and admiration. In comparison with him, the other Monarchs of
Europe made an inconsiderable figure; he, as the chief Prince in Christendom,
appeared to be concerned for the honor of the Christian name, for the public
security and welfare, while they were attentive only to their private and
particular interests.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VI.
UNFORTUNATELY for the reputation of Francis I. among his contemporaries, his
conduct, at this juncture, appeared a perfect contrast to that of his rival, as
he laid hold on the opportunity afforded him, by the Emperor's having turned
his whole force against the common enemy, to revive his pretensions in Italy,
and to plunge Europe into a new war. The treaty of Cambray, as has been
observed, did not remove the causes of enmity between the two contending
Princes; it covered up, but did not extinguish the flames of discord. Francis,
in particular, who waited with impatience for a proper occasion of recovering
the reputation as well as territories which he had lost, continued to carry on
his negociations in different courts against the Emperor, taking the utmost
pains to heighten the jealousy which many Princes entertained of his power or
designs, and to inspire the rest with the same suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though indebted to Charles for the
possession of the duchy of Milan, had received it on such hard conditions, as
rendered him not only a vassal of the Empire, but a tributary dependant upon
the Emperor. The honor of having married the Emperor's niece, did not
reconcile him to this ignominious state of subjection, which became so
intolerable even to Sforza, a weak and poor spirited Prince, that he listened
with eagerness to the first proposals Francis made of rescuing him from the
yoke. These proposals were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he
is called by the French historians, a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and
soon after, in order to carry on the negotiation with greater advantage,
Merveille was sent to Milan, on pretense of visiting his relations, but with
secret credentials from Francis as his envoy. In this character he was received
by Sforza. But notwithanding his care to keep that circumstance concealed,
Charles suspecting, or having received information of it, remonstrated and
threatened in such a high tone, that the Duke and his ministers, equally
intimidated, gave the world immediately a most infamous proof of their servile
fear of offending the Emperor. Having decoyed Merveille, who had neither the
prudence nor temper which the station wherein he was placed required, into a
quarrel in which he happened to kill his antagonist, one of the Duke's
domestics, they instantly commanded him to be seized, to be tried for that
crime, and to be beheaded (Dec. 1533). Francis, astonished at this violation of
a character held sacred among the most uncivilized nations, and enraged at the
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, threatened Sforza with the effects
of his indignation, and complained to the Emperor, whom he considered as the
real author of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with no satisfaction from
either, he appealed to all the Princes of Europe, and thought himself now
entitled to take vengeance for an injury, which it would have been indecent and
pusillanimous to let pass with impunity.

BEING thus furnished with a pretext for beginning a war, on which he had
already resolved, he multiplied his efforts in order to (...) other Princes to
take part in the quarrel. But all his mea^ (...) for this purpose were
disconcerted by unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the honor of his
house by the marriage of his son with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain
Clement, the death of that Pontiff had deprived him of all the advantages which
he expected to derive from his friendship. Paul, his successor, though attached
by inclination to the Imperial interest, seemed determined to maintain the
neutrality suitable to his character as the common father of the contending
Princes. The King of England, occupied with domestic cares and projects,
declined for once, engaging in the affairs of the continent, and refused to
assist Francis, unless he would imitate his example, in throwing off the Papal
supremacy. These disappointments led him to solicit, with greater earnestness,
the aid of the Protestant Princes associated by the league of Smalkalde. That
he might the more easily acquire their confidence, he endeavored to
accommodate himself to their predominant passion, zeal for their religious
tenets. He affected a wonderful moderation with regard to the points in
dispute; he permitted Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments
concerning some of the most important articles, in terms not far different from
those used by the Protestants Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, etc.
Sleid. Hist. 178, 183; Seckend. lib. iii. 103.
; he even condescended to invite Melancthon, whose gentle manners and pacific
spirit distinguished him among the Reformers, to visit Paris, that by his
assistance he might concert the most proper measures for reconciling the
contending sects, which so unhappily divided the church Camerarii Vita Ph.
Melanchthonis, 12mo, Hag. 1655. p. 12.
. These concessions must be considered rather as arts of policy, than the
result of conviction; for whatever impression the new opinions in religion made
on his sisters, the Queen of Navarre and Duchess of Ferrara, the gaiety of
Francis's own temper, and his love of pleasure, allowed him little leisure to
examine theological controversies.

BUT soon after he lost all the fruits of this disingenuous artifice, by a step
very inconsistent with his declarations to the German Princes. This step,
however, the prejudice of the age, and the religious sentiments of his own
subjects, rendered it necessary for him to take. His close union with the King
of England an excommunicated heretic; his frequent negociations with the
German Protestants; but above all, his giving public audience to an envoy from
Sultan Solomon, had excited violent suspicions concerning the sincerity of his
attachment to religion. To have attacked the Emperor, who, on all occasions,
made high pretensions to zeal in defense of the Catholic faith, and at the
very juncture, when he was preparing for his expedition against Barbarossa,
which was then considered as a pious enterprise, could not have failed to
confirm such unfavourable sentiments with regard to Francis, and called on him
to vindicate himself by some extraordinary demonstration of his reverence for
the established doctrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of some of his
subjects, who had imbibed the Protestant opinions, furnished him with such an
occasion as he desired. They had affixed to the gates of the Louvre, and other
public places, papers containing indecent reflections on the doctrines and rites
of the Popish church. Six of the persons concerned in this rash action were
discovered and seized. The King, in order to avert the judgments which it was
supposed their blasphemies might draw down upon the nation, appointed a solemn
procession. The holy sacrament was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in his hand; the princes of
the blood supported the canopy over it; the nobles marched in order behind. In
the presence of this numerous assembly, the King, accustomed to express himself
on every subject in strong and animating language, declared that if one of his
hands were infected with heresy, he would cut it off with the other, and would
not spare even his own children, if found guilty of that crime. As a dreadful
proof of his being in earnest, the six unhappy persons were publicly burnt
before the procession was finished, with circustances of the most shocking
barbarity attending their execution Belcarii Camment. Rer, Gallic. 646. Sleid.
Hist. 175, etc.
.

THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled with resentment and indignation
at the cruelty with which their brethren were treated, could not conceive
Francis to be sincere, when he offered to protect in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigor in his own dominions; so that all Bellay's
art and eloquence in vindicating his master, and apologizing for his conduct,
made but little impression upon them. Besides, the Emperor, who hitherto had
never employed violence against the doctrines of the Reformers, nor even given
them much molestation in their progress, was now bound by the agreement at
Ratisbon, not to disturb those who had embraced the new opinions; and the
Protestants wisely considered this as a more certain and immediate security,
than the precarious and distant hopes with which Francis endeavored to allure
them. The manner too in which he had behaved to his allies at the peace of
Cambray, was two recent to be forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely
much on his friendship or generosity. Upon all these accounts, the Protestant
Princes refused to assist the French King in any hostile attempt against the
Emperor. The Elector of Saxony, the most zealous among them, in order to avoid
giving any umbrage to Charles, would not permit Melancthon to visit the court
of France, although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by the invitation of so
great a Monarch, or hoping that his presence there might be of signal advantage
to the Protestant cause, discovered a strong inclination to undertake the
journey. Camerarii Vita Melan. 142, etc. 415. Seekend. lib. iii. 107.


BUT though none of the many Princes who envied or dreaded the power of
Charles, would second Francis's efforts in order to reduce and circumscribe it,
he, nevertheless, commanded his army to advance toward the frontiers of Italy.
As his sole pretext for taking arms was, that he might chastise the Duke of
Milan for his insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might have
been expected that the whole weight of his vengeance was to have fallen on his
territories. But on a sudden and at their very commencement, the operation^ or
war took another direction. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the least active and
able Princes of the line from which he descended, had married Be^ (...)
Portugal, the Empress's sister. By her great talents, she soon acquired an
absolute ascendant over her husband; and proud of her affinity to the Emperor,
(...) allured by the magnificent promises with which he flattered her ambition,
she formed an union between the Duke and the Imperial court, extremely
inconsistent with that neutrality, which wise policy as well as the situation
of his dominions had hitherto induced him to observe in all the quarrels
between the contending Monarchs. Francis was abundantly sensible of the
distress to which he might be exposed, if when he entered Italy, he should
leave behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted so obsequiously to the
Emperor, that he had sent his eldest son to be educated in the court of Spain,
as a kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement the Seventh, who had represented
this danger in a strong light during his interview with Francis at Marseilles,
suggested to him, at the same time, the proper method of guarding against it,
having advised him to begin his operations against the Milanese, by taking
possession of Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way of securing a
communication with his own dominions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke on
many accounts, particularly for having supplied the Constable Bourbon with the
money, which enabled him to levy that body of troops which ruined the French
army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was not unwilling to let him now feel both
how deeply he resented, and how severely he could punish these injuries. Nor
did he want several pretexts that would give some color of equity to the
violence which he intended. The territories of France and Savoy lying
contiguous to each other, and intermingled in many places, various disputes,
unavoidable in such a situation, subsisted concerning the limits of their
respective property; and besides, Francis had, in right of his mother Louise of
Savoy, large claims upon the Duke her brother, for her share in their father's
succcession. Being unwilling, however, to begin hostilities without some cause
of quarrel more specious than these pretensions, many of which were obsolete,
and others dubious, he demanded permission to march through Piedmont in his way
to the Milanese, hoping that the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the
Imperial interest, might refuse this request, and thus give a greater
appearance of justice to all his operations against him. But* if we may believe
the historians of Savoy, better informed with regard to this particular than
those of France, the Duke readily, and with a good grace, granted what it was
not in his power to deny, promising free passage to the French troops as was
desired; so that Francis, as the only method now left of justifying the
measures which he determined to take, was obliged to insist for full
satisfaction with regard to every thing that either the crown of France or his
mother Louise could demand of the house of Savoy Histoire Genealogique de
Savoye, par. Guichenou. 2. tom. fol. Lion. 166^, i. 639, etc.
. Such an evasive answer, as might have been expected, being made to this
requisition, the French army under the admiral Brion poured at once into the
Duke's territories at different places. The countries of Bresse and Bugey,
united at that time to Savoy, were overrun in a moment. Most of the towns in
the duchy of Savoy opened their gates at the approach of the enemy; a few
which attempted to make resistance were easily forced; and before the end of
the campaign, the Duke saw himself stripped of all his dominions, but the
province of Piedmont, in which there were not many places in a condition to be
defended.

TO complete the Duke's misfortunes, the city of Geneva, the sovereignty of
which he claimed, and in some degree possessed, threw of his yoke, and its
revolt drew along with it the loss of the adjacent territories. Geneva was, at
that time, an Imperial city; and though under the direct dominion of its own
bishops, and the remote sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of its
internal constitution was purely republican, being governed by syndics and a
council chosen by the citizens. From these distinct and often clashing
jurisdictions, two opposite parties took their rise, and had long subsisted in
the state; the one composed of the advocates for the privileges of the
community, assumed the name of Eignotz, or confederates in defense of liberty;
and branded the other, which supported the episcopal or ducal prerogatives,
with the name of Mammelukes or slaves. At length, the Protestant opinions
beginning to spread among the citizens, inspired such as embraced them with
that bold enterprizing spirit which always accompanied or was naturally
produced by them in their first operations. As both the Duke and Bishop were
from interest, from prejudice, and from political considerations, violent
enemies of the Reformation, all the new converts joined with warmth the party
of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion, mingling with the love of liberty, added
strength to that generous passion. The rage and animosity of two factions, shut
up within the same walls, occasioned frequent insurrections, which terminating
mostly to the advantage of the friends of liberty, they daily gained ground.

THE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their ancient contests about jurisdiction, had
united against their common enemies, and each attacked them with his proper
weapons. The Bishop excommunicated the people of Geneva as guilty of a double
crime; of impiety, in apostatising from the established religion; and of
sacrilege, in invading the rights of his see. The Duke attacked them as rebels
against their lawful Prince, and attempted to render himself master of the
city, first by surprise, and then by open force. The citizens, despising the
thunder of the Bishop's censures, boldly asserted their independance against
the Duke; and partly by their own valor, partly by the powerful assistance
which they received from their allies, the canton of Berne, together with some
small supplies both of men and money, secretly furnished by the King of France,
they defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied with having repulsed him, or with
remaining always upon the defensive themselves, they now took advantage of the
Duke's inability to resist them, while overwhelmed by the armies of France, and
seized several castles and places of strength which he possessed in the
neighborhood of Geneva; thus delivering the city from these odious monuments
of its former subjection, and rendering the public liberty more secure for the
future. At the same time the canton of Berne invaded and conquered the Paijis
de Vaud, to which it had some pretensions. The canton of Friburgh, though
zealously attached to the Catholic religion, and having no subject of contest
with the Duke, laid hold on part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince. A
great portion of these conquests or usurpations being still retained by the two
cantons, add considerably to their power, and have become the most valuable
part of their territories, Geneva, notwithstanding many schemes and enterprises
of the Dukes of Savoy to re-establish their dominion there, still keeps
possession of its independance; and in consequence of that blessing, has
attained a degree of consideration, wealth and elegance, which it could not
otherwise have reached Hist. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. 120. Utr. 1685.
p. 99. Hist. de la Reformation de Suisse, par Rouchat, Genesis 1798. tom. iv. p.
224, etc. tom. v. p. 216, etc. Mem de Bellay, 181.
.

AMIDST such a succession of disastrous events, the Duke of Savoy had no other
resource but the Emperor's protection, which, upon his return from Tunis, he
demanded with the most earnest importunity; and as his misfortunes were
occasioned chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial interest, he had a just
title to immediate assistance. Charles, however, was not in a condition to
support him with that vigor and dispatch which the exigency of his affairs
called for. Most of the troops employed in the African expedition, having been
raised for that service alone, were disbanded as soon as it was finished; the
veteran forces under Antonio de Leyva were scarce sufficient for the defense of
the Milanese; and the Emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his vast
efforts against the Infidels.

BUT the death of Francis Sforza, (October 24) occasioned, according to some
historians, by the terror of a French invasion, which had twice been fatal to
his family, afforded the Emperor full leisure to prepare for action. By this
unexpected event, the nature of the war, and the causes of discord, were
totally changed. Francis's first pretext for taking arms, in order to chastise
Sforza for the insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut off;
but, as that Prince died without issue, all Francis's rights to the duchy of
Milan, which he had yielded only to Sforza and his posterity, returned back to
him in full force. As the recovery of the Milanese was the favorite object of
that Monarch, he instantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported his
pretensions by ordering the powerful army quartered in Savoy, to advance
without losing a moment toward Milan, he could scarce have failed to secure
the important point of possession. But Francis who became daily less
enterprizing as he advanced in years, and who was overawed at some times into
an excess of caution by the remembrance of his past misfortunes, endeavored to
establish his rights by negotiation, not by arms; and from a timid moderation,
fatal in all great affairs, neglected to improve the favorable opportunity
which presented itself. Charles, meanwhile, in quality of sovereign, took
possession of the duchy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and while Francis
endeavored to explain and assert his title to it, by arguments and memorials,
using every art in order to reconcile the Italian powers to the thoughts of his
regaining footing in Italy, his rival was silently taking effectual steps to
prevent it. The Emperor, however, was very careful not to discover too early
any intention of this kind; but seeming to admit the equity of Francis's claim,
he appeared sollicitous only about giving him possession in such a manner as
might not disturb the peace of Europe, or overturn the balance of power in
Italy, which the politicians of that country were so fond of preserving. By
this artifice he deceived Francis, and gained so much confidence with the rest
of Europe, that almost without incurring any suspicion, he involved the affair
in new difficulties, and protracted the negociations at pleasure. Sometimes he
proposed to grant the investiture of Milan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's
second son, sometimes to the Duke of Angouleme, his third son; as the views and
inclinations of the French court varied, he transferred his choice alternately
from the one to the other, with such profound and well conducted dissimulation,
that neither Francis nor his ministers seem to have penetrated his real
intention; and all military operations were entirely suspended, as if nothing
had remained but to enter quietly into possession of what they demanded.

DURING the interval gained in this manner, (1536) Charles prevailed on the
states both of Sicily and Naples, who thought themselves greatly honored by
the presence of their sovereign on his return from Tunis, and who were no less
pleased with the apparent disinterestedness of his expedition into Africa, than
dazzled by the success which had attended his arms, to vote him such liberal
subsidies as were seldom granted in that age. This enabled him to recruit his
veteran troops, to levy a body of Germans, and to take every other proper
precaution for executing or supporting the measures on which he had determined.
Bellay, the French envoy in Germany, having discovered the intention of raising
troops in that country, notwithstanding all the pretexts employed in order to
conceal it, first alarmed his master with this evident proof of the Emperor's
insincerity Mem. de Bellay, 192.
. But Francis was so possessed at that time with the rage of negotiation, in
all the artifices and refinements of which his rival far surpassed him, that
instead of beginning his military operations, and pushing them with vigor or
seizing the Milanese before the Imperial army was assembled, he satisfied
himself with making new offers to the Emperor, in order to procure the
investiture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, indeed, so liberal and
advantageous, that if ever Charles had intended to grant his demand, he could
not have rejected them with decency. He dexterously eluded them by declaring
that, until he consulted the Pope in person, he could not take his final
resolution with regard to a point which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy.
By this evasion he gained some farther time for ripening the schemes he had in
view.

THE Emperor at last advanced toward Rome, and made his public entry into that
city with extraordinary pomp; (April 6) but it being found necessary to remove
the ruins of an ancient temple of peace in order to widen one of the streets,
through which the cavalcade had to pass, all the historians take notice of this
trivial circumstance, which they are fond to interpret as an omen of the bloody
war that followed. Charles, it is certain, had by this time banished all
thoughts of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with which he had so long
covered his designs from the court of France, by a declaration of his
sentiments no less singular than explicit. The French ambassadors having in
their master's name demanded a definitive reply to his propositions concering
the investiture of Milan, Charles promised to give it next day in presence of
the Pope and Cardinals assembled in full consistory. These being accordingly
met, and all the the foreign ambassadors invited to attend, the Emperor stood
up, and addressing himself to the Pope, expatiated for some time on the
sincerity of his own wishes for the peace of Christendom, and his abhorrence of
war, the miseries of which he enumerated at great length, with studied and
elaborate oratory; he comp^ined that all his endeavors to preserve the
tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been defeated by the restless and unjust
ambition of the French King; that even during his minority he had proofs of the
unfriendly and hostile intentions of that monarch; that afterward, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Imperial crown which belonged to him by
a title no less just than natural; that he had next invaded his kindom of
Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he had attacked his territories as well
as those of his allies both in Italy and the Low Countries; that when the
valor of the Imperial troops, rendered irresistible by the protection of the
Almighty, had checked his progress, ruined his armies, and seized his person,
he continued to pursue by deceit what he had undertaken with injustice; that he
had violated every article in the the treaty of Madrid to which he owed his
liberty, and as soon as he returned to his dominions took measures for
rekindling the war which that pacification had happily extinguished; that when
new misfortunes compelled him to sue again for peace at Cambray, he concluded
and observed it with great insincerity; that soon thereafter he had formed
dangerous connections with the heretical Princes in Germany, and incited them
to disturb the tranquillity of the Empire; that now he had driven the Duke of
Savoy, his brother-in-law and ally, out of the greater part of his territories;
that after injuries so often repeated, and amidst so many sources of discord,
all hope of amity or concord became desperate; and though he was still willing
to grant the investiture of Milan to one of the Princes of France, there was
little probability of that event's taking place, as Francis on the one hand,
would not consent to what he judged necessary for securing the tranquillity of
Europe, nor, on the other, could he think it reasonable or safe to give him the
unconditional possession of all that he demanded. Let us not, however, added
he, continue wantonly to shed the blood of our innocent subjects; let us decide
the quarrel man to man, with what arms he pleases to choose, in our shirts, on
an island, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river; let the duchy of
Burgundy be put in deposit on his part, and that of Milan on mine; these shall
be the prize of the conqueror; and after that, let the united forces of
Germany, Spain, and France, be employed to humble the power of the Turk, and to
extirpate heresy out of Christendom. But if he, by declining this method of
terminating our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing shall divert me
from prosecuting it to such extremity, as shall reduce one of us to be the
poorest gentleman in his own dominions. Nor do I fear that it will be on me
this misfortune shall fall; I enter upon action with the fairest prospect of
success; the justice of my cause, the union of my subjects, the number and
valor of my troops, the experience and fidelity of my generals, all combine to
ensure it. Of all these advantages, the King of France is destitute; and were
my resources no more certain, and my hopes of victory no better founded than
his, I would instantly throw myself at his feet and with folded hands and a
rope about my neck, implore his mercy Bellay, 199. Sandov. Histor. del Emper.
II. 226.
.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered with an elevated voice, a haughty
tone, and the greatest vehemence of expression and gesture. The French
ambassadors, who did not fully comprehend his meaning, as he spoke in the
Spanish tongue, were totally disconcerted, and at a loss how they should answer
such an unexpected invective; when one of them began to vindicate his master's
conduct, Charles interposed abruptly, and would not permit him to proceed. The
Pope, without entering into any particular detail, satisfied himself with a
short but pathetic recommendation of peace, together with an offer of employing
his sincere endeavors, in order to procure that blessing to Christendom; and
the assembly broke up in the greatest astonishment at the extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited. In no part of his conduct indeed, did Charles ever
deviate so widely from his general character. Instead of that prudent
recollection, that composed and regular deportment so strictly attentive to
decorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his own passions, for which he was
at all other times conspicuous, he appears on this occasion before the most
august assembly in Europe, boasting of his own power and exploits with
insolence; inveighing against his enemy with indecency; and challenging him to
combat with an ostentatious valor, more becoming a champion in romance, than
the first Monarch in Christendom. But the well known and powerful operation of
continued prosperity, and of exaggerated praise, even upon the firmest minds,
sufficiently account for this seeming inconsistency. After having compelled
Solomon to retreat, and having stripped Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles began
to consider his arms as invincible. He had been entertained, ever since his
return from Africa, with repeated scenes of triumphs and public rejoicings; the
orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant at that time in Europe, had
exhausted their genius in panegyric, to which the astrologers added magnificent
promises of a more splendid fortune still in store. Intoxicated with all these,
he forgot his usual reserve and moderation, and was unable to restrain this
extravagant sally of vanity, which became the more remarkable, by being both so
uncommon and so public.

HE himself seems to have been immediately sensible of the impropriety of his
behavior, and when the French ambassadors demanded next day a more clear
explanation of what he had said concerning the combat, he told them, that they
were not to consider his proposal as a formal challenge to their master, but as
an expedient for preventing bloodshed; he endeavored to soften other
expressions in his discourse; and spoke in terms full of respect toward
Francis. But though this slight apology was far from being sufficient to remove
the offense which had been given, Francis by an unaccountable infatuation,
continued, to negociate, as if it had still been possible to bring their
differences to a period by an amicable composition. Charles finding him so
eager to run into the snare, favored the deception, and by seeming to listen
to his proposals gained time to prepare for the execution of his own designs
Mem. de Bellay, 205, etc.
.

AT last the Imperial army assembled on the frontiers of the Milanese, to the
amount of forty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, while that of France
encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont, being greatly inferior in number, and
weakened by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom Charles artfully persuaded
the Popish cantons to recall, that they might not serve against the Duke of
Savoy, their ancient ally. The French general, not daring to risque a battle,
retired as soon as the Imperialists advanced (May 6). The Emperor put himself
at the head of his forces, which the marquis del Guasto, the Duke of Alva, and
Ferdinand de Gonzago commanded under him, though the supreme direction of the
whole was committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose abilities and experience justly
entitled him to that distinction. Charles soon discovered his intention not to
confine his operations to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy, but to push
forward and invade the southern provinces of France. This scheme he had long
meditated, and had long been taking measures for executing it with such vigor
as might ensure success. He had remitted large sums to his sister, the
governess of the Low Countries, and to his brother, the King of the Romans,
instructing them to levy all the forces in their power, in order to form two
separate bodies, the one to enter France on the side of Picardy, the other on
the side of Champagne; while he with the main army, fell upon the opposite
frontier of the kingdom. Trusting to these vast preparations, he thought it
impossible that Francis could resist so many unexpected attacks, on such
different quarters; and begun his enterprise with such confidence of its happy
issue, that he desired Paul Jovius the historian, to make a large provision of
paper sufficient to record the victories which he was going to acquire.

HIS ministers and generals, instead of entertaining the same sanguine hopes,
represented to him in the strongest terms the danger of leading his troops so
far from his own territories, to such a distance from his magazines, and into
provinces which did not yield sufficient subsistence for their own inhabitants.
They entreated him to consider the inexhaustible resources of France in
maintaining a defensive war, and the active zeal with which a gallant nobility
would serve a Prince whom they loved, in repelling the enemies of their
country; they recalled to his remembrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon and
Pescara, when they ventured upon the same enterprise under circumstances which
seemed as certainly to promise success; the marquis del Guasto in particular,
fell on his knees, and conjured him to abandon the undertaking as desperate.
But many circumstances combined in leading Charles to disregard all their
remonstrances. He could seldom be brought, on any occasion, to depart from a
resolution which he had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate or despise the
talents of his rival the King of France, which differed so widely from his own;
he was blinded by the presumption which accompanies prosperity; and relied,
perhaps, in some degree, on the prophecies which predicted the increase of his
own grandeur. He not only adhered obstinately to his own plan, but determined
to advance toward France without waiting for the reduction of any part of
Piedmont, except such towns as were absolutely necessary for preserving his
communication with the Milanese.

THE marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had entrusted the command of a small
body of troops left for the defense of Piedmont, rendered this more easy than
he had any reason to expect. That nobleman, educated in the court of France,
distinguished by continual marks of the king's favor, and honored so lately
with a charge of such importance, suddenly, and without any provocation or
pretext of disgust, revolted from his benefactor. His motives to this
treacherous action, were as childish as the deed itself was base. Being
strongly possessed with a superstitious faith in divination and astrology, he
believed with full assurance, that the fatal period of the French nation was at
hand; that on its ruins the Emperor would establish an universal monarchy; that
therefore he ought to follow the dictates of prudence, in attaching himself to
his rising fortune, and would incur no blame for deserting a Prince whom heaven
had devoted to destruction Bellay. 221. a. 246, b.
. His treason became still more odious, by his employing that very authority
with which Francis had invested him, in order to open his kingdom to his
enemies. Whatever was proposed or undertaken by the officers under his command
for the defense of their conquests, he rejected or defeated. Whatever properly
belonged to himself as commander in chief, to provide or perform for that
purpose, he totally neglected. In this manner, he rendered towns even of the
greatest consequence untenable, by leaving them destitute either of provisions,
or ammunition or artillery, or a sufficient garrison; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as short time as was necessary to march through it, if
Montpezat, the governor of Fossana, had not, by an extraordinary effort of
courage and military conduct, detained them, almost a month, before that
inconsiderable place.

BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he gained his master sufficient
time for assembling his forces, and for concerting a system of defense against
a danger which he now saw to be inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper
and effectual plan for defeating the invasion of a powerful enemy; and his
prudence in choosing this plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it,
deserve the greater praise, as it was equally contrary to his natural temper,
and to the genius of the French nation. He determined to remain altogether upon
the defensive; never to hazard a battle, or even a great skirmish, without
certainty of success; to fortify his camps in a regular manner; to throw
garrisons only into towns of great strength; to deprive the enemy of
subsistence, by laying waste the country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces. The execution of this plan he
committed entirely to the marechal Montmorency, who was the author of it; a man
wonderfully fitted by nature for such a trust. Haughty, severe, confident in
his own abilities, and despising those of other men; incapable of being
diverted from any resolution by remonstrances or entreaties; and in prosecuting
any scheme, regardless alike of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a strong camp, under the walls of Avignon, at the
confluence of the Rhosne and Durance, one of which plentifully supplied his
troops with all necessaries from the inland provinces, and the other covered
his camp on that side, where it was most probable the enemy would approach. He
labored with unwearied industry to render the fortifications of this camp
impregnable, and assembled there a considerable army, though greatly inferior
to that of the enemy; while the King with another body of troops encamped at
Valence, higher up the Rhosne. Marseilles and Arles were the only towns he
thought it necessary to defend; the former in order to retain the command of
the sea; the latter, as the barrier of the province of Languedoc; and each of
these he furnished with numerous garrisons of his best troops, commanded by
officers, on whose fidelity and valor he could rely. The inhabitants of the
other towns as well as of the open country, were compelled to abandon their
houses, and were conducted to the mountains, to the camp at Avignon or to the
inland provinces. The fortifications of such places as might have afforded
shelter or defense to the enemy were thrown down. Corn, forage and provisions
of every kind, were carried away or destroyed; all the mills and ovens were
ruined, and the wells filled up or rendered useless. The devastation extended
from the Alps to Marseilles and from the sea to the confines of Dauphine; nor
does history afford any instance among civilized nations, in which this cruel
expedient for the public safety was employed with the same rigor.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the van of his army on the frontiers of
Provence, and was still so possessed with confidence of success, that during a
few days, when he was obliged to halt until the rest of his troops came up, he
began to divide his future conquests among his officers; and as a new
incitement to serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of offices, lands
and honors in France Bellay, 266, a.
. The face of desolation, however, which presented itself to him, when he
entered the country, could scarce fail to damp his hopes; and to convince him
that a Monarch, who, in order to distress an enemy, had voluntarily ruined one
of his richest provinces, would defend the rest with obstinate despair. Nor was
it long before he became sensible, that Francis's plan of defense was as
prudent as it appeared extraordinary. His fleet, on which Charles chiefly
depended for subsistence, was prevented for some time by contrary winds, and
other accidents to which naval operations are subject, from approaching the
French coast; and even after its arrival, it afforded at best a precarious and
scanty supply to such a numerous body of troops Sandov. ii. 231.
; nothing was to be found in the country itself for their support; nor could
they draw considerable aid from the dominions of the Duke of Savoy, exhausted
already by maintaining two great armies. The Emperor was no less embarrassed
how to employ, than how to subsist his forces; for, though he was now in
possession of almost an entire province, he could not however be said to have
the command of it, while he held only defenseless towns; and while the French,
besides their camp at Aviguon, continued masters of Marseilles and Arles. At
first he thought of attacking the camp, and of determinating the war by one
decisive blow; but skilful officers, who were appointed to view it, declared
the attempt to be utterly impracticable. He then commanded Marseilles and Arles
to be invested, hoping that the French would quit their advantageous post in
order to relieve them; but Montmorency adhering firmly to his plan, remained
immovable at Avignon, and the Imperialists met with such a warm reception from
the garrisons of both towns, that they relinquished their enterprise with loss
and disgrace. As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once more toward Avignon,
though with an army harrassed by the perpetual incursions of small parties of the
French light troops, weakened by diseases, and dispirited by disasters, which
seemed more intolerable, because they were unexpected.

DURING these operations Montmorency found himself exposed to greater danger
from his own troops than from the enemy; and their inconsiderate valor went
near to have precipitated the kingdom into these calamities, which he with such
industry and caution had endeavored to avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy
ravaging their country almost without control; impatient of such long
inaction; unacquainted with the slow and remote, but certain effects of
Montmorency's system of defense; the French wished for a battle with no less
ardour than the Imperialists. They considered the conduct of their general as a
disgrace to their country. His caution they imputed to timidity; his
circumspection to want of spirit; and the constancy with which he pursued his
plan to obstinacy or pride. These reflections, whispered, at first, among the
soldiers and subalterns, were adopted, by degrees, by officers of higher rank;
and as many of these envied Montmorency's favor with the King, and more were
dissatisfied with his harsh disgusting manner, the discontent soon became great
in his camp, which was filled with general murmurings, and almost open
complaints against his measures. Montmorency, on whom the sentiments of his own
troops made as little impression as the insults of the enemy, adhered steadily
to his system; though in order to reconcile the army to his maxims, no less
contrary to the genius of the nation, than to the ideas of war among
undisciplined troops, he assumed an unusual affability in his deportment, and
often explained with great condescension the motives of his conduct, the
advantages which had already resulted from it, and the certain success with
which it would be attended. At last Francis joined his army at Avignon, which
having received several reinforcements, he now considered as of strength
sufficient to face the enemy. As he had put upon himself no small constraint,
in having consented that his troops should remain so long upon the defensive,
it can scarce be doubted but that his fondness for what was daring and
splendid, added to the impatience both of officers and soldiers, would have
overruled Montmorency's salutary caution Mem. de Bellay, 269, etc. 312, etc.
.

HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered the kingdom from the danger which
any rash resolution might have occasioned. The Emperor, after spending two
inglorious months in Provence, having performed nothing suitable to his vast
preparations, or that could justify the confidence with which he had boasted of
his own power, found that, besides Antonio de Leyva, and other officers of
distincton, he had lost one half of his troops by diseases, or by famine; and
that the rest were in no condition to struggle any longer with calamities, by
which so many of their companions had perished. Necessity, therefore, extorted
from him orders to retire; and though he was some time in motion before the
French suspected his intention, a body of light troops, assisted by crowds of
peasants, eager to be revenged on those who had brought such desolation on
their country, hung upon the rear of the Imperialists, and by seizing every
favorable opportunity of attacking them, threw them often into confusion. The
road by which they fled, for they pursued their march with such disorder and
precipitation, that it scarce deserves the name of a retreat, was strewed with
arms or baggage, which in their hurry and trepidation they had abandoned, and
covered with the sick, the wounded, and the dead; insomuch, that Martin Bellay,
an eyewitness of their calamities, endeavors to give his readers some idea of
it, by comparing their miseries to those which the Jews suffered from the
victorious and destructive arms of the Romans Mem. de Bellay, 316. Sandov.
Hist. del Emper, ii. 232.
. If Montmorency at this critical moment had advanced with all his forces,
nothing could have saved the whole Imperial army from utter ruin. But that
general, by standing so long and so obstinately on the defensive, had become
cautious to excess; his mind, tenacious of any bent it had once taken, could
not assume a contrary one as suddenly as the change of circumstances required;
and he still continued to repeat his favorite maxims, that it was more prudent
to allow the lion to escape, than to drive him to despair, and that a bridge of
gold should be made for a retreating enemy.

THE Emperor having conducted the shattered remains of his troops to the
frontiers of Milan, and appointed the marquis del Guasto to succeed Leyva in
the government of the duchy, set out for Genoa. As he could not bear to expose
himself to the scorn of the Italians, after such a sad reverse of fortune; and
did not choose, under his present circumstances, to revisit those cities through
which he had so lately passed in triumph for one conquest, and in certain
expectation of another; he embarked directly for Spain Jovii Histor. lib. 35.
p. 174, etc.
.

NOR was the progress of his arms on the opposite frontier of France such as to
alleviate in any degree the losses which he had sustained in Provence. Bellay
by his address and intrigues had prevailed on so many of the German Princes to
withdraw the contingent of troops which they furnished to the King of the
Romans, that he was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of his intended irruption
into Champagne. Though a powerful army levied in the Low Countries entered
Picardy, which they found but feebly guarded, while the strength of the Kingdom
was drawn toward the south; yet the nobility taking arms with their usual
alacrity, supplied by their spirit the defects of the King's preparations, and
defended with such vigor Peronne, and other towns which were attacked, as
obliged the enemy to retire without making any conquest of importance Mem. de
Bellay, 318, etc.
.

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his own measures, and by the union and valor
of his subjects, rendered abortive those vast efforts by which his rival had
almost exhausted his whole force. As this humbled the Emperor's arrogance no
less than it checked his power, he was mortified more sensibly on this occasion
than on any other, during the course of the long contests between him and the
French Monarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy with which the success of the
campaign inspired Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin, his eldest son, a
Prince of great hopes, and extremely beloved by the people on account of his
resemblance to his father. This happening suddenly, was imputed to poison, not
only by the vulgar, sond of ascribing the death of illustrious personages to
extraordinary causes, but by the King and his ministers. The count de
Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cupbearer to the Dauphin, being seized on
suspicion and put to the torture, openly charged the Imperial generals, Gonzaga
and Leyva, with having instigated him to the commission of that crime, and
threw out some indirect and obscure accusations against the Emperor himself. At
a time when all France was animated with implacable hatred against Charles,
this was considered as an incontestible proof of guilt; while the confidence
with which both he and his officers asserted their own innocence, together with
the indignation and horror which they expressed on their being supposed capable
of such a detestable action, were little attended to, and less regarded Mem. de
Bellay, 289.
. It is evident however, that the Emperor could have no inducement to
perpetrate such a crime, as Francis was still in the vigor of life himself,
and had two sons, besides the Dauphin, grown up to a good age. That single
consideration, without mentioning the Emperor's general character, unblemished
by the imputation of any deed resembling this in atrocity, is more than
sufficient to counterbalance the weight of a dubious testimony uttered during
the anguish of torture Sandov. Hist. del Emper. ii. 231.
. According to the most unprejudiced historians, the Dauphin's death was
occasioned by his having drunk too freely of cold water after overheating
himself at tennis; and this account, as it is most simple, is likewise the most
credible. But if his days were cut short by poison, it is not improbable that
the Emperor conjectured rightly, when he affirmed that it had been administered
by the direction of Catharine of Medici, in order to secure the crown to the
Duke of Orleans, her husband Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75.
. The advantages resulting to her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious as well
as great; nor did her boundless and daring ambition ever scruple at any action
necessary toward attaining the objects which she had in view.

NEXT year (1537.) opened with a transaction very uncommon, but so incapable of
producing any effect, that it would not deserve to be mentioned, if it were not
a striking proof of that personal animosity which mingled itself in all the
hostilities between Charles and Francis, and which often betrayed them into
such indecencies toward each other, as lessened the dignity of both. Francis,
accompanied by the peers and princes of the blood, having taken his seat in the
parliament of Paris with the usual solemnities, the advocate-general appeared;
and after accusing Charles of Austria, (for so he affected to call the Emperor)
of having violated the treaty of Cambray, by which he was absolved from the
homage due to the crown of France for the counties of Artois and Flanders;
insisted that this treaty being now void, he was still to be considered as a
vassal of the crown, and, by consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in
taking arms against his sovereign; and therefore he demanded that Charles
should be summoned to appear in person, or by his counsel, before the
parliament of Paris, his legal judges to answer for his crime. The request was
granted; a herald repaired to the frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him, with
the accustomed formalities to appear against a day prefixed. The term being
expired, and no person appearing in his name, the parliament gave judgment,
"That Charles of Austria had forfeited by rebellion and contumacy these fiefs;
declared Flanders and Artois to be reunited to the crown of France; and
ordered their decree for this purpose to be published by sound of trumpet on
the frontiers of these provinces Lettres et Memoires d'Etat par Ribier, 2. tom.
Blois. 1666, tom. i. p. 1.
."

SOON after this vain display of his resentment, rather than of his power,
Francis marched toward the Low Countries, as if he intended to execute the
sentence which his parliament had pronounced, and to seize those territories
which it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hungary, to whom her brother the
Emperor had committed the government of that part of his dominions, was not
prepared for so early a campaign, he at first made some progress, and took
several towns of importance. But being obliged soon to leave his army, in order
to superintend the other operations of war, the Flemings having assembled a
numerous army, not only recovered most of the places which they had lost, but
began to make conquests in their turn. At last they invested Terouenne, and the
Duke of Orleans, now Dauphin, by the death of his brother, Montmorency, whom
Francis honored with the constable's sword, as the reward of his great service
during the former campaign, determined to hazard a battle in order to relieve
it. While they were advancing for this purpose, and within a few miles of the
enemy, they were stopped short by the arrival of an herald from the Queen of
Hungary, acquainting him that a suspension of arms was now agreed upon.

THIS unexpected event was owing to the zealous endeavors of the two sisters,
the Queens of France and of Hungary, who had long labored to reconcile the
contending Monarchs. The war in the Netherlands had laid waste the frontier
provinces of both countries, without any real advantage to either; the French
and Flemings equally regretted the interruption of their commerce, which was
beneficial to both; and Charles and Francis, who had each strained to the
utmost, in order to support the vast operations of the former campaign, found
that they could not now keep armies on foot in this quarter, without weakening
their operations in Piedmont, where both wished to push the war with the
greatest vigor. All these circumstances facilitated the negociations of the
two Queens; a truce was concluded, (July 30) to continue in force for ten
months, but it extended no farther than the Low Countries Memoires de Ribier,
56.
.

IN Piedmont the war was still prosecuted with great animosity; and though
neither Charles nor Francis could make the powerful efforts to which their
animosity prompted them, they continued to exert themselves like combatants,
whose rancour remains after their strength is exhausted. Towns were alternately
lost and retaken; skirmishes were fought every day; and much blood was shed,
without any decisive action, that gave the superiority to either side. At last
the two Queens determining not to leave unfinished the good work which they had
begun, prevailed by their importunate solicitations, the one on her brother,
the other on her husband, to consent also to a truce in Piedmont for three
months, upon condition that each should keep possession of what was in his
hands, and leaving garrisons in the towns, withdraw his army out of the
province; and that plenipotentiaries should be appointed to adjust all matters
in dispute by a final treaty Mem. de Ribier, 62.
.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Princes to this accommodation, have
been often mentioned. The expenses of the war had far exceeded the sums which
their revenues were capable of supplying, nor durst they venture upon any great
addition to the impositions then established, as subjects were not yet taught
to bear with patience the immense burdens to which they have become accustomed
in modern times. The Emperor, in particular, though he had contracted debts
which in that age appeared prodigious Ribier, i. 294.
, had it not in his power to pay the large arrears which had been long due to
his army. At the same time he had no prospect of deriving any aid in money or
men either from the Pope or Venetians, though he had employed promises and
threats, alternately, in order to procure it. But he found the former fixed in
his resolution of adhering steadily to the neutrality which he had always
declared to be suitable to his character, and passionately desirous of bringing
about a peace. He perceived that the latter were still intent on their ancient
object of holding the balance even between the rivals, and sollicitous not to
throw too great a weight into either scale.

WHAT made a deeper impression on Charles than all these, was the dread of the
Turkish arms, which Francis had drawn upon him by his league with Solomon.
Though Francis, without the assistance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
against an enemy greatly superior in power to himself, yet so great was the
horror of Christians, in that age, at any union with Infidels, which they
considered not only as dishonorable but profane, that it was long before he
could be brought to avail himself of the obvious advantages resulting from such
a confederacy. Necessity at last surmounted his delicacy and scruples; and
toward the close of the preceding year, La Forest, a secret agent at the
Ottoman port, had concluded a treaty with the Sultan, whereby Solomon engaged
to invade, next campaign, the kingdom of Naples, and to attack the King of the
Romans in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis undertook to enter the
Milanese at the same time with a proper force. Solomon had punctually performed
what was incumbent on him. Barbarossa with a great fleet appeared on the coast
of Naples, filled that kingdom, from which all the troops had been drawn
toward Piedmont, with consternation, landed without resistance near Tarantoo,
obliged Castro, a place of some strength, to surrender, plundered the adjacent
country, and was taking measures for securing and extending his conquests, when
the unexpected arrival of Doria, together with the Pope's galleys, and a
squadron of the Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to retire. In Hungary
the progress of the Turks was more formidable. Mahmet, their general, after
gaining several small advantages, defeated the Germans in a great battle at
Essek on the Drove Istnanhaffi Hist. Hung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
. Happily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's power to execute with equal
exactness what he had stipulated; nor could he assemble at this juncture an
army strong enough to penetrate into the Milanese. By this he failed in
recovering possession of that duchy; and Italy was not only saved from the
calamities of a new war, but from feeling as an addition to all that it had
suffered the desolating rage of the Turkish arms Jovii. Histor. lib. xxxv, p.
^83.
. As the Emperor knew that he could not long resist the efforts of two such
powerful confederates, nor could expect that the same fortunate accidents would
concur a second time to deliver Naples, and to preserve the Milanese: As he
foresaw that the Italian states would not only tax him loudly with insatiable
ambition, but might even turn their arms against him, if he should be so
regardless of their danger as obstinately to protract the war, he thought it
necessary, both for his safety and reputation, to give his consent to a truce.
Nor was Francis willing to sustain all the blame of obstructing the
re-establishment of peace, or to expose himself on that account to the danger
of being deserted by the Swiss and other foreigners in his service. He even
began to apprehend that his own subjects would serve him coldly, if by
contributing to aggrandize the power of the Infidels, which it was his duty,
and had been the ambition of his ancestors to depress, he continued to act in
direct opposition to all the principles which ought to influence a Monarch
distinguished by the title of Most Christian King. He chose, for all these
reasons, rather to run the risque of disobliging his new ally the Sultan, than,
by an unseasonable adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit what was of
greater consequence.

BUT though both parties consented to a truce, the plenipotentiaries found
insuperable difficulties in settling the articles of a definitive treaty. Each
of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a conqueror, aimed at giving law to the
other; and neither would so far acknowledge his inferiority, as to sacrifice
any point of honor, or to relinquish any matter of right; so that the
plenipotentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless negociations, and
separated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a few months.

THE Pope, however, did not despair of accomplishing a point in which the
plenipotentiaries had failed, and took upon himself the sole burden of
negociating a peace. To form a confederacy capable of defending Christendom
from the formidable inroads of the Turkish arms, and to concert effectual
measures for the extirpation of the Lutheran heresy, were two great objects
which Paul had much at heart, and he considered the union of the Emperor with
the King of France as an essential preliminary to both. To be the instrument of
reconciling these contending Monarchs, whom his predecessors by their
interested and indecent intrigues had so often embroiled, was a circumstance
which could not fail of throwing distinguished luster on his character and
administration. Nor was he without hopes that while he pursued this laudable
end, he might secure advantages to his own family, the aggrandizing of which he
did not neglect, though he aimed at it with a less audacious ambition than was
common among the Popes of that century. Influenced by these considerations, he
proposed an interview between the two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair
thither in person, that he might act as mediator in composing all their
differences. When a Pontiff of a venerable character, and of very advanced age,
was willing, from his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues of such a distant
journey, neither Charles nor Francis could with decency decline the interview.
But though both came to the place of rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of
adjusting the ceremonial, or such the remains of distrust and rancour on each
side, that they refused to see one another, and every thing was transacted by
the intervention of the Pope, who visited them alternately. Nor could he, with
all his zeal and ingenuity, find out any method of removing the obstcales,
particularly those arising from the possession of the Milanese, which prevented
a final accommodation; nor was all the weight of his authority, sufficient to
overcome the obstinate perseverance of either Monarch in asserting his own
claims. At last, that he might not seem to have labored altogether without
effect, he prevailed on them to sign a truce for ten years, (June 18) upon the
same condition with the former, that each should retain what was now in his
possession, and in the mean time should send ambassadors to Rome, to discuss
their pretensions at leisure Recueil des Traitez, ii. 210. Relatione del Nicolo
Tiepolo de l'abocamento di Nizza chez. Du Mont Corpse Diplomat. par. ii. p. 172.
.

THUS ended a war of no long continuance, but very extensive in its operations,
and in which both parties exerted their utmost strength. Though Francis failed in
the object that he had principally in view, the recovery of the Milanese, he
acquired, nevertheless, great reputation by the wisdom of his measures, as well
as the success of his arms in repulsing a formidable invasion; and by securing
possession of one half of the Duke of Savoy's dominions, he added no
inconsiderable accession to his kingdom. Whereas, Charles, repulsed and
baffled, after having boasted so arrogantly of victory, purchased an inglorious
truce, by sacrificing an ally who had rashly confided too much in his
friendship and power. The unfortunate Duke murmured, complained, and
^emonstrated against a treaty so much to his disadvantage; but in vain; he had
no means of redress, and was obliged to submit. Of all his dominions, Nice,
with its dependencies, was the only corner of which he himself kept possession.
He saw the rest divided between a powerful invader, and the ally to whose
protection he had trusted, while he remained a sad monument of the imprudence
of weak Princes, who by taking part in the quarrel of mighty neighbors,
between whom they happen to be situated, are crushed and overwhelmed in the
shock.

A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce, the Emperor set sail for
Barcelona, but was driven by contrary winds to the island St. Margaret on the
coast of Provence. When Francis, who happened to be not far distant, heard of
this, he considered it as an office of civility, to invite him to take shelter
in his dominions, and proposed a personal interview with him at Aigues-mortes.
The Emperor, who would not be outdone by his rival in complaisance, instantly
repaired thither. As soon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis, without
waiting to settle any point of ceremony, but relying implicitly on the
Emperor's honor for his security, visited him on board his galley, and was
received and entertained with the warmest demonstrations of esteem and
affection. Next day, the Emperor repaid the confidence which the King had
placed in him. He landed at Aigues-mortes with as little precaution, and met
with a reception equally cordial. He remained on shore during the night, and in
both visits, they vied with each other in expressions of respect and friendship
Sandov. Hist. vol. ii. 2^8. Relation de ^^n^reyne de Charl. V. and Fran. I.
par. M. de la Rivoire. Hist. de Langued. par. D. D. De Vie and Vaisette. tom.
v. Pr^^, p. 93.
. After twenty years of open hostilities, or of secret enmity; after so many
injuries reciprocally inflicted or endured; after having formally given the
lie, and challenged one another to single combat; after the Emperor had
inveighed so publicly against Francis, as a Prince void of honor or
integrity; and Francis, had accused him as accessory to the murder of his
eldest son; such an interview appears altogether singular, and even unnatural.
But the history of these Monarchs abounds with such surprising transitions.
From implacable enmity, they appeared to past, in a moment, to the most cordial
reconcilement; from suspicion and distrust, to perfect confidence; and from
practicing all the dark arts of a deceitful policy, they could assume, of a
sudden, the liberal and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having restored peace to Europe, gained,
according to his expectation, a point of great consequence to his family, by
prevailing on the Emperor to betroth Margaret of Austria his natural daughter,
formerly the wife of Alexander de Medici, to his grandson Octavio Farnese, and
in consideration of this marriage, to bestow several honors and territories
upon his future son-in-law. A very tragical event, which happened about the
beginning of the year one thousand five hundred and thirty seven, had deprived
Margaret of her first husband. That young prince, whom the Emperor's partiality
had raised to the supreme power in Florence, upon the ruins of the public
liberty, neglected entirely the cares of government, and abandoned himself to
the most dissolute debauchery. Lorenzo de Medici his nearest kinsman, was not
only the companion but director of his pleasures, and employing all the powers
of a cultivated and inventive genius in this dishonorable ministry, added such
elegance and variety to vice as gained him an absolute ascendant over the mind
of Alexander. But while Lorenzo seemed to be sunk in Luxury, and affected such
an appearance of indolence and effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword, and
trembled at the sight of blood, he concealed under that disguise, a dark,
designing, audacious spirit. Prompted either by the love of liberty, or allured
by the hope of attaining the supreme power, he determined to assassinate
Alexander his benefactor and friend. Though he long revolved this design in his
mind, his reserved and suspicious temper prevented him from communicating it to
any person whatever; and continuing to live with Alexander in their usual
familiarity, he, one night, under pretense of having secured him an assignation
with a lady of high rank, whom- he had often solicited, drew that unwary Prince
into a secret apartment of his house, and there stabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch, expecting the arrival of the lady whose company he had
been promised. But no sooner was the deed done, than standing astonished, and
struck with horror at its atrocity, he forgot, in a moment, all the motives
which had induced him to commit it, and, instead of rouzing the people to
recover their liberty, by publishing the death of the tyrant, instead of taking
any step toward opening his own way to the dignity now vacant, he locked the
door of the apartment, and, like a man bereaved of reason and presence of mind,
fled with the utmost precipitation out of the Florentine territories. It was
late next morning before the fate of the unfortunate Prince was known, as his
attendants, accustomed to his irregularities, never entered his apartment
early. Immediately the chief persons in the state assembled. Being induced
partly by the zeal of cardinal Cibo for the house of Medici, to which he was
nearly related, partly by the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who recalled
to their memory, and represented in striking colors, the caprice as well as
turbulence of their ancient popular government, they agreed to place Cosmo di
Medici, a youth of eighteen, the only male heir of that illustrious house, at
the head of the government; though at the same time such was their love of
liberty, that they established several regulations in order to circumscribe and
moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place of safety, made known what he had
done, to Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who had been driven into
exile, or who had voluntarily retired, when the republican form of government
was abolished in order to make way for the dominion of the Medici. By them, the
deed was extolled with extravagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was
compared with that of the elder Brutus, who disregarded the ties of blood, or
with that of the younger, who forgot the friendship and favors of the tyrant,
that they might preserve or recover the liberty of their country Lettere di
Principi, tom. iii. p. 52.
. Nor did they rest satisfied with empty panegyricks; they immediately quitted
their different places of retreat, assembled forces, animated their vassals and
partisans to take arms, and to seize this opportunity of re-establishing the
public liberty on its ancient foundation. Being openly assisted by the French
ambassador at Rome, and secretly encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good will
to the house of Medici, they entered the Florentine dominions with a
considerable body of men. But the persons who had elected Cosmo possessed both
the means of supporting his government, and abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner. They levied, with the greatest expedition, a good number of
troops; they endeavored by every art, to gain the citizens of greatest
authority, and to render the administration of the young prince agreeable to
the people. Above all, they courted the Emperor's protection, as the only firm
foundation of Cosmo's dignity and power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the
Florentines to the friendship of France, and how much all the partisans of a
republican government detested him as the oppressor of their liberties, saw it
to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-establishment of the ancient
constitution in Florence. For this reason, he not only acknowledged Cosmo as
head of the Florentine state, and conferred on him all the titles of honor
with which Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to defend him to the
utmost; and as a pledge of this, ordered the commanders of such of his troops
as were stationed on the frontiers of Tuscany, to support him against all
aggressors. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy victory over the exiles, whose
troops he surprised in the nightime, and took most of the chiefs prisoners;
an event which broke all their measures, and fully established his own
authority. But though he was extremely desirous of the additional honor of
marrying the Emperor's daughter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles, secure
already of his attachment, chose rather to gratify the Pope by bestowing her on
his nephew Jovii Hist. c. xcviii. p. 218, etc. Belcarii Comment. l. 22. p. 696.
Istoria de sui tempi di Giov. Bat. Adrian. Ven. 1587. p. 10.
.

DURING the war between the Emperor and Francis, an event had happened which
abated in some degree the warmth and cordiality of friendship which had long
subsisted between the latter and the King of England. James the fifth of
Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince, having heard of the Emperor's intention
to invade Provence, and being fond of showing that he did not yield to any of
his ancestors in the sincerity of his attachment to the French crown, as well
as eager to distinguish himself by some military exploit, levied a body of
troops with an intention of leading them in person to the assistance of the
King of France. Though some unfortunate accident prevented his carrying any
troops into France, nothing could divert him from going thither in person.
Immediately upon his landing he hastened to Provence, but had been detained so
long in his voyage that he could not have any share in the military operations,
and he met the King on his return after the retreat of the Imperialists,
(January 1, 1537.) Francis, greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with his
manners and conversation, could not refuse him his daughter Magdalen, whom he
demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry extremely to see a Prince of whom he
was lately become jealous, after having long treated him and his subjects with
contempt, form an alliance, from which he derived such an accession both of
reputation and security Hist. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.
. He could not, however, with decency oppose Francis's bestowing his daughter
upon a Monarch descended from a race of Princes, the most ancient and faithful
allies of the French crown. But when James, upon the sudden death of Magdalen,
demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly solicited Francis to deny
his suit, and in order to disappoint him asked that lady in Marriage for
himself. When Francis preferred the Scottish King's sincere courtship to his
artful and malevolent proposal, he discovered much dissatisfaction. The
pacification agreed upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of the two rivals
at Aiguesmortes, filled Henry's mind with new suspicions, as if Francis had
altogether renounced his friendship for the sake of new connections with the
Emperor. Charles, thoroughly acquainted with the temper of the English King,
and watchful to observe all the shiftings and caprices of his passions, thought
this a favorable opportunity of renewing his negociations with him, which had
long been broken off. By the death of Queen Catherine, whose interest the
Emperor could not with decency have abandoned, the chief cause of their discord
was removed; so that without touching upon the delicate question of her
divorce, he might now take what measures he thought most effectual for
regaining Henry's good will. For this purpose, he began with proposing several
marriage-treaties to the King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the King of
Denmark, to Henry himself; he demanded the Princess Mary for one of the Princes
of Portugal, and was even willing to recieve her as the King's illegitimate
daughter Mem, de Ribier, t. i 4^6
. Though none of these projected alliances ever took place, or perhaps were
ever seriously intended, they occasioned such frequent intercourse between the
courts, and so many reciprocal professions of civility and esteem, as
considerably abated the edge of Henry's rancour against the Emperor, and paved
the way for that union between them which afterward proved so disadvantageous
to the French King.

THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor had been engaged, and the wars he
had been carrying on for some years proved, as usual, extremely favorable to
the progress of the reformation in Germany. While Charles was absent upon his
African expedition, or intent on his vast projects against France, his chief
object in Germany was to prevent the dissensions about religion from disturbing
the public tranquillity, by granting such indulgence to the Protestant Princes
as might induce them to concur with his measures, or at least hinder them from
taking part with his rival. For this reason, he was careful to secure to the
Protestants the possession of all the advantages which they had gained by the
articles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-two Du Mont Corpse Diplom. tom. iv. part 2. p. 138.
; and except some slight trouble from the proceedings of the Imperial chamber,
they met with nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their religion, or to
interrupt the successful zeal with which they propagated their opinions.
Meanwhile the Pope continued his negociations for convoking a general council;
and though the Protestants had expressed great dissatisfaction with his
intention to fix upon Mantua as the place of meeting, he adhered obstinately to
his choice, issued a bull on the second of June, one thousand five hundred and
thirty-six, appointing it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of May
the year following; he nominated three cardinals to preside in his name;
enjoined all Christian Princes to countenance it by their authority, and
invited the prelates of every nation to attend in person. This citation of a
council, an assembly which from its nature and intention demanded quiet times,
as well as pacific dispositions, at the very juncture, when the Emperor was on
his march toward France, and ready to involve a great part of Europe in the
confusions of war, appeared to every person extremely unseasonable. It was
intimated, however, to all the different courts by nuncios dispatched of
purpose Pallavie. Hist. Conc. Trid. 113.
. The Emperor, with an intention to gratify the Germans, had, during his
residence at Rome, warmly solicited the Pope to call a council; but being at
the same time willing to try every art in order to persuade Paul to depart from
the neutrality which he preserved between him and Francis, he sent Heldo his
vice chancellor along with the nuncio whom the Pope employed in Germany,
instructing him to second all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce them
with the whole weight of the Imperial authority (February 25, 1537). The
Protestants gave them audience at Smalkalde, where they had assembled in a
body, in order to receive them. But after weighing all their arguments, they
unanimously refused to acknowledge a council summoned in the name and by the
authority of the Pope alone; in which he assumed the sole right of presiding;
which was to be held in a city not only far distant from Germany, but subject
to a Prince, a stranger to them, and closely connected with the court of Rome,
and to which their Divines could not repair with safety, especially after their
doctrines had been stigmatized in the very bull of convocation with the name of
heresy. These and many other objections against the council, which appeared to
them unanswerable, they enumerated in a large manifesto, which they published
in vindication of their conduct Sli^dan, l. xii. 123, etc. Seckend. Com. lib.
iii. p. 143, etc.
.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as a flagrant proof of their
obstinacy and presumption, and the Pope still persisted in his resolution to
hold the council at the time and in the place appointed. But some unexpected
difficulties being started by the Duke of Mantua, both about the right of
jurisdiction over those who resorted to the council, and the security of his
capital amidst such a concourse of strangers, the Pope, after fruitless
endeavors to adjust these, first prorogued the council for some months, and
afterward transferring the place of meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian
territories, appointed it to assemble on the first of May in the following
year. As neither the Emperor nor the French King, who had not then come to any
accommodation would permit their subjects to repair thither, not a single
prelate appeared on the day prefixed, and the Pope, that his authority might
not become altogether contemptible by so many ineffectual intimations, put off
the meeting by an indefinitive prorogation F. Paul, 117. Pallavic. 117.
.

MEANWHILE, that he might not seem to have turned his whole attention toward a
reformation which he was not able to accomplish, while he neglected that which
was in his power, he deputed a certain number of cardinals and bishops with
full authority to inquire into the abuses and corruptions of the Roman court;
and to propose the most effectual method of removing them (1538). This
scrutiny, undertaken with reluctance, was carried on slowly and with
remissness. All defects were touched with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too
deep, or of discovering too much. But even by this partial examination, many
irregularities were detected, and many chormities exposed to light, while the
remedies which they suggested as most proper were either inadequate, or were
never applied. The report and resolutions of these deputies, though intended to
be kept secret, were transmitted by some accident into Germany, and being
immediately made public, afforded ample matter for reflection and triumph to
the Protestants Sleidan, 233.
. On the one hand they demonstrated the necessity of a reformation in the head
as well as the members of the church, and even pointed out many of the
corruptions against which Luther and his followers had remonstrated with the
greatest vehemence. They showed on the other hand, that it was vain to expect
this reformation from ecclesiastics themselves, who, as Luther strongly
expressed it, piddled at curing warts, while they overlooked or confirmed
ulcers Seck. l. iii. 164.
.

THE earnestness with which the Emperor seemed, at first, to press their
acquiescing in the Pope's scheme of holding a council in Italy, having alarmed
the Protestant Princes so much, that they thought it prudent to strengthen
their confederacy, by admitting several new members who solicited that
privilege, particularly the King of Denmark; Heldo, who during his residence in
Germany, had observed all the advantages which they derived from that union,
endeavored to counterbalance its effects by an alliance among the catholic
powers of the Empire (1539.) This league, distinguished by the name of Holy,
was merely defensive, and though concluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterward disowned by him, and subscribed by very few Princes Seck. l. iii.
171. Recueil de Traitez.
.

THE Protestants soon got intelligence of this association, notwithstanding all
the endeavors of the contracting parties to conceal it; and their zeal, always
apt to suspect and to dread, even to excess, every thing that seemed to
threaten religion, instantly took the alarm, as if the Emperor had been just
ready to enter upon the execution of some formidable plan for the extirpation
of their opinions. In order to disappoint this, they held frequent
consultations; they courted the Kings of France and England with great
assiduity, and even began to think of raising the respective contingents both
in men and money, which they were obliged to furnish by the treaty of
Smalkalde. But it was not long before they were convinced, that these
apprehensions were without foundation, and that the Emperor, to whom repose was
absolutely necessary, after being exhausted by efforts beyond his strength in
the war with France, had no thoughts of disturbing the tranquillity of Germany.
As a proof of this, his ambassadors, at an interview with the Protestant
Princes in Francfort, (April 19) agreed that all concessions in their favor,
particularly those contained in the pacification of Nuremberg, should continue
in force for fifteen months; that during this period, all proceedings of the
Imperial chamber against them should be suspended; that a conference should be
held by a few divines of each party, in order to discuss the points in
controversy, and to propose articles of accommodation, which should be laid
before the next diet. Though the Emperor that he might not irritate the Pope,
who remonstrated against the first part of this agreement as impolitick, and
against the latter, as an impious encroachment upon his prerogative, never
formally ratified this convention, it was observed with considerable exactness,
and greatly strengthened the basis of that ecclesiastical liberty, for which
the Protestants contended F. Paul, 82. Sleid. 247. Seck. l. iii. 200.
.

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, (April 24) happened the death of
George Duke of Saxony, an event of great advantage to the Reformation. That
Prince, the head of the Albertine or younger branch of the Saxon family,
possessed, as marquis of Misnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dresden. Leipsick, and other cities now the most considerable in
the electorate. From the first dawn of the Reformation, he had been its enemy
as avowedly, as the electoral Princes were its protectors, and had carried on
his opposition not only with all the zeal flowing from religious prejudices,
but with a virulence inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and imbittered
by the domestic animosity, subsisting between him and the other branch of his
family. By his death without issue, his succession fell to his brother Henry,
whose attachment to the Protestant religion, surpassed, if possible, that of
his predecessor to popery. Henry no sooner took possession (...) new dominions,
than, disregarding a clause in George's will, dictated by his bigotry, whereby
he bequeathed all his territories to the Emperor and King of the Romans, if his
brother should attempt to make any innovation in religion; he invited some
Protestant divines, and among them Luther himself, to Leipsick. By their advice
and assistance, he overturned, in a few weeks, the whole system of ancient
rites, establishing the full exercise of the reformed religion, with the
universal applause of his subjects, who had long wished for this change, which
the authority of their Duke alone had hitherto prevented Sleidan, 249.
. This revolution delivered the Protestants from the danger to which they were
exposed, by having an inveterate enemy situated in the middle of their
territories; and their dominions now extended in one great and almost unbroken
line, from the shore of the Baltic to the banks of the Rhine.

SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice, an event happened, which
satisfied all Europe, that Charles had prosecuted the war to the utmost
extremity, that the state of his affairs would permit. Vast arrears were due to
his troops, whom he had long amused with vain hopes and promises. As they now
foresaw that little attention would be paid to their demands, when by the
re-establishment of peace, their services became of less importance, they lost
all patience, broke out into open mutiny, and declared, that they thought
themselves entitled to seize by violence, what was detained from them contrary
to all justice. Nor was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of the
Emperor's dominions; the mutiny was almost as general as the grievance which
gave rise to it. The soldiers in the Milanese, plundered the open country
without control, and filled the capital itself with consternation. Those in
garrison at Goletta, threatened to give up that important fortress to
Barbarossa. In Sicily, the troops proceeded to still greater excesses; having
chased away their officers, they elected others in their stead, defeated a body
of men whom the viceroy sent against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conducting themselves all the while, in such a manner, that their operations
resembled rather the regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion, than the
rashness and violence of a military mutiny. But by the address and prudence of
the generals, who, partly by borrowing money in their own name, or in that of
their master, partly by extorting large sums from the cities in their
respective provinces, raised what was sufficient to discharge the arrears of
the soldiers, these insurrections were quelled. The greater part of the troops
being disbanded, such a number only as was necessary for garrisoning the
principal towns, and protecting the sea coasts from the insults of the Turks,
was kept in pay Jovii Histor. l. xxxvii, 203. c. Sandov. Feri^ras, ix. 209.
.

IT was happy for the Emperor, that the abilities of his generals extricated
him out of these difficulties, which it exceeded his own power to have removed.
He had depended, as his chief resource for discharging the arrears due to his
soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expected from his Castilian subjects. For
this purpose, he assembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo, and having
represented to them the great expense of his military operations, together with
the vast debts in which these had necessarily involved him, he proposed to levy
such supplies as the present exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general
excise on commodities. But the Spaniards who already felt themselves oppressed
with a load of taxes unknown to their ancestors, and who had often complained
that their country, in order to prosecute quarrels in which it was not
interested, and to fight battles from which it could reap no benefit, was
drained not only of its wealth but of its inhabitants, determined not to add
voluntarily to their own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor with the means of
engaging in new enterprises no less ruinous to the kingdom than most of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in particular, inveighed with
great vehemence against the imposition proposed, as an encroachment upon the
valuable and distinguishing privilege of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded a conference with the the
representatives of the cities concerning the state of the nation. They
contended that if Charles would imitate the example of his predecessors, who
had resided constantly in Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in a
multiplicity of transactions foreign to the concerns of his Spanish dominions,
the stated revenues of the crown would be fully sufficient to defray the
necessary expenses of government. They represented to him that it would be
unjust to lay new burdens upon the people, while this prudent and effectual
method of re-establishing public credit, and securing national opulence, was
totally neglected Sandov. Hist. vol. ii. 269.
. Charles, after employing arguments, entreaties and promises, but without
success, in order to overcome their obstinacy, dismissed the assembly with
great indignation. From that period neither the nobles nor the prelates have
been called to these assemblies, on pretense that such as pay no part of the
public taxes, should claim no vote in laying them on. None have been admitted
to the Cortes but the procurators or representatives of eighteen cities. These
to the number of thirty-six, being two from each community, form an assembly
which bears no resemblance either in power or dignity or independence to the
ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at the devotion of the court in all their
determinations Sandov. ibid. La Science du Gouvernement, par M. de Real, tom.
ii. p. 102.
. Thus the imprudent zeal with which the Castilian nobles had supported the
regal prerogative, in opposition to the claims of the commons, during the
commotions in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-one, proved at last
fatal to their own body. By enabling Charles to depress one of the orders in
the state, they destroyed that balance to which the constitution owed its
security, and put it in his power and that of his successors to humble the
other, and to strip it of its most valuable privileges.

AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees still possessed extraordinary
power as well as privileges, which they exercised and defended with an
haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this the Emperor himself had a
mortifying proof, during the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was
returning one day from a tournament, accompanied by most of the nobility, one
of the sergeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear the way for the
Emperor, struck the Duke of Infantado's horse with his batton, which that
haughty grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat and wounded the officer.
Charles, provoked at such an insolent deed in his presence, immediately ordered
Ronquillo, the judge of the court, to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advanced to
execute his charge, when the constable of Castile interposing, checked him,
claimed the right of jurisdiction over a grandee as a privilege of his office,
and conducted Infantado to his own apartment. All the nobles present were so
pleased with the boldness of the constable in asserting the rights of their
order, that deserting the Emperor, they attended him to his house with infinite
applauses, and Charles returned to the palace without any person along with him
but the cardinal Tavera. The Emperor, how sensible soever of the affront, saw
the danger of irritating a jealous and high-spirited order of men, whom the
slightest appearance of offense might drive to the most unwarrantable extremes.
For that reason, instead of straining at any ill-timed exertion of his
prerogative, he prudently connived at the arrogance of a body too potent for
him to control, and sent next morning to the Duke of Infantado, offering to
inflict what punishment he pleased on the person who had affronted him. The
Duke considering this as a full reparation to his honor, instantly forgave the
officer; bestowing on him, besides, a considerable present as a compensation
for his wound. Thus the affair was entirely forgotten Sandov. 11. 274.
Ferreras, ix. 212. Miniana, 113.
; nor would it have deserved to be mentioned, if it were not a striking example
of the haughty and independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in that age, as
well as an instance of the Emperor's dexterity in accommodating his conduct to
the circumstances in which he was placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering any such condescension or lenity toward the
citizens of Ghent, who not long after broke out into open rebellion against his
government. An event which happened in the year one thousand five hundred and
thirty-six, gave occasion to this rash insurrection so fatal to that
flourishing city. At that time the Queen dowager of Hungary, governess of the
Netherlands, having received orders from her brother to invade France with all
the forces she could raise, she assembled the States of the united Provinces,
and obtained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred thousand florins, to defray
the expense of that undertaking. Of this sum, the county of Flanders was
obliged to pay a third part as its proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the
most considerable city in that country, averse to a war with France with which
they carried on an extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay their quota,
and contended that in consequence of stipulations between them and the
ancestors of their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax could be levied upon
them, unless they had given their express consent to the imposition of it. The
governess, on the other hand, maintained that as the subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins had been granted by the States of Flanders, of which their
representatives were members, they were bound, of course, to conform to what
was enacted by them, as it is the first principle in society, on which the
tranquillity and order of government depend, that the inclinations of the
minority must be overruled by the judgment and decision of the superior number.

THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not willing to relinquish a privilege of
such high importance as that which they claimed. Having been accustomed, under
the government of the house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, and to
be treated with much indulgence, they disdained to sacrifice to the delegated
power of a regent those rights and liberties which they had often and
successfully asserted against their greatest Princes. The Queen, though she
endeavored at first to sooth them, and to reconcile them to their duty by
various concessions, was at last so much irritated by the obstinacy with which
they adhered to their claim, that she ordered all the citizens of Ghent, on
whom she could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands, to be arrested. But
this rash action made an impression very different from what she expected on
men, whose minds were agitated with all the violent passions which indignation
at oppression and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affected with the danger of
their friends and companions, than irritated at the governess, they openly
despised her authority, and sent deputies to the other towns of Flanders,
conjuring them not abandon their country at such a juncture, but to concur with
them in vindicating its rights against the encroachments of a woman, who either
did not know or did not regard their immunities. All but a few inconsiderable
towns declined entering into any confederacy against the governess; however,
they joined in petitioning her to put off the term for payment of the tax so
long, that they might have it in their power to send some of their number into
Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption before their sovereign. This
she granted with some difficulty. But Charles received their commissioners with
an haughtiness to which they were not accustomed from their ancient Princes,
and enjoining them to yield the same respectful obedience to his sister, which
they owed to him in person, remitted the examination of their claim to the
council of Malines. This court, which is properly a standing committee of the
parliament or states of the county, and which possesses the supreme
jurisdiction in all matters civil as well as well as criminal Descrittione di
tutti paesi bassi di Lud. Guicciardini. Ant. 1571. fol. p. 53.
, pronounced the claim of the citizens of Ghent to be ill founded, and
appointed them forthwith to pay the proportion of the tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they considered as notoriously unjust, and
rendered desperate on seeing their rights betrayed by that very court which was
bound to protect them, the people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner,
drove such of the nobility as resided among them out of the city; secured
several of the Emperor's officers; put one of them to the torture, whom they
accused of having stolen or destroyed the record, that contained the privileges
of exemption from taxes which they pleaded; chose a council to whom they
committed the direction of their affairs; gave orders for repairing and adding
to their fortifications; and openly erected the standard of rebellion against
their sovereign Memoires sur la revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean
d'Hollander, ecrit en 1547. A la Hay 1747. P. Heuter. Rer. Austr. lib. xi. p.
262. Sandov. Histor. tom. ii. p. 282.
. Sensible, however, of their inability to support what their zeal had prompted
them to undertake, and desirous of securing a protector against the formidable
forces by which they might expect soon to be attacked, they sent some of their
number to Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him as their sovereign, and
to put him in immediate possession of Ghent, but to assist him with all their
forces in recovering those provinces in the Netherlands, which had anciently
belonged to the crown of France, and had been so lately reunited to it by the
decree of the parliament of Paris. This unexpected proposition coming from
persons who had it in their power to have performed instantly one part of what
they undertook, and who could contribute so effectually toward the execution
of the whole, opened vast as well as alluring prospects to Francis's ambition.
The counties of Flanders and Artois were of greater value than the duchy of
Milan, which he had so long labored to acquire with passionate but fruitless
desire; their situation with respect to France rendered it more easy to conquer
or to defend them; and they might be formed into a separate principality for
the Duke of Orleans, no less suitable to his dignity than that which his father
aimed at obtaining. From this, the Flemings, who were acquainted with the
French manners and government, would not have been averse; and his own
subjects, weary of their destructive expeditions into Italy, would have turned
their arms toward this quarter with more good will, and with greater vigor.
Several considerations, nevertheless, prevented Francis from laying hold of
this opportunity, the most favorable in appearance which had ever presented
itself, of extending his dominions or distressing the Emperor. From the time of
their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles had continued to court the King of
France with wonderful attention; and often flattered him with hopes of
gratifying at last his wishes concerning the Milanese, by granting the
investiture of it either to him or to one of his sons. But though these hopes
and promises were thrown out with no other intention than to detach him from
his confederacy with the grand Seignior, or to raise suspicions in Solyman's
mind by the appearance of a cordial and familiar intercourse subsisting between
the courts of Paris and Madrid, Francis was weak enough to catch at the shadow
by which he had been so often deceived, and from eagerness to seize it,
relinquished what must have proved a more substantial acquisition. Besides
this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of his brother, and unwilling that a Prince
who seemed to be of a restless and enterprizing nature should obtain an
establishment, which from its situation might be considered almost as a
domestic one, made use of Montmorency, who by a singular piece of good
fortune, was at the same time the favorite of the father and of the son, to
defeat the application of the Flemings and to divert the King from espousing
their cause. Montmorency represented accordingly the reputation and power which
Francis would acquire by recovering that footing which he had formerly in
Italy, and that nothing could be so efficacious to overcome the Emperor's
aversion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce, and refusing on this
occasion to countenance his rebellious subjects. Francis, apt of himself to
over-rate the value of the Milanese, because he estimated it from the length of
time as well as from the great efforts which he had employed in order to
reconquer it, and fond of every action which had the appearance of generosity,
assented without difficulty to sentiments so agreeable to his own, rejected the
propositions of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their deputies with an
harsh answer Mem. de Bellay, p. 263. P. Heuter. Rer, Austr. lib. xi. 263.
.

NOT satisfied with this, by a farther refinement in generosity, he
communicated to the Emperor his whole negotiation with the malcontents, and
all that he knew of their schemes and intentions Sandov. Histor. tom. ii. 282.
. This convincing proof of Francis's dinsinterestedness relieved Charles from
the most disquieting apprehensions, and opened a way to extricate himself out
of all difficulties. He had already received full information of all the
transactions in the Netherlands, and of the rage with which the people of Ghent
had taken arms against his government. He was thoroughly acquainted with the
genius and qualities of his subjects in that country; their love of liberty;
their attachment to their ancient privileges and customs; as well as the
invincible obstinacy with which their minds, slow but firm and persevering,
adhered to any measure on which they had leisure to fix. He easily saw what
encouragement and support they would have derived from the assistance of
France; though now free from any danger on that quarter, he was still sensible
that some immediate and vigorous interposition was necessary in order to
prevent the spirit of disaffection and rebellion from spreading in a country
where the number of cities, the multitude of people, together with the great
wealth diffused among them by commerce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and
would supply it with exhaustible resources. No expedient, after long
deliberation, appeared to him so effectual as his going in person to the
Netherlands; and the governess his sister being of the same opinion, warmly
solicited him to undertake the journey. There were only two different routs
which he could take; one by land through Italy and Germany, the other, entirely
by sea, from some port in Spain to one in the Low Countries. But the former was
more tedious than suited the present exigency of his affairs; nor could he in
consistency with his dignity or even his safety pass through Germany without
such a train both of attendants and of troops, as would have added greatly to
the time that he must have consumed in his journey; the latter was dangerous at
this season, and not to be ventured upon, while he was on bad terms with the
King of England, unless under the convoy of a powerful fleet. This perplexing
situation, in which he was under a necessity of choosing, and did not know what
to choose, inspired him at last with the singular and seemingly extravagant
thought of passing through France, as the most expeditious way of reaching the
Netherlands. He proposed in his council to demand Francis's permission for that
purpose. All his counselors joined with one voice in condemning the measure as
no less rash than unprecedented, and which must infallibly expose him to
disgrace or to danger; to disgrace if the demand were rejected in the manner
that he had reason to expect; to danger, if he put his person in the power of
an enemy whom he had often offended, who had ancient injuries to revenge, as
well as subjects of present contest still remaining undecided. But Charles who
had studied the character of his rival with greater care, and more profound
discernment than any of his ministers, persisted in his plan, and flattered
himself that it might be accomplished not only without danger to his own
person, but even without the expense of any concession detrimental to his crown.

WITH this view he communicated the matter to the French ambassador at his
court, and sent Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to obtain from
Francis permission to pass through his dominions, and to promise that he would
soon settle the affair of the Milanese to his satisfaction; but at the same
time to entreat that he would not exact any new promise, or even insist on
former engagements, at this juncture, lest whatever he should grant, under his
present circumstances, might seem rather to be extorted by necessity, than to
flow from friendship or the love of justice. Francis, instead of attending to
the snare which such a slight artifice scarce concealed, (...) dazzled with the
splendor of overcoming an enemy by acts of generosity, and so pleased with the
air of superiority, which the rectitude and disinterestedness of his
proceedings gave him on this occasion, that he at once assented to all that was
demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by his own, he imagined that the
sentiments of gratitude, arising from the remembrance of good offices and
liberal treatment, would determine him more forcibly to fulfill what he had so
often promised, than the most precise stipulations that could be inserted in
any treaty.

UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment was precious, set out,
notwithstanding the fears and suspicions of his Spanish subjects, with a small
but splendid train of an hundred persons. At Bavonne, on the frontiers of
France, he was received by the Dauphin and the Duke of Orleans, attended by the
constable Montmorency, The two Princes offered to go into Spain, and to remain
there as hostages for the Emperor's safety; but this he rejected, declaring,
that he relied with implicit confidence on the King's honor, and had never
demanded, nor would accept of any other pledge for his security. In all the
towns through which he passed, the greatest possible magnificence was
displayed; the magistrates presented him the keys of the gates; the prison
doors were set open; and by the royal honors paid to him, he appeared more
like the sovereign of the country, than a stranger. The King advanced as far as
Chatelherault to meet him; their interview was distinguished by the warmest
expressions of friendship and regard. They proceeded together toward Paris,
and presented to the inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary spectacle of
two rival Monarchs, whose enmity had disturbed and laid waste Europe, during
twenty years, making their solemn entry together, with all the symptons of
confidence and harmony, as if they had forgotten, for ever, past injuries, and
would never revive hostilities for the future Thuan. Hist. lib. i. c. 14. Mem.
de Bellay, 264.
.

CHARLES remained six days at Paris; but amidst the perpetual caresses of the
French court, and the various entertainments contrived to amuse or to do him
honor, he discovered an extreme impatience to continue his journey, arising as
much from an apprehension of danger which constantly oppressed him, a^ from the
necessity of his presence in the Low Countries. Conscious of the disingenuity
of his own intentions, he trembled when he reflected, that some fatal accident
might betray them to his rival, or lead him to suspect them; and though his
artifices to conceal these should be successful, he could not help fearing that
motives of interest, might at last triumph over the scruples of honor, and
tempt Francis to avail himself of the advantage now in his hands. Nor were
there wanting persons among the French ministers, who advised the King to turn
his own arts against the Emperor, and as the retribution due for so many
instances of fraud or falsehood, to seize and detain his person, till he
granted him full satisfactson with regard to all the just claims of the French
crown, (1540). But no consideration could induce Francis to violate the faith
which he had pledged, nor could any argument convince him, that Charles, after
all the promises that he had given, and all the favors which he had received,
might still be capable of deceiving him. Full of this false confidence, he
accompanied him to St. Quintin, and the two Princes, who had met him on the
borders of Spain, did not take leave of him, until he entered his dominions in
the Low Countries.

AS soon as the Emperor reached his own territories (January 24) the French
ambassadors demanded the accomplishment of what he had promised, concerning the
investiture of Milan, but Charles, under the plausible pretext, that his whole
attention was then engrossed by the consultations necessary toward suppressing
the rebellion in Ghent, put off the matter for some time. But in order to
prevent Francis from suspecting his sincerity, he still ^^^inued to talk of his
resolutions with repect to that matter, in the ^^^strain as when he entered
France, and even wrote to the King much to the same purpose, though in general
terms, and with equivocal expressions, which he might afterward explain away
or interpret at pleasure Memoires de Ribier, i. 504.
.

MEANWHLE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, destitute of leaders capable
either of directing their councils, or conducting their troops; abandoned by
the French King, and unsupported by their countrymen; were unable to resist
their offen^^ sovereign, who was ready to advance against them with one body of
troops, which he had raised in the Netherlands, with another drawn out of
Germany, and a third which had arrived from Spain by sea. The near approach of
danger made them, at last, so sensible of their own folly, that they sent
ambassadors to the Emperor imploring his mercy, and offering to set open their
gates at his approach. Charles without vouchsafing them any other answer, than
that he would appear among them, as their sovereign, with the scepter and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head of his troops. Though he chose
to enter the city on the twenty-fourth of February, his birthday, he was
touched with nothing of that tenderness or indulgence, which was natural
toward the (...) of his nativity. Twenty-six of the principal citizens were
put to death (April 20;) a greater number was sent into banishment; the city
was declared to have forfeited all its privileges and immunities; the revenues
belonged to it were confiscated; its ancient form of govemnent was abolished;
the nomination of its magistrates was vested for the future in the Emperor and
his successors; a new system of laws and political administration was
prescribed Les coutumes and loix da Compte de Flandre, par Alex. le Grande, 3
tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p. 169.
, and in order to bridle the seditious spirit of the citizens a strong citadel
was appointed to be erected, for defraying the expense of which a fine of an
hundred and fifty thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants, together
with an annual tax of six thousand florins for the support of a garrison Haraei
Annals Brabantiae, vol. i. 616.
. By these rigorous proceedings, Charles not only punished the citizens of
Ghent, but set an awful example of severity before his other subjects in the
Netherlands, whose immunities and privileges, partly the effect, partly the
cause of their extensive commerce, circumscribed the royal prerogative within
very narrow bounds, and often stood in the way of measures which he wished to
undertake, or fettered and retarded him in his operations.

CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-established his authority in the
Low Countries, and being now under no necessity of continuing the same scene of
falsehood and dissimulation with which he had long amused Francis, began
gradually to throw aside the veil under which he had concealed his intentions
with respect to the Milanese. At first, he eluded the demands of the French
ambassadors, when they again reminded him of his promises; then he proposed, by
way of equivalent for the duchy of Milan, to grant the Duke of Orleans the
investiture of Flanders, clogging the offer, however, with impracticable
conditions, or such as he knew would be rejected Mem. de Ribier, i. 509. 514.
. At last, being driven from all his evasions and subterfuges by their
insisting on a categorical answer, he peremptorily refused to give up a
territory of such value, or voluntarily to make such a liberal addition to the
strength of an enemy, by diminishing his own power Ribier, i. 519.
. He denied at the same time, that he had ever made any promise which could
bind him to an action so foolish, and so contrary to his own interest Bellay,
365-6.
.

OF all the actions in the emperor's life, this, without doubt, reflects the
greatest dishonor on his reputation Jovii Hist. lib. xxxix. p. 238. ^.
. Though Charles was not extremely scrupulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplishing his ends, or always observant of the strict
precepts of veracity and honor, he had hitherto maintained some regard for the
maxims of that less precise and rigid morality by which monarchs think
themselves entitled to regulate their conduct. But, on this occasion, the
scheme that he formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted Prince; the
illiberal and mean artifices by which he carried it on; the insensibility with
which he received all the marks of his friendship, and the ingratitude with
which he requited them; are all equally unbecoming the dignity of his
character, and inconsistent with the grandeur of his views.

THIS transaction exposed Francis to as much scorn as it did the Emperor to
censure. After the experience of a long reign, after so many opportunities of
discovering the duplicity and artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity
with which he trusted him at this juncture seemed to merit no other return than
it actually met with. Francis, however, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this
had been the first instance in which the Emperor had deceived him. Feeling, as
is usual, the insult which was offered to his understanding still more sensibly
than the injury done to his interest, he discovered such resentment as made it
obvious that he would lay hold on the first opportunity of being revenged, and
that a war, no less rancorous than that which had so lately raged, would soon
break out anew in Europe.

THIS year is rendered memorable by the establishment of the order of Jesuits;
a body whose influence on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs has been so
considerable, that an account of the genius of its laws and government justly
merits a place in history. When men take a view of the rapid progress of this
society toward wealth and power; when they contemplate the admirable prudence
with which it has been governed; when they attend to the persevering and
systematick spirit with which its schemes have been carried on; they are apt to
ascribe such a singular institution to the superior wisdom of its founder, and
to suppose that he had formed and digested his plan with profound policy. But
the Jesuits, as well as the other monastic orders, are indebted for the
existence of their order not to the wisdom of their founder, but to his
enthusiasm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which he received in defending Pampeluna Book ii. p. 84.
, was a fanatic distinguished by extravagancies in sentiment and conduct, no
less incompatible with the maxims of sober reason, than repug^^^t to the spirit
of true religion. The wild adventures, and visionary schemes, in which his
enthusiasm engaged him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of the Romish
saints; but unworthy of notice in history.

PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love of power and
distinction, from which such pretenders to superior sanctity are not exempt,
Loyola was ambitious of becoming the founder of a religious order. The plan
which he formed of its constitution and laws, was suggested, as he gave out,
and as his followers still teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven Compte
rendu des Constitutions des Jesuits, a^ Parliament de Provence, par M. de
Monclar. p. 285.
. But notwithstanding this high pretension, his design met at first with
violent opposition. The Pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the sanction of
his authority to confirm the institution, referred his petition to a committee
of Cardinals. They represented the establishment to be unnecessary as well as
dangerous, and Paul refused to grant his approbation of it. At last, Loyola
removed all his scruples by an ^^^er which it was impossible for any Pope to
resist. ^^^roposed that besides the three vows of poverty, of cha^^^y, and of
monastic obedience, which are common to all monastic orders, the members of his
society should take a fourth vow of obedience to the Pope, binding themselves
to go whithersoever he should command for the service of religion, and without
requiring any thing from the Holy See for their support. At a time when the
papal authority had received such a shock by the revolt of so many nations from
the Romish church; at a time when every part of the popish system was attacked
with so much violence and success, the acquisition of a body of men, thus
peculiarly devoted to the sea of Rome, and whom it might set in opposition to
all its enemies, was an object of the highest consequence. Paul instantly
perceived this, confirmed the institution of the Jesuits by his bull (September
27;) granted the most ample privileges to the members of the society; and
appointed Loyola to be the first general of the order. The event had fully
justified Paul's discernment, in expecting such beneficial consequences to the sea of Rome from this institution. In less than half a century, the society
obtained establishments in every country that adhered to the Roman catholic
church; its power and wealth increased amazingly; the number of its members
became great; their character and accomplishments were still greater; and the
Jesuits were celebrated by the friends, and dreaded by the enemies of the
Romish faith, as the most able and enterprizing order in the church.

THE constitution and laws of the society were perfected by Laynez and Aquavia,
the two generals who succeeded Loyola, men far superior to their master in
abilities, and in the science of government. They framed that system of
profound and artful policy which distinguished the order. The large infusion of
fanaticism, mingled with its regulations, should be imputed to Loyola its
founder. Many circumstances concurred in giving a peculiarity of character to
the order of Jesuits, and in forming the members of it not only to take greater
part in the affairs of the world than any other body of monks, but to acquire
superior influence in the conduct of them.

THE primary object of almost all the monastic orders is to separate men from
the world, and from any concern in its affairs. In the solitude and silence of
the cloister, the monk is called to work out his own salvation by extraordinary
acts of mortification and piety. He is dead to the world, and ought not to
mingle in its transactions. He can be of no benefit to mankind, but by his
example and by his prayers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are taught to consider
themselves as formed for action. They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert
themselves continually in the service of God, and of the Pope, his vicar on
earth. Whatever tends to instruct the ignorant; whatever can be of use to
reclaim or to oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their proper object. That
they may have full leisure for this active service, they are totally exempted
from those functions, the performance of which is the chief business of other
monks. They appear in no processions; they practice no rigorous austerities;
they do not consume one half of their time in the repetition of tedious offices
Compte Rendu, par M. de Monclar. p. 13. 290. Sur la destruct. des Jesuits, par
M. D'Alembert, p. 42.
. But they are required to attend to all the transactions of the world, on
account of the influence which these may have on religion; they are directed to
study the dispositions of persons in high rank, and to cultivate their
friendship Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 12.
; and by the very constitution as well as genius of the order, a spirit of
action and intrigue is infused into all its members.

AS the object of the society of Jesuits differed from that of the other
monastic orders, the diversity was no less in the form of its government. The
other orders are to be considered as voluntary associations, in which whatever
affects the whole body, is regulated by the common suffrage of all its members.
The executive power is vested in the persons placed at the head of each
convent, or of the whole society; the legislative authority resides in the
community. Affairs of moment, relating to particular convents, are determined
in conventual chapters; such as respect the whole order are considered in
general congregations. But Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedience,
which he had derived from his military profession, appointed that the
government of his order should be purely monarchial. A General, chosen for life
by the deputies from the several provinces, possessed power that was supreme
and independent, extending to every person, and to every case. He, by his sole
authority nominated provincials, rectors, and every other officer employed in
the government of the society, and could remove them at pleasure. In him was
vested the sovereign administration of the revenues and funds of the order.
Every member belonging to it was at his disposal; and by his uncontrollable
mandate, he could impose on them any task, or employ them in what service
soever he pleased. To his commands they were required to yield not only outward
obedience, but to resign up to him the inclinations of their own wills, and the
sentiments of their own understandings. They were to listen to his injunctions,
as if they had been uttered by Christ himself. Under his direction, they were
to be mere passive instruments, like clay in the hands of the potter, or like
dead carcases incapable of resistance Compte rendu au Parlem. de Bretagne, par
M. de Chalotais, p. 41, etc. Compte par M. de Monclar. 83. 185. 334.
. Such a singular form of policy could not fail to impress its character on all
the members of the order, and to give a peculiar force to all its operations.
There is not in the annals of mankind any example of such a perfect despotism,
exercised not over monks shut up in the cells of a convent, but over men
dispersed among all the nations of the earth.

AS the constitutions of the order vest, in the General, such absolute dominion
over all its members, they carefully provide for his being perfectly informed
with respect to the character and abilities of his subjects. Every novice who
offers himself as a candidate for entering into the order, is obliged to
manifest his conscience to the superior, or to a person appointed by him: and
is required to confess not only his sins and defects, but to discover the
inclinations, the passions, and the bent of his soul. This manifestation must
be renewed every six months Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 121, etc.
. The society not satisfied with penetrating in this manner into the innermost
recesses of the heart, directs each member to observe the words and actions of
the novices; they are constituted spies upon their conduct; and are bound to
disclose every thing of importance concerning them to the superior. In order
that this scrutiny into their character may be as complete as possible, a long
noviciate must expire, during which they pass through the several gradations of
ranks in the society, and they must have attained the full age of thirty three
years, before they can be admitted to take the final vows, by which they become
professed members Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la dest. des Jes. par
M. D'Alemb. p. 39.
. By these various methods, the superiors, under whose immediate inspection the
novices are placed, acquire a thorough knowledge of their dispositions and
talents. In order that the General, who is the soul that animates and moves the
whole society, may have under his eye every thing necessary to inform or direct
him, the provincials and heads of the several houses are obliged to transmit to
him regular and frequent reports concerning the members under their inspection.
In these they descend into minute details with respect to the character of each
person, his abilities natural or acquired, his temper, his experience in
affairs, and the particular department for which he is best fitted M. de
Chalotais has made a calculation of the number of these reports, which the
general of the Jesuits must annually receive according to the regulations of
the society. These amount in all to 6584. If this sum be divided by 37, the
number of provinces (...) the order, it appears that 177 reports concerning the
state of each province are transmitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52. Besides
this, there may be extraordinary letters, or such as are sent by the monitors
or spies which the general and provincials entertain in each house. Compte par
M. de Moncl. p. 431. Hist. des Jesuits, Amst. 1761. tom iv. p. 56. The
provincials and heads of houses not only report concerning the members of the
society, but are bound to give the general an account of the civil affairs of
the country wherein they are settled, in so far as the knowledge of these may
be of benefit to religion. This condition may extend to every particular, so
that the general is furnished with full information concerning the transactions
of every Prince and state in the world. Compte par M. de Moncl. 443. Hist. des
Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When the affairs with respect to which the provincials or
rectors write are of importance, they are directed to use ciphers, and each of
them has a particular cipher from the General. Compte par M. de Chalotais, p.
54.
. These reports, when digested and arranged, are entered into registers, kept
of purpose that the General may, at one comprehensive view, survey the state of
the society in every corner of the earth; observe the qualifications and
talents of its members; and thus choose, with perfect information, the
instruments, which his absolute power can employ in any service for which he
thinks meet to destine them Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 215. 439. -- Compte par
M. de Chalotais, p. 52, 222.
.

AS it was the professed intention of the order of Jesuits to labor with
unwearied zeal in promoting the salvation of men, this engaged them, of course,
in many active functions. From their first institution, they considered the
education of youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at being spiritual
guides and confessors; they preached frequently in order to instruct the
people; they set out as missionaries to convert unbelieving nations. The
novelty of the institution, as well as the singularity of its objects procured
the Order many admirers and patrons. The governors of the society had the
address to avail themselves of every circumstance in its favor, and in a short
time, the number as well as influence of its members increased wonderfully.
Before the expiration of the sixteenth century, the Jesuits had obtained the
chief direction of the education of youth in every catholic country in Europe.
They had become the confessors of almost all its monarchs, a function of no
small importance in any reign, but under a weak Prince, superior even to that
of minister. They were the spiritual guides of almost every person eminent for
rank or power. They possessed the highest degree of confidence and interest
with the papal court, as the most zealous and able champions for its authority.
The advantages which an active and enterprizing body of men might derive from
all these circumstances are obvious. They formed the minds of men in their
youth. They retained an ascendant over them in their advanced years. They
possessed, at different periods, the direction of the most considerable courts
in Europe. They mingled in all affairs. They took part in every intrigue and
revolution. The General, by means of the extensive intelligence which he
received, could regulate the operations of the order with the most perfect
discernment, and by means of his absolute power could carry them on with the
utmost vigor and effect When Lovola in the year 1540 petitioned the Pope to
authorize the institution of the order, he had ^^ly ten disciples. But in the
year 16^8, sixty eight years after their first institution, the number of
Jesuits had increased to ten thousand five hundred and eighty one. In the year
171^, the order possessed twenty-four professed houses; fifty-nine houses of
probation; three hundred and forty residencies; six hundred and twelve
colleges; two hundred missions; one hundred and fifty seminaries and ^oarding
schools; and consisted of 19,998 Jesuits. Hist. des Jesuits, tom. i, p. 20.
.

TOGETHER with the power of the order, its wealth continued to increase.
Various expedients were devised for eluding the obligation of the vow of
poverty. The order acquired ample possessions in every catholic country; and by
the number as well as magnificence of its public buildings, together with the
value of its property, moveable or real, it vied with the most opulent of the
monastic fraternities. Besides the sources of wealth common to all the regular
clergy, the Jesuits possessed one which was peculiar to themselves. Under
pretext of promoting the success of their missions, and of facilitating the
support of their missionaries, they obtained a special license from the court
of Rome, to trade with the nations which they labored to convert. In
consequence of this, they engaged in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both
in the East and West Indies. They opened warehouses in different parts of
Europe, in which they vended their commodities. Not satisfied with trade alone,
they imitated the example of other commercial societies, and aimed at obtaining
settlements. They acquired possession accordingly of a large and fertile
province in the southern continent of America, and reigned as sovereigns over
some hundred thousand subjects. Hist. des Jes. iv. 168 -- 196, etc.


UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influence which the order of Jesuits acquired
by all these different means, has been often exerted with the most penicious
effect. Such was the tendency of that discipline observed by the society in
forming its members, and such the fundamental maxims in its constitution, that
every Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the order as the capital
object, to which every consideration was to be sacrificed. This spirit of
attachment to their order, the most ardent, perhaps, that ever influenced any
body of men Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 285.
, is the characteristic principle of the Jesuits, and serves as a key to the
genius of their policy, and to the peculiarities in their sentiments and
conduct.

AS it was for the honor and advantage of the society, that its members should
possess an ascendant over persons in high rank or of great power, the desire of
acquiring and preserving such a direction of their conduct, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a system of relaxed and pliant
morality, which accommodates itself to the passions of men, which justifies
their vices, which tolerates their imperfections, which authorizes almost every
action that the most andacious or crafty politician would wish to perpetrate.

AS the prosperity of the order was intimately connected with the preservation
of the papal authority, the Jesuits, influenced by the same principle of
attachment to the interests of their society, have been the most zealous
patrons of those doctrines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical power on the
ruins of civil government. They have attributed to the court of Rome a
jurisdiction as extensive and absolute as was claimed by the most presumptuous
pontiffs in the dark ages. They have contended for the entire independence of
ecclesiastics on the civil magistrate. They have published such tenets
concerning the duty of opposing Princes who were enemies of the catholic faith,
as countenanced the most atrocious crimes, and tended to dissolve all the ties
which connect subjects with their rulers.

AS the order derived both reputation and authority from the zeal with which it
stood forth in defense of the Romish church against the attacks of the
reformers, its members, proud of this distinction, have considered it as their
peculiar function to combat the opinions, and to check the progress of the
Protestants. They have made use of every art, and have employed every weapon
against them. They have set themselves in opposition to every gentle or
tolerating measure in their favor. They have incessantly stirred up against
them all the rage of ecclesiastical and civil persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed, ventured to teach the same
pernicious doctrines, and have held opinions equally inconsistent with the
order and happiness of civil society. But they, from reasons which are obvious,
have either delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or have propagated
them with less success. Whoever recollects the events which have happened in
Europe during two centuries, will find that the Jesuits may justly be
considered as responsible for most of the pernicious effects arising from that
corrupt and dangerous casuistry, from those extravagant tenets concerning
ecclesiastical power, and from that intolerant spirit, which have been the
disgrace of the church of Rome throughout that period, and which have brought
so many calamities upon civil society Encyclopedie, Art, Jesuits, tom. viii.
513.
.

BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing from the institution of this order,
mankind, it must be acknowledged, have derived from it some considerable
advantages. As the Jesuits made the education of youth one of their capital
objects, and as their first attempts to establish colleges for the reception of
students were violently opposed by the universities in different countries, it
became necessary for them, as the most effectual method of acquiring the
public favor, to surpass their rivals in science and industry. This prompted
them to cultivate with great ardour the study of ancient literature. This put
them upon various methods for facilitating the instruction of youth; and by the
improvements which they made in it, they have contributed not a little toward
the progress of polite learning, and have on this account me rited well of
society. Nor has the order of Jesuits been successful only in teaching the
elements of literature, it has produced likewise eminent masters in many
branches of science, and can alone boast of a greater number of ingenious
authors, than all the other religious fraternities taken together M. d'Alembert
has observed that though the Jesuits have made extraordinary progress in
erudition of every species; though they can reckon up many of their brethren
who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquarians, and critics; though they
have even formed some orators of reputation; yet the order has never produced
one man, whose mind was so much enlightened with sound knowledge, as to merit
the name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable effect of
monastic education to contract and fetter the human mind. The partial
attachment of a monk to the interest of his order, which is often incompatible
with that of other citizens; the habit of implicit obedience to the will of a
superior, together with the frequent return of the wearisome and frivolous
duties of the cloister, debase his faculties, and extinguish that generosity of
sentiment and spirit, which qualifies men for thinking or feeling justly with
repect to what is proper in life and conduct. Father Paul of Venice is,
perhaps, the only person educated in a cloister, that ever was altogether
superior to its prejudices, or who renewed the transactions of men, and
reasoned concerning the interests of society, with the enlarged sentiments of a
philosopher, with the discernment of a man conversant in affairs, and with the
liberality of a gentleman.
.

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have exhibited the most wonderful
display of their abilities, and have contributed most effectually to the
benefit of the human species. The conquerors of that unfortunate quarter of the
globe had nothing in view but to plunder, to enslave, and to exterminate its
inhabitants. The Jesuits alone have made humanity the object of their settling
there. About the beginning of the last century they obtained admission into the
fertile province of Paraguay, which stretches across the southern continent of
America, from the bottom of the mountains of Potosi to the confines of the
Spanish and Portuguese settlements on the banks of the river de la Plata: they
found the inhabitants in a state little different from that which takes place
among men when they first begin to unite together; strangers to the arts;
subsisting precariously by hunting or fishing; and scarce acquainted with the
first principles of subordination and government. The Jesuits set themselves to
instruct and to civilize these savages. They taught them to cultivate the
ground, to rear tame animals, and to build houses. They brought them to live
together in villages. They trained them to arts and manufactures. They made
them taste the sweets of society; and accustomed them to the blessings of
security and order. These people became the subjects of their benefactors; who
have governed them with a tender attention, resembling that, with which a
father directs his children. Respected and beloved almost to adoration, a few
Jesuits presided over some hundred thousand Indians. They maintained a perfect
equality among all the members of the community. Each of them was obliged to
labor not for himself alone but for the public. The produce of their fields,
together with the fruits of their industry of every species, were deposited in
common storehouses, from which each individual received every thing necessary
for the supply of his wants. By this institution, almost all the passions which
disturb the peace of society, and render the members of it unhappy, were
extinguished. A few magistrates, chosen by the Indians themselves, watched over
the public tranquillity, and secured obedience to the laws. The sanguinary
punishments frequent under other governments were unknown. An admonition from a
Jesuit; a slight mark of infamy; or, on some singular occasion, a few lashes
with a whip, were sufficient to maintain good order among these innocent and
happy people Hist. de Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 42. etc. Voyage
au Perou par Don G. Juan and D. Ant. de ^llo^, tom. i. 540, etc. Par. 4to.
.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Jesuits for the good of mankind,
the genius and spirit of their order have mingled and are discernible. They
plainly aimed at establishing in Paraguay an independent empire, subject to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excellence of its constitution and
police, could scarce have failed to extend its dominion over all the southern
continent of America. With this view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or
Portuguese in the adjacent settlements, from acquiring any influence over the
people whom they governed that might be dangerous, the Jesuits endeavored to
inspire the Indians with hatred and contempt of these nations. They cut off all
intercourse between their subjects and the Spanish or Portuguese settlements.
They prohibited any private trader of either nation from entering their
territories. When they were obliged to admit any person in a public character
from the neighboring governments, they did not permit him to have any
conversation with their subjects, and no Indian was allowed even to enter the
house where these strangers resided, unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In
order to render any communication between them as difficult as possible, they
industriously avoided giving the Indians any knowledge of the Spanish or any
other European language; but encouraged the different tribes, which they had
civilized, to acquire a certain dialect of the Indian tongue, and labored to
make that the universal language throughout their dominions. As all these
precautions, without military force, would have been insufficient to have
rendered their empire secure and permanent, they instructed their subjects in
the European arts of war. They formed them into bodies of cavalry and infantry,
completely armed and regularly disciplined. They provided a great train of
artillery, as well as magazines stored with all the implements of war. Thus
they established an army so numerous and well appointed, as (...) be formidable
in a country, where a few sickly and ill-disciplined battalions composed all
military force kept on foot by the Spaniards or Portuguese Voyage de Juan and
de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recuell des to^tes les Pieces qui ont paru sur les
Affairs des Jesuits en Portugal, tom. i. p. 7. etc.
.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of power during the reign of Charles
V. who, with his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous tendency of the
institution, and checked its progress Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 312.
. But as the order was founded in the period of which I write the history, and
as the age to which I address this work has seen its fall, the view which I
have exhibited of the laws and genius of this formidable body will not, I hope,
be unacceptable to my readers; especially as one circumstance has enabled me to
enter into this detail with particular advantage. Europe had observed, for two
centuries, the ambition and power of the order. But while it felt many fatal
effects of these, it could not fully discern the causes to which they were to
be imputed. It was unacquainted with many of the singular regulations in the
political constitution or government of the Jesuits, which formed that spirit
of intrigue and enterprise which distinguished its members, and elevated the
body itself to such a height of power. It was a favorite maxim with the
Jesuits, from their first institution, not to publish the rules of their order.
These they kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery. They never communicated
them to strangers; nor even to the greater part of their own members. They
refused to produce them when required by courts of justice Hist. des Jes. tom.
iii. 236, etc. Compte par M. de Chalotais. p. 38.
; and by a strange solecism in policy, the civil power in different countries
authorized or connived at the establishment of an order of men, whose
constitution and laws were concealed with a solicitude, which alone was a good
reason for having excluded them. During the prosecutions lately carried on
against them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have been so inconsiderate as
to produce the mysterious volumes of their institute. By the aid of these
authentic records, the principles of their government may be delineated, and
the sources of their power investigated with a degree of certainty and
precision, which, previous to that event, it was impossible to attain The
greater part of my information concerning the government and laws of the order
of Jesuits, I have derived from the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de
Monclar. I rest not, however, upon the authority even of these respectable
magistrates, and elegant writers, but upon ^^^merable passages which they have
extracted from the constitutions (...), deposited in their hands Hospinian, a
Protestant divine (...) Jesuitica, printed A. D. 1619, published a small part
of the constitutions of the Jesuits, of which by some accident he had got a
copy, p. 13 -- 4.
. But as I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of the constitution and
spirit of the order with the freedom becoming an historian, the candor and
impartiality no less requisite in that character call on me to add one
observation, That no class of regular clergy in the Romish church has been more
eminent for decency, and even purity of manners, than the major part of the
order of Jesuits Sur la destruct. des Jes. par M. D'Al^mbert, p. 55.
. The maxims of an intriguing, ambitious interested policy, might influence
those who governed the society, and might even corrupt the heart, and pervert
the conduct of some individuals, while the greater number, engaged in literary
pursuits, or employed in the functions of religion, was left to the guidance of
those common principles which restrain men from vice, and excite them to what
is becoming and laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin of this mighty
body, as well as the circumstances and effects with which it has been attended
in the different countries of Europe, though objects extremely worthy the
attention of every intelligent observer of human affairs, do not fall within
the period of this history.

NO sooner had Charles re-established order in the Low Countries, than he was
obliged to turn his attention to the affairs of Germany. The Protestants
pressed him earnestly to appoint that conference between a select number of the
divines of each party, which had been stipulated in the convention at
Frankfort. The Pope, considering such an attempt to examine or decide the
points in dispute as derogatory to his right of being the supreme judge in
controversy, and persuaded that it would either be ineffectual by determining
nothing, or prove dangerous by determining too much, employed every art to
prevent the meeting. The Emperor, however, finding it more for his interest to
sooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid little regard to his
remonstrances. In a diet held at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for the
conference. In another diet assembled at Worms, the conference was begun,
Melancthon on the one side and Eckius on the other, sustaining the principal
part in the dispute; but after they had made some progress, though without
concluding any thing, it was suspended by the Emperor's command, Dec. 6, that
it might be renewed with greater solemnity in his own presence in a diet
summoned to meet at Ratisbon, 1541. This assembly was opened with great pomp,
and with a general expectation that its proceedings would be vigorous and
decisive. By the consent of both parties, the Emperor was entrusted with the
power of nominating the persons who should manage the conference, which it was
agreed should be conducted not in the form of a public disputation, but as a
friendly scrutiny or examination into the articles which had given rise to the
present controversies. He appointed Eckius, Gropper and Pflug, on the part of
the Catholics, and Melacthon, Bucer and Pistorius, on that of the Protestants,
all men of distinguished reputation among their own adherents, and, except
Eckius, all eminent for their moderation, as well as desirous of peace. As they
were about to begin their consultations, the Emperor put into their hands a
book, composed, as he said, by a learned divine in the Low Countries, with such
extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as might go far, in his opinion, to unite
and comprehend the two contending parties. Gropper, a canon of Cologne, whom he
had named among the managers of the conference, a man of address as well as of
erudition, was afterward suspected to be the author of this short treatise. It
contained positions with regard to twenty-two of the chief articles in
theology, which included most of the questions then agitated in the controversy
between the Lutherans and the church of Rome. By ranging his sentiments in a
natural order, and expressing them with great simplicity; by employing often
the very words of scripture, or of the primitive fathers; by softening the
rigor of some opinions, and explaining away what was absurd in others; by
concessions, now on one side, and now on the other; and especially by banishing
as much as possible scholastic phrases, those words and terms of art in
controversy, which serve as badges of distinction to the different sects, and
for which theologians often contend more fiercely than for opinions themselves;
he framed his work in such a manner, as promised fairer than any thing that had
hitherto been attempted, to compose and to terminate religious dissensions
Goldast. Constit. Imper. ii. p. 182.
.

BUT the attention of the age was turned, with such acute observation, toward
theological controversies, that it was not easy to impose on it by any gloss
how artful or specious soever. The length and eagerness of the dispute had
separated the contending parties so completely, and had set their minds at such
variance, that they were not to be reconciled by partial concessions. All the
zealous Catholics, particularly the ecclesiastics who had a seat in the diet,
joined in condemning Gropper's treatise as too favorable to the Lutheran
opinions, the poison of which heresy it conveyed, as they pretended, with
greater danger, because it was in some degree disguised. The rigid Protestants,
especially Luther himself, and his patron, the Elector of Saxony, were for
rejecting it as an impious compound of error and truth, craftily prepared that
it might impose on the weak, the timid, and the unthinking. But the divines, to
whom the examination of it was committed, entered upon that business with
greater deliberation and temper. As it was more easy in itself, as well as more
consistent with the dignity of the church to make concessions, and even
alterations with regard to speculative opinions, the discussion whereof is
confined chiefly to schools, and which present nothing to the people that
either strikes their imagination or affects their senses, they came to an
accommodation about those without much labor, and even defined the great
article concerning justification to their mutual satisfaction. But, when they
proceeded to points of jurisdiction, where the interest and authority of the
Roman See were concerned, or the rites and forms of external worship, where
every change that could be made must be public, and draw the observation of the
people, there the Catholics were altogether untractable; nor could the church
either with safety or with honor abolish its ancient institutions. All the
articles relative to the power of the Pope, the authority of councils, the
administration of the sacraments, the worship of saints, and many other
particulars did not, in their nature, admit of any temperament; so that after
laboring long to bring about an accommodation with respect to these, the
Emperor found all his endeavors ineffectual. Being impatient, however, to
close the diet, July 28, he at last prevailed on a majority of the members to
approve of the following recess; "That the articles concerning which the
divines had agreed in the conference, should be held as points decided, and be
observed inviolably by all; that the other articles about which they had
differed, should be referred to the determination of a general council, or if
that could not be obtained, to a national synod of Germany; and if it should
prove impracticable, likewise to assemble a synod, that a general diet of the
Empire should be called within eighteen months, in order to give some final
judgment upon the whole controversy; that the Emperor should use all his
interest and authority with the Pope, to procure the meeting either of a
general council or synod; that in the mean time, no innovations should be
attempted, no endeavors should be employed to gain proselytes; and neither the
revenues of the church, nor the rights of the monasteries, should be invaded
Sleidan, 267. etc. Pallav. l. 4. c. 11. p. 136. F. Paul, p. 86. Seckend. l.
iii. 256.
.

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the recess in which they
terminated, gave great offense to the Pope. The power which the Germans had
assumed of appointing their own divines to examine and determine matters of
controversy, he considered as a very dangerous invasion on his rights; the
renewing of their ancient proposal concerning a national synod, which had been
so often rejected by him and his predecessors, appeared extremely undutiful;
but the bare mention of allowing a diet, composed chiefly of laymen, to pass
judgment with respect to articles of faith, was deemed no less criminal and
profane, than the worst of those heresies which they seemed zealous to
suppress. On the other hand, the Protestants were no less dissatisfied with a
recess, which considerably abridged the liberty which they enjoyed at that
time. As they murmured loudly against it, Charles, unwilling to leave any seeds
of discontent in the Empire, granted them a private declaration, in the most
ample terms, exempting them from whatever they thought oppressive or injurious
in the recess, and ascertaining to them the full possession of all the
privileges which they had ever enjoyed Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corpse
Diplom. iv. p. ii, p. 210.
.

EXTRAORDINARY as these concessions may appear, the situation of his affairs at
this juncture made it necessary for the Emperor to grant them. He foresaw a
rupture with France to be unavoidable, as well as near at hand, and durst not
give any such cause of disgust or fear to the Protestants, as might force them,
in self-defence. to court the protection of the French King, from whom, at
present, they were much alienated. The rapid progress of the Turks in Hungary,
was a more powerful and present cause of the moderation which Charles
discovered. A great revolution had happened in that kingdom; John Zapol Scaepus
having chosen, as has been related, rather to possess a tributary kingdom, than
to renounce the royal dignity to which he had been accustomed, had, by the
assistance of his mighty protector Solomon, wrested from Ferdinand a great part
of the country, and left him only the precarious possession of the rest. But
being a prince of pacific qualities, the frequent attempts of Ferdinand, or of
his partisans among the Hungarians, to recover what they had lost, gave him
great pain; and the necessity, on these occasions, of calling in the Turks,
whom he considered and felt to be his masters rather than auxiliaries, were
scarce less mortifying. In order, therefore, to avoid these distresses, and to
secure quiet and leisure to enjoy the arts and amusements in which he
delighted, he secretly came to an agreement with his competitor, on this
condition; That Ferdinand should acknowledge him as King of Hungary, and leave
him, during life, the unmolested possession of that part of the kingdom now in
his power; but that, upon his demise, the sole right to the whole should
devolve upon Ferdinand Isluanhaffi Hist. Hung. lib. xii p. 135.
. As John had never been married, and was then far advanced in life, the terms
of the contract seemed very favorable to Ferdinand. But, soon after, some of
the Hungarian nobles, sollicitous to prevent a foreigner from ascending their
throne, prevailed on John to put an end to a long celibacy, by marrying
Isabella, the daughter of Sigismond, King of Poland. John had the satisfaction,
before his death, which happened within less than a year thereafter, to see a
son born to inherit his kingdom. To him, without regarding his treaty with
Ferdinand, which he considered, no doubt, as void, upon an event not foreseen
when it was concluded, he bequeathed his crown; appointing the Queen and George
Martinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, guardians of his son; and regents of the
kingdom. The greater part of the Hungarians immediately acknowledged the young
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their monarchy, they gave the name
of Stephen Jovii Hist. lib. 39. p. 239, a. etc.
.

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by this unexpected event, resolved
not to abandon the kingdom which he had acquired by his compact with John. He
sent ambassadors to the Queen to claim possession, and to offer the province of
Transylvania as a settlement for her son, preparing at the same time to assert
his right by force of arms. But John had committed the care of his son to
persons, who had too much spirit to give up the crown tamely, and who possessed
abilities sufficient to defend it. The Queen, to all the address peculiar to
her own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition, and magnanimity. Martinuzzi,
who had raised himself from the lowest rank in life to his present dignity, was
one of those extraordinary men, who by the extent as well as variety of their
talents, are fitted to act a superior part in bustling and factious times. In
discharging the functions of his ecclesiastical office, he put on the semblance
of an humble and austere sanctity. He discovered, in civil transactions,
industry, dexterity and boldness. During war he laid aside the cassock, and
appeared on horseback with his scymeter and buckler, as active, as
ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his countrymen. Amidst all these
different and contradictory forms which he could assume, an insatiable desire
of dominion and authority was conspicuous. From such persons it was obvious
what answer Ferdinand had to expect. He soon perceived that he must depend on
arms alone for recovering Hungary. Having levied for this purpose a
considerable body of Germans, whom his partisans among the Hungarians joined
with their vassals, he ordered them to march into that part of the kingdom
which adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi, unable to make head against such a
powerful army in the field, satisfied himself with holding out the towns, all
of which, especially Buda, the place of greatest consequence, he provided with
every thing necessary for defense; and in the mean time he sent ambassadors to
Solomon, be seeching him to extend toward the son, the same Imperial
protection which had so long maintained the father on his throne. The Sultan,
though Ferdinand used his utmost endeavors to thwart this negotiation, and
even offered to accept of the Hungarian crown on the same ignominious condition
of paying tribute to the Ottoman Port, by which John had held it, saw such
prospects of advantage from espousing the interest of the young King, that he
instantly promised him his protection; and commanding one army to advance
toward Hungary, he himself followed with another. Meanwhile the Germans,
hoping to terminate the war by the reduction of a city in which the King and
his mother were shut up, had formed the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi, having drawn
thither the strength of the Hungarian nobility, defended the town with such
courage and skill, as allowed the Turkish forces time to come up to his relief.
They instantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue, diseases and
desertion, and defeated them with great slaughter Isluanhaffi. hist. Hung. lib.
14. p. 150.
.

SOLOMON soon after joined his victorious troops, and being weary of so many
expensive expeditions undertaken in defense of dominions which were not his
own, or being unable to resist this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while possessed by an infant, under the guardianship of a woman and a priest,
he allowed interested considerations to triumph with too much facility over the
principles of honor and the sentiments of humanity. What he planned
ungenerously, he executed by fraud. Having prevailed on the Queen to send her
son, whom he pretended to be desirous of seeing, into his camp, and having at
the same time invited the chief of the nobility to an entertainment there,
while they, suspecting no treachery, gave themselves up to the mirth and
jollity of the feast, a select band of troops by the Sultan's orders seized one
of the gates of Buda. Being thus master of the capital, of the King's person
and of the leading men among the nobles, he ordered the Queen together with her
son to be conducted to Transylvania, which province he allotted to them, and
appointing a Basha to reside in Buda with a large body of soldiers, annexed
Hungary to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and complaints of the unhappy Queen
had no influence to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi either resist his
absolute and uncontrollable command, or prevail on him to recall it Isluanhaffi.
lib. 14 p. 56. Jovii hist. lib. 39. p. 2476, etc.
.

BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation reached Ferdinand he was so
unlucky as to have dispatched new ambassadors to Solomon with a fresh
representation of his right to the crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of
his former overture to hold the kingdom, of the Ottoman Port, and to pay for
it an annual tribute. This ill-timed proposal was rejected with scorn. The
Sultan elated with success, and thinking that he might prescribe what terms he
pleased to a prince who voluntarily proffered conditions so unbecoming his own
dignity, declared that he would not suspend the operations of war, unless
Ferdinand instantly evacuated all the towns which he held in Hungary, and
consented to the imposition of a tribute upon Austria, in order to reimburse
the sums, which his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had obliged the Ottoman
Port to expend in defense of that kingdom Isluanhaffi. hist. Hung. l. 14. p.
158,
.

SUCH was the state of affairs in Hungary. As the unfortunate events there had
either happened before the dissolution of the diet at Ratisbon, or were dreaded
at that time, Charles saw the danger of irritating and inflaming the minds of
the Germans, while such a formidable enemy was ready to break into the Empire;
and perceived that he could not expect any vigorous assistance either toward
the recovery of Hungary or the defense of the Austrian frontiers, unless he
courted and satisfied the Protestants. By the concessions which have been
mentioned, he gained this point, and such liberal supplies both of men and
money were voted for carrying on the war against the Turks, as left him under
little anxiety about the security of Germany during next campaign Sleid. 283.
.

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, the Emperor set out for Italy. As
he passed through Lucca he had a short interview with the Pope, but nothing
could be concluded concerning the proper method of composing the religious
disputes in Germany, between two princes whose views and interest with regard
to that matter were at this juncture so opposite. The Pope's endeavors to
remove the causes of discord between Charles and Francis, and to extinguish all
those mutual animosities which threatened to break out suddenly into open
hostility, were not more successful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, at that time, on the great
enterprise which he had concerted against Algiers, that he listened with little
attention to the Pope's schemes or overtures, and hastened to join his army and
fleet Sandov. histor. tom. ii. 298
.

ALGIERS still continued in that state of dependence on the Turkish empire to
which Barbarossa had subjected it. Ever since he, as captain Basha, commanded
the Ottoman fleet, Algiers had been governed by Hascen-Aga, a renegado eunuch,
who by passing through every station in the Corsairs service, had acquired
great experience in war, and was well fitted for a station which required a man
of tried and daring courage. Hascen, in order to show how well he deserved that
dignity, carried on his piratical depredations against the Christian states
with amazing activity, and out-did, if possible, Barbarossa himself in boldness
and cruelty. The commerce of the Mediterranean was greatly interrupted by his
cruisers, and such frequent alarms given to the coasts of Spain, that there was
a necessity of erecting watch-towers at proper distances, and of keeping guards
constantly on foot, in order to discry the approach of his squadrons, and to
protect the inhabitants from their descents Jovii hist. l. ^^. p. 266.
. Of this the Emperor's subjects had long complained, representing it as an
enterprise corresponding to his power, and becoming his humanity, to reduce
Algiers, which since the conquest of Tunis, was the common receptacle of all
the free booters; and to exterminate that lawless race, the implacable enemies
of the Christian name. Moved partly by their entreaties, and party allured by
the hope of adding to the glory which he had acquired by his last expedition
into Africa, Charles before he left Madrid in his way to the Low Countries, had
issued orders both in Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this
purpose. No change in circumstances, since that time, could divert him from
this resolution, or prevail on him to turn his arms toward Hungary; though the
success of the Turks in that country seemed more immediately to require his
presence there; though many of his most faithful adherents in Germany urged
that the defense of the Empire ought to be his first and peculiar care; though
such as bore him no good will ridiculed his preposterous conduct in flying from
an enemy almost at hand, that he might go in quest of a remote and more ignoble
foe. But to attack the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that measure
might appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his power, and was not
consistent with his interest. To draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march
them into a country so distant as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus
necessary for transporting thither the artillery, ammunition and baggage of a
regular army, and to push the war in that quarter, where it could scarce be
brought to any issue during several campaigns, were undertakings so extensive
and unwieldly as did not correspond with the low condition of the Emperor's
treasury. While his principal force was thus employed, his dominions in Italy
and the Low Countries must have lain open to the French King, who would not
have allowed such a favorable opportunity of attacking them to go unimproved.
Whereas the African expedition, the preparations for which were already
finished and almost the whole expense of it defrayed, would depend upon a
single effort, and besides the security and satisfiaction which the success of
it must give his subjects, would detain him during so short a space, that
Francis could scarce take advantage of his absence, to invade his dominions in
Europe.

ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his first plan, and with such
determined obstinacy, that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised, or to
Andrew Doria who conjured him not to expose his whole armament to almost
unavoidable destruction, by venturing at such an advanced season of the year,
and while the autumnal winds were so violent, to approach the dangerous coast
of Algiers. Having embarked on board Doria's galleys at Porto Venere in the
Genoese territories, he soon found that this experienced sailor had not judged
wrong concerning the element with which he was so well acquainted; for such a
storm arose that it was with the utmost difficulty and danger he reached
Sardinia, the place of general rendezvous. But as his courage was undaunted,
and his temper often inflexible, neither the remonstrances of the Pope and
Doria, nor the danger to which he had already been exposed by disregarding
them, had any other effect than to confirm him in his fatal resolution. The
force, indeed, which he had collected was such as might have inspired a Prince
less adventurous, and less confident in his own schemes, with the most sanguine
hopes of success. It consisted of twenty thousand foot and two thousand horse,
Spaniards, Italians and Germans, mostly veterans, together with three thousand
volunteers, the flower of the Spanish and Italian nobility, fond of paying
court to the Emperor by attending him in this favorite expedition, and eager
to share in the glory which they believed he was going to reap; to these were
added a thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the order of St. John, led by an
hundred of its most gallant Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the African coast, was not less tedious, or full
of hazard, than that which he had just finished. When he approached the land,
the roll of the sea, and vehemence of the winds, would not permit the troops to
disembark. But at last, the Emperor seizing a favorable opportunity, landed
them without opposition, not far from Algiers, and immediately advanced toward
the town. To oppose this mighty army, Hascen had only eight hundred Turks, and
five thousand Moors, partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees from
Granada. He returned, however, a fierce and haughty answer when summoned to
surrender. But with such a handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage,
nor consummate skill in war could have long resisted forces superior to those
which had defeated Barbarossa at the head of sixty thousand men, and had
reduced Tunis, in spite of all his endeavors to save it.

BUT how far soever the Emperor might think himself beyond the reach of any
danger from the enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dreadful calamity, and
one against which human prudence, and human efforts availed nothing. On the
second day after his landing, and before he had time for any thing but to
disperse some light armed Arabs who molested his troops on their march, the
clouds began to gather, and the heavens to appear with a fierce and threatening
aspect. Toward evening rain began to fall, accompanied with violent wind, and
the rage of the tempest increasing during the night, the soldiers, who had
brought nothing ashore but their arms, remained exposed to all its fury without
tents, or shelter, or cover of any kind. The ground was so wet that they could
not lie down on it; their camp being in a low situation was overflowed with
water, and they sunk at every stepped to the ancles in mud; while the wind blew
with such impetuosity, that to prevent their falling they were obliged to
thrust their spears into the ground, and to support themselves by taking hold
of them. Hascen was too vigilant an officer to allow an enemy in such distress
to remain unmolested. About the dawn of morning, he sallied out with soldiers,
who having been screened from the storm under their own roofs, were fresh and
vigorous. A body of Italians who were stationed nearest the city, dispirited
and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach of the Turks. The troops at the
post behind them, discovered greater courage, but as the rain had extinguished
their matches and wet their powder, their muskets were useless, and having
scarce strength to handle their other arms, they were soon thrown into
confusion. Almost the whole army, with the Emperor himself in person, was
obliged to advance before the enemy could be repulsed, who, after spreading
such general consternation, and killing a considerable number of men, retired
at last in good order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and danger were quickly
obliterated by a more dreadful as well as affecting spectacle. It was now broad
day; the hurricane had abated nothing of its violence, and the sea appeared
agitated with all the rage of which that destructive element is capable; all
the ships, on which alone the whole army knew that their safety and subsistence
depended, were seen driven from their anchors, some dashing against each other,
some beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced ashore, and not a few sinking in
the waves. In less than an hour, fifteen ships of war, and an hundred and forty
transports with eight thousand men perished; and such of the unhappy crews as
escaped the fury of the sea, were murdered, without mercy, by the Arabs, as
soon as they reached land. The Emperor stood in silent anguish and astonishment
beholding this fatal event, which at once blasted all his hopes of success, and
buried in the depths the vast stores which he had provided as well for annoying
the enemy, as for subsisting his own troops. He had it not in his power to
afford them any other assistance or relief, than by sending some troops to
drive away the Arabs, and thus delivering a few who were so fortunate as to get
ashore from the cruci fate which their companions had met with. At last the
wind began to fall, and to give some hopes that as many ships might escape, as
to save the army from perishing by famine, and transport them back to Europe.
But these were only hopes; the approach of evening covered the sea with
darkness; and it being impossible for the officers on board the ships, that had
outlived the storm, to send any intelligence to their companions who were
ashore, they remained during the night, in all the anguish of suspense and
uncertainty. Next day, a boat dispatched by Doria, made shift to reach land,
with information, that having weathered out the storm, to which, during fifty
years knowledge of the sea, he had never seen any equal in fierceness and
horror; he had found it necessary to bear away with his shattered ships to Cape
Metafuz. He advised the Emperor, as the face of the sky was still lowering and
tempestuous, to march with all speed to that place, where the troops could
reimbark with greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded Charles, from being assured that
part of his fleet had escaped, was balanced by the new cares and perplexity in
which it involved him with regard to his army. Metafuz was at least three days
march from his present camp; all the provisions which he had brought ashore at
his first landing were now consumed; his soldiers worn out with fatigue, were
scarce able for such a journey, even in a friendly country; and being
dispirited by a succession of hardships, which victory itself would scarce have
rendered tolerable, they were in no condition to undergo new toils. But the
situation of the army was such, as allowed not one moment for deliberation, nor
left it in the least doubtful what to choose. They were ordered instantly to
march, the wounded, the sick and the feeble being placed in the center; such as
seemed most vigorous were stationed in the front and rear. Then the sad effects
of what they had suffered began to appear more manifestly than ever, and new
calamities were added to all these which they had already endured. Some could
scarce bear the weight of their arms; others, spent with the toil of forcing
their way through deep and almost impassable roads, sunk down and died; many
perished by famine, as the whole army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries,
or the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's order, and distributed among
the several battalions; many were drowned in brooks which were swollen so much by
the excessive rains, that in passing them they waded up to the chin; not a few
were killed by the enemy, who during the greatest part of their retreat,
alarmed, harrassed and annoyed them night and day. At last they arrived at
Metafuz; and the weather being now so calm as to restore their communication
with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of provisions, and cheered with
the prospect of safety.

DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the Emperor discovered great
qualities, many of which an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity had
hitherto afforded him no opportunity of displaying. He was conspicuous for
firmness and constancy of spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude, humanity and
compassion. He endured as great hardships as the meanest soldier; he exposed
his own person wherever danger appeared; he encouraged the desponding; visited
the sick and wounded; and animated all by his words and example. When the army
embarked, he was among the last who left the shore, although a body of Arabs
hovered at no great distance, ready to fall on the rear. By these virtues,
Charles attoned, in some degree, for his obstinancy and presumption in
undertaking an expedition so fatal to his subjects.

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate enterprise did not end here;
for no sooner were the forces got on board, than a new storm arising, though
less furious than the former, scattered the fleet, and obliged them,
separately, to make toward such ports in Spain or Italy as they could first
reach; thus spreading the account of their disasters, with all the
circumstances of aggravation and horror, which their fear or fancy suggested.
The Emperor himself, after escaping great dangers, and being forced into the
port of Bugia in Africa, where he was obliged, by contrary winds, to remain
several weeks, arrived at last in Spain, (December 2.) in a condition very
different from that in which he had returned from his former expedition against
the Insidels Carol. v. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villagnonem Equitem
Rhodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii. Hist. l. xl. p. 269 -- b. Vera y
Zuniga vida de Carlos v. p. 83. Sandov. Histor. ii. 299, etc.
.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
DR. ROBERTSON is now engaged in writing the following WORK, A Sequel to the
History of CHARLES V. CONTAINING, THE HISTORY OF THE DISCOVERY AND CONQUEST OF
THE NEW WORLD: WITH THE ESTABLISHMENT of COLONIES IN THE ISLANDS AND CONTINENT
OF AMERICA.

LIKEWISE, A VIEW OF THE STATE OF SOCIETY Among its Ancient Inhabitants; Their
Characters -- Manners and Arts, THE GENIUS OF THE European Settlements in its
various Provinces; Together, with the Influence of these upon the Systems of
Policy or Commerce in EUROPE.

UPON the arrival of the above Work from England, the Subscribers to the
American Edition of CHARLES V. may depend, that the Editor, ROBERT BELL, will
immediately reprint an edition in AMERICA, to range uniformly with this History
of CHARLES the Fifth.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF CHARLES THE FIFTH, EMPEROR OF GERMANY; And of all
the KINGDOMS and STATES in EUROPE, during his Age.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, From the
Subversion of the ROMAN EMPIRE, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

CONFIRMED BY Historical PROOFS and ILLUSTRATIONS.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH, and
HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND. Author of the late elegant History
of Scotland.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

AMERICA: PRINTED FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS. M, DCC, LXX.

A LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS, WHOSE Names posterity may respect, because, by their
seasonable encouragement, this American Edition has been accomplished at a
price so moderate, that the MAN of the WOODS, as well as the MAN of the COURT,
may now solace himself with Sentimental Delight.
His Excellency WILLIAM FRANKLIN, Esquire Captain General, Governor, and Commander
in Chief, of the Colony of New Jersey.
A
OF BOSTON.
John Adams, Esquire Robert Auchmuty, Esquire
NEW ENGLAND.
Oaks Angier, Esquire of Bridgwater, William Appleton, Bookseller, of Ports. N.
Hampsh. 12 sets.
OF NEW YORK.
Doctor Edward Agar, Apothecary and Druggist, John Abeel, Merchant, John
Applegate, Vendue-Master.
NEW JERSEY.
Isaac Allen, Esquire of Trenton, Dunlap Adams, Merchant, of Trenton, 12 sets.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
The Revd. Francis Alison, D. D. Vice-Provost of the College and Academy,
Captain Benjamin Alison, William Adcock, Merchant, Thomas Affleck,
Cabinet-Maker, Joseph Alston, junior, Clerk, James Armstrong, M. B.
PENNSYLVANIA.
William Atlee, Esquire of Lancaster, Samuel Atlee, of Pequea.
MARYLAND.
The Revd. Henry Addison, M. A. Rector of St. John's, Andrew Skinner Annells,
Merchant, of Baltimore, Robert Alexander, Esquire of Baltimore.
B
OF BOSTON.
Alexander Barclay, Bookseller and Binder, 12 sets, John Bernard, Merchant, 2
sets, George Bethune, Merchant.
NEW ENGLAND.
Joseph Blaney, Esquire of Salem, Joseph Bowditch, Esquire of Salem, Nathan Bowen, Esquire
of Marblehead.
NEW YORK.
Colonel George Brewerton, William Butler, Esquire Inspector of his Majesty's
stores, Walter Buchanan, Merchant, Sebastian Bauman, Merchant, John Brown,
Merchant.
NEW JERSEY.
Elias Boudenot, Esquire of Elisabeth-Town, James Bowman, Esquire of Gloucester.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
James Biddle, Esquire Prothonotary, Jacob Bankson, Student of Law, Doctor Richard
Bond, Edward Bachelor, Merchant, James Berwick, Clerk, James Buchanan,
Merchant, Captain William Brown, George Bartram, Merchant, William Bingham, A.
B. John Byrne, Peruke-Maker.
PENNSYLVANIA.
The Revd. Thomas Barton, of Lancaster, Doctor Charles Bensel, of Germantown,
Samuel Bethel, on Susquehannah, Edward Biddle, Esquire of Reading.
MARYLAND.
The Revd. Jonathan Boucher, Rector of St. Ann's, Annapolis, William Baxter,
Esquire of Baltimore, Doctor John Boyd, of Baltimore, Charles Banks, of Arundel
county, William Montgomery Biggs, of Baltimore, Doctor William Beans, of
Piscataway, Bazil Burgess, Surveyor, of Anne, Arundel county.
SOUTH CAROLINA.
Richard Beresford, junior, of Charlestown.
C
OF BOSTON.
Richard Cranch, Merchant.
NEW ENGLAND.
Francis Cabot, Esquire of Salem, Joseph Cabot, of Salem, Samuel Curwen, Esquire of
Salem, The Revd. Henry Cummings, of Billerica, Captain Thomas Cobb, of Taunton,
The Revd. William Crawford, of Penobscut.
NEW YORK.
John Cortlandt, Brewer, Anthony Car, Printer, 12 sets, Daniel Campbell, Esquire of
Skenectaday.
NEW JERSEY.
William Cleayton, Esquire of Trenton, Abraham Cottnam, Esquire of Trenton, Isaac
Collins, Esquire Printer, of Burlington, 12 sets, Daniel Cox, Esquire of Trenton,
Captain A. Campbell, of the 29th regiment.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Cadwallader, Esquire Thomas Cadwallader, M. D. Lambert Cadwallader, Gent.
William Coats, Gent. Benjamin Condy, Mathematical Instrument-Maker, Joseph
Crukshank, Printer and Bookseller, 24 sets.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Mrs. Letitia Cunningham, of Lancaster, Daniel Clarke, Merchant, of Somerset,
William Clarke, of Newcastle county.
MARYLAND.
John Campbell, Merchant, of Annapolis, Robert Couden, Merchant, of Annapolis,
Robert Christie, Merchant, of Baltimore, James Christie, Merchant, of
Baltimore, John Craig, Merchant, of Port-Tobacco, Captain -- Cowan, Joseph
Coudon, M. A.
SOUTH CAROLINA.
Benjamin Cattle, of Charlestown.
D
OF BOSTON.
Philip Dumarisque, Merchant, Alexander Dunn, Merchant.
NEW ENGLAND.
The Revd. Nathan Davis, of Dracut,
NEW YORK.
Gerardus Duyckinck, Merchant, James Deas, Merchant, John Davis, Esquire of
Poughkeepsie.
NEW JERSEY.
Isaac De Cou, Esquire of Trenton, Jonathan Dare, Esquire of Perth-Amboy.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Dickinson, Esquire 6 sets, Doctor John Day, Druggist, John Dunlap, Printer
and Bookseller, 56 sets, Sharp Delany, Druggist, Benjamin Dean, Merchant,
Benedict Dorsey, Merchant and Paper-Maker, Doctor Samuel Duffield, Druggist,
William Dawson, Merchant, Samuel Dellap, Bookseller, 50 sets, John Dorsius,
Merchant, Burrowes Dowdney, Watch-Maker, Anthony D'Normandie, Painter.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Doctor James Deimer, of Reading, Doctor John D'Normandie, near Bristol.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Cockie Deye, Esquire of Baltimore county, William Dick, Professor of
Languages, in Baltimore, George Diggs, of Baltimore, John Deuer, Bricklayer, of
Baltimore, William Deakins, junior, of Calvert county.
WEST INDIES.
Thomas Duncan, Merchant, of Grenville, in the Grenades.
E
OF BOSTON.
The Honorable John Erving, Esquire 6 sets, George Erving, Esquire Messrs. Edes and
Gill, Printers and Booksellers, 50 sets, John Edwards, Bookseller, 12 sets.
OF NEW YORK.
John Elliot, Merchant-Taylor.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
Mrs. Sarah Edgar, Joel Evans, Merchant.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Ewing, Merchant, of Baltimore, Michael Earl, Esquire of Cecil county.
F
NEW ENGLAND.
John Fisher, Esquire of Salem, Peter Frye, Esquire of Salem.
NEW YORK.
Alexander Fortune, Tanner and Currier, Nathan Fish, Merchant, Charles Fueter,
Watch-Maker.
NEW JERSEY.
Captain Jeremy French, of the 29th regiment, at Brunswick.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
Miers Fisher, Esquire Jabez Maud Fisher, Merchant, Alexander Foster, Clerk. John
Foxcroft, Esquire Joint Deputy Post Master General, for the Northern District of
North America.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Franklin, Esquire Major Franklin, of Baltimore county, Robert Ferguson,
Merchant, of Piscataway.
WEST INDIES.
James Furlong, Esquire of Antigua.
G
OF BOSTON.
John Gooch, Esquire William Gooch, Glazier,
NEW ENGLAND.
George Gardner, of Salem, Henry Gardner, of Salem.
OF NEW YORK.
Hugh Gain, Printer and Bookseller, 24 sets, Adam Gilchrist, Merchant-Taylor,
Ennis Graham, Merchant-Taylor, Richard Graham, Merchant, Daniel and Moses
Gomez, Merchants, John Gregg, Merchant, John Griffiths, jun. of the Forest of
Deane Furnace.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Gibson, Esquire The Rev. And. Georgson, Minister of the Swedish Congregation,
George Glentworth, M. D. Samuel Garrigues, jun. Merchant, William Gallagher,
Scrivener, Jacob Giles, jun. Merchant, William Goddard, Printer, John Groves,
Clerk, Francis Gurney, Merchant, Co. Gio. Batta. Gualdo, Master of Music.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Lewis Gordon, Esquire of Eastown, Henry Hale Graham, Esquire of Chester.
MARYLAND.
Charles Gordon, Esquire Captain William Galbraith, The Rev. John Gordon, M. A.
Rector of St. Michael's, Talbot County, Robert Gilchrist, of Leonard's Town.
VIRGINIA.
William Grayson, Esquire of Dumfries.
WEST INDIES.
George Gillespie, Merchant, of Jamaica.
H
OF BOSTON.
The Rev. Simeon Howard, John Hodgson, Bookbinder.
NEW ENGLAND.
E. A. Holycke, Esquire of Salem, Joseph Hooper, Merchant, of Marblehead, Willis
Hall, Distiller, of Medford, Benjamin Heart, of the Portsmouth Stage-Coach,
New Hampshire.
OF NEW YORK.
The Hon. Daniel Horsmanden, Esquire Chief Justice. Isaac Heron, Watch-Maker, John
Holt, Printer and Bookseller, 6 sets, Robert Hyslop, Clerk, 12 sets,
NEW JERSEY.
The Rev. Andrew Hunter, of Cohanzie, Joseph Hugg, Esquire of Gloucester, William
Hugg, of Gloucester, Joseph Heart, of Salem.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
David Hay, Esquire Captain Commandant of his Majesty's Royal Artillery in the
southern District of British America, Isaac Hunt, Esquire Henry Hill, Esquire Josiah
Hewes, Merchant, John Heart, Vendue-Master, Hugh Henry, Peruke-Maker, Whitehead
Humphreys, Steel Manufacturer, William Hollingshead, Merchant.
PENNSYLVANIA.
John Haley, Esquire of Chester, John Hall, Bookseller and Binder, of Wilmington,
Newcastle County, Jonathan Humphreys, of the Middle Ferry, on Schuylkill, John
Haslet, Esquire of Mispilion, Kent County, Doctor John Huston, of Pequea,
Apothecary, Peter Hosnagle, of Lancaster, Ensign Francis Howard, of the Royal
Irish, at Fort-Pitt, Ellis Hughes, Esquire beyond the Blue Mountains.
MARYLAND.
Doctor Thomas Hamilton, of Prince George's County. Alexander Hamilton,
Merchant, of Piscataway, 12 sets, William Hackle, Silver-Smith, of Baltimore,
James Harris, Merchant, of Baltimore, Thomas Harris, Merchant, of Baltimore,
James Hutchings, jun. Merchant, of Baltimore, Henry Holiday, of Talbot County.
VIRGINIA.
Col. John Hunter, Esquire of Norsolk, 30 sets.
ENGLAND.
William Hiorn, Merchant, of Bristol.
I
OF BOSTON.
Thomas Irving, Esquire 2 sets, Peter Johonnett, Merchant, Gabriel Johonnett,
Merchant.
OF NEW YORK.
The Honorable David Jones, Esquire Samuel Jones, Esquire Samuel Inslie, Printer, 12
sets.
NEW JERSEY.
John Johnson, Esquire of Perth-Amboy.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Inglis, Merchant, David Jackson, Distiller, Edward Jones, Merchant, John
James, Peruke-Maker.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Jones, Esquire of Baltimore, Thomas Jennings, Esquire of Annapolis.
K
OF NEW YORK.
Captain Stephen Kemble, Aid-de-Camp to General Gage.
NEW JERSEY.
Stephen Kemble, Esquire
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Kaigho, Merchant, Adam Kuhn, M. D. Robert Kennedy, Printseller, and
Picture Frame Maker.
PENNSYLVANIA.
William Killen, Esquire of Dover, Kent County.
MARYLAND.
Murdoch Kennedy, Merchant, of Baltimore, Maurice Kennedy, Clerk, of Baltimore.
L
OF BOSTON.
Thomas Leverett, Printer, Bookseller and Binder, 12 sets.
NEW ENGLAND.
Benjamin Lynde, Esquire of Salem, Col. Jeremiah Lee, Esquire of Marblehead.
OF NEW YORK.
Miss Jennet Livingston, William Livingston, Esquire Philip Livingston, Esquire Peter
Van Burgh Livingston, Esquire Doctor Latham, Samuel Loudon, Ship-Chandler, Thomas
Lynch, 2 sets, Abraham Lot, Esquire Treasurer of New York.
NEW JERSEY.
Nathaniel Lewis, near Bordenton, The Library Company of Burlington.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Lukens, Esquire Surveyor-General, 2 sets, Lyndford Lardner, Esquire Mordecai
Lewis, Merchant, Thomas Leiper, Tobacconist, Emanuel Lion, Tallow-Chandler, The
Library Company of Philadelphia, 2 sets, The Proprietor of the General
Circulating Library, in Third-street, 3 sets.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Levy Andrew Levy, Merchant, of Lancaster, John Ludan, of Christiana-Bridge,
The Library Company of Chester, The Juliana Library Company of Lancaster, The
Social Library Company of Wilmington.
MARYLAND.
Richard Bennet Loyd, Esquire Corbin Lee, Merchant, of Baltimore, Alexander Lawson,
Merchant, of Baltimore, Robert Long, jun. Merchant, of Baltimore, Hugh Lennox,
Merchant, of Newton, Chester, 12 sets, Doctor Andrew Leiper, of Piscataway,
James Leakin, of Baltimore, Captain Christopher Limes, of Baltimore, George
Lucks, of Baltimore.
VIRGINIA.
Patrick Lenagan, Teacher of Languages in Fredericksburgh.
SCOTLAND.
John Learmonth, Merchant, of Edinburgh.
M
OF BOSTON.
The Rev. John Morehead, William M'Alpine, Printer, Bookseller and Binder, 12
sets.
NEW ENGLAND.
Isaac Mansfield, Esquire of Marblehead, Benjamin Marston, Esquire of Marblehead, The
Rev. David M'Gregor, of Londonderry, Alex. M'Coy, Merchant, near Horsneck.
OF NEW YORK.
Peter Middleton, M. D. Captain Montresor, one of his Majesty's chief
Engineers, Captain Alexander M'Donald, Alexander Maclean, Merchant, 6 sets.
NEW JERSEY.
Samuel Meredith, Esquire of Otter-Hall, William Morris, Esquire of Trenton.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
The Rev. William Marshall, ^^^nister of the Scots Congregation, Archibald
M'Call, Merchant, John Searle M'Call, Merchant, Daniel M'Calla, Teacher of
Sciences and Languages, Archibald M'Elroy, Peruke Maker, John Maxfield, Esquire
Randle Mitchell, Merchant, John Mitchell, Merchant, Cadwallader Morris,
Merchant, Thomas Morris, House-Carpenter, Robert Smith Mosson, Teacher of the
Mathematics, Israel Musgrave, Merchant.
PENNSYLVANIA.
John Montgomery, Esquire of Carlisle, Jacob Moore, Esquire of Lewis Town, Kent County,
Joseph Miller, Esquire of Pequea, William M'Clay, Surveyor, on Juniata. Doctor
William M'Mahon, of Christiana-Bridge, N. C. County, Joseph Myers, of
Lancaster.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Montgomery, Merchant, near the head of Elk-river, James Miller,
Merchant, of Bladensburgh, -- Millegan, of Bohemia, James M'Beth, Merchant, of
Baltimore, 24 sets, John M'Nabb, Merchant, of Baltimore, Alexander M'Mechan,
Merchant, of Baltimore, John M'Clure, Merchant, of Baltimore, John Moulds,
Merchant, of Baltimore.
N
OF NEW YORK.
Garrat Noel, Bookseller, 12 sets.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
George Noarth, junior, A. B. Student of Law.
MARYLAND.
Benjamin Nicholson, Merchant, of Baltimore.
O
NEW ENGLAND.
The H^^^le Andrew Oliver, Esquire of Salem, Joshua Orne, Esquire of Marblehead, Samuel
Orne, Merchant and Bookseller, of Salem, 36 sets.
PENNSYLVANIA.
John Okely, of Bethlehem.
MARYLAND.
Benjamin Ogle, of Annapolis, Charles Orick, Esquire Arundel County.
P
OF BOSTON.
Captain Adino Paddock, Doctor Nathaniel Perkins.
NEW ENGLAND.
The Honorable Colonel Benjamin Pickman, Esquire of Salem, William Pynchon, Esquire of
Salem, Timothy Pickering, junior, Merchant, of Salem, Doctor William Pain, of
Salem, The Revd. Jonathan Parsons, of Newbury-Port.
OF NEW YORK.
William Park, Merchant.
NEW JERSEY.
The Honorable James Parker, Esquire of Perth-Amboy, William Pidgeon, Esquire of
Trenton, Captain Vincent Pearce, of Ashfield, John Pope, Merchant, of
Mansfield.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
William Parr, Esquire Israel Pemberton, Esquire Phineas Pemberton, Merchant, Charles
Pemberton, Merchant, Richard Peter's, Esquire Thomas Patterson, Vendue-Master, Isaac
Parish, Hatter and Paper-Maker, Thomas Penrose, Ship-Carpenter, James Penrose,
Ship-Carpenter, Doctor Frederick Phile, Edward Pole, Merchant, James Potts,
Student of Law, Thomas Phillips, Merchant, Samuel Pleasants, Merchant, John
Prior, Merchant, The Proprietors of the American China Manufactory, 2 sets.
PENNSYLVANIA.
John Price, Esquire of Reading, William Patterson, Esquire on Juniata, William
Pearson, of Kensington, Benjamin Poultney, Bookseller, of Lancaster, 12 sets.
MARYLAND.
Jonathan Plowman, Esquire of Baltimore.
Q
NEW ENGLAND.
Josiah Quincy, Esquire of Braintree, Norton Quincy, Esquire of Braintree.
R
OF BOSTON.
Doctor Isaac Rand, junior, Captain -- Royn.
NEW ENGLAND.
Thomas Robie, Merchant, of Marblehead.
NEW YORK.
Beverly Robinson, Esquire Walter Rutherforth, Esquire James Rivington, Bookseller, 12
sets.
NEW JERSEY.
Thomas Reynolds, Esquire
OF PHILADELPHIA.
Benjamin Rush, M. D. Professor of Chemistry, in the College, Samuel Rhoads,
Esquire William Rush, Ironmonger, Robert Ritchie, Merchant, John Reynells,
Merchant, John Richardson, Merchant, Collingson Read, Student of Law, Andrew
Robeson, Student of Law, Maurice Rogers, Clerk, Alexander Ruthersord,
Shoemaker, Joseph Rathell, Teacher of the English Language.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Caesar Rodney, Esquire of Dover, Kent county, The Revd. Thomas Reid, of Newark,
Newcastle county, George Ross, Esquire of Lancaster.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Richardson, of Georgetown. Doctor Jonathan Roberts, of Kent-Island.
S
OF BOSTON.
Abraham Savage, Gent. Stephen Seals, Merchant, Francis Skinner, Merchant,
John Short, Merchant, John Smith, Merchant, Doctor John Sprague, Isaac Stearns,
Merchant.
NEW ENGLAND.
Nathaniel Sparhawk, junior, Merchant, of Salem, Wyat St. Barbe, Merchant, of
Marblehead.
NEW YORK.
John William Smith, Esquire Timothy Scandrett, Tavern-Keeper, Lieutenant Smybert,
of the -- regiment, John Stephens, junior, Merchant, Samuel Stevens, Esquire
NEW JERSEY.
The Honorable Richard Stockton, Esquire of Princeton, Jonathan Sergeant, Esquire of
Princeton, Stephen Skinner, Esquire of Perth-Amboy, Cortland Skinner, Esquire of
Perth-Amboy, John Smith, Esquire of Perth-Amboy, The Revd. Elihu Spencer, of
Trenton, Robert Savage, of Salem, William Sheahan, Teacher of Languages at
Gloucester.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
William Shippen, junior, M. D. Professor of Anatomy in the College, Joseph
Shippen, junior, Esquire Pennsylvania Provincial Secretary, George Schlosser,
Merchant, John She, Merchant, Bertles She, Merchant, Thomas Shields,
Silversmith, Joseph Sims, Merchant, Thomas Smith, Merchant, The Revd. Dr.
Smith, for the College, Doctor John Sparhawk, Druggist and Bookseller, Jo^^^
Stamper, Merchant, Archibald Stuart, Clerk.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Jasper Scull, Esquire of Reading, Thomas Scully, Merchant, of Christiana-Bridge,
Newcast. C.
MARYLAND.
John Shuttleworth, M. D. of Annapolis.
T
NEW ENGLAND.
John Tappan, Merchant, of Newbury-Port, Doctor Cotton Tufts, of Weymouth.
NEW YORK.
The Revd. Joseph Treat.
NEW JERSEY.
James Thompson, of Elizabeth-Town.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
Robert Tait, Merchant, Samuel Tailor, Bookseller and Binder, William Tailor,
Silversmith, Captain George Thompson, Thomas Tillyer, Clerk of the Post Office.
PENNSYLVANIA.
George Tailor, Esquire of Northampton, Captain William Thompson, of Carlisle.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Talbot, Esquire of Baltimore.
U
Lieutenant James Urquhart, of the 14th Regiment.
V
NEW YORK.
James Vardell, A. B.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Abraham Vandyke, Gent, near Port-Penn, Newcastle county, Nicholas Vandyke, Esquire
near Port-Penn, Newcastle county, James Vandyke, Esquire of Dover, Kent county.
W
OF BOSTON.
Jonathan Williams, Esquire Samuel Winthrop, Esquire Joseph Waldo, Merchant, Isaac
Winslow, junior, Merchant.
NEW ENGLAND.
The Revd. Joshua Wingate Weeks, of Marblehead, The Revd. Anthony Wybart of
Braintree.
NEW YORK.
William Wadell, Merchant, -- Wood, Merchant.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
Nicholas Waln, Esquire Joshua Maddox Wallace, A. M. Pelatiah Webster, A. M.
Merchant, John Webster, Upholsterer, John Wharton, Merchant, John White,
Merchant, Joseph Whitall, Clerk, Isaac Wikoff, Merchant, Richard Wistar,
Merchant, James Willing, Merchant, William Woodhouse, Bookseller and Binder, 6
sets, Benjamin Wynkoop, Merchant.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Conrad Weikly, Esquire of Lancaster, John Williams, Merchant, of Reading, George
Wood, Tavern-Keeper, of Franckfort.
MARYLAND.
Thomas Ward, Merchant, of Baltimore, David Walker, Merchant, of Port-Tobacco,
Conrad Theodore Wederstrand, Merchant, of Baltimore, William White, Merchant,
on Great Duck-Creek, Thomas Williams, and Co. Merchants, of Annapolis, 24 sets,
Joseph Williams, Merchant, of Annapolis, Charles Wiessenthal, Merchant, of
Baltimore, William Worthington, Gent. of Calvert county.
Y
OF BOSTON.
Doctor Thomas Young.
OF NEW YORK.
James Yeoman, Merchant, John Young, Sadler.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Jasper Yeates, Esquire of Lancaster.
MARYLAND.
Colonel William Young, Esquire of Baltimore.
Z
PENNSYLVANIA.
Paul Zantzinger, Merchant, of Lancaster.
THIS List wa^ printed, before any attempt had been made to collect Subscribers
in the Provinces of Virginia, and the Carolinas; but, it is the Editor's
determination, in any future Work, published by Subscription, to give them also
an early opportunity of encouraging Literature and Manufactures on the
Continent, believing, that they will then BLAZON forth with a LUSTER equal to
any of the other Provinces -- In this PEACEABLE AND ACTIVE PATRIOTISM.

ADDRESS TO THE SUBSCRIBERS.
IMPRESSED with the deepest sensations of gratitude, the Editor takes this
opportunity of sincerely thanking the numerous Subscribers to the American
edition of Robertson's History of Charles the Fifth, in periodical Volumes. --
Vivified by the encouragement afforded him in your acceptance of each Volume
sewed in blue boards, as an equivalent for One Dollar; -- And animated by this
practical proof of your alacrity to promote native fabrications, he
respectfully lays before the American Public, Proposals for reprinting in
periodical Volumes by subscription. -- Thus humbly to attempt, in the New
World, the reprinting of such celebrated Books at moderate Prices, calculated
for this Meridian, as Men of Literary Taste, and Lovers of Country-born
Manufactures, are pleased to contribute their names to encourage the
republication of in America. -- Because some inimical incendiaries, who daily
foster the exiguity of their understandings, by barricading their faculties in
the vile and almost impregnable castle of ignorance, exotics to the native
rights of American Freedom, have insinuated, that this Edition is an infraction
on the monopoly of literary property in Great Britain, the Editor requests
their attention to this subject for a few moments.

IN the year 1709, the Legislature of Great Britain, legally ascertained to
every author the sale of his works for fourteen years certain. -- However
reasonable this monopoly of literature might appear in a country overgrown
with riches, thank God and government, this monopoly extends no farther than
Great Britain. -- As precedents are useful even in the support of self-evident
truths, I hope the candid Reader will have patience to read one, the
incontestibility of which is universally known.

IRELAND is a dependent and subordinate kingdom, belonging to Great Britain: It
was not till the year 1730, that a taste for literary knowledge made any
considerable progress there; but, ever since the year 1740, this taste has
made such rapid and universal progress, among the higher rank of people in
Ireland, that, as soon as any new Book appears in London, it is immediately
reprinted by the Irish Booksellers in Dublin.

THUS the depressed, I had almost said, the opp -- ss -- d people of Ireland,
has reprinted two editions of Robertson's Charles V. three editions of
Blackstone's Commentaries, two editions of the Universal History, one edition
of Chambers's Dictionary, and editions of every valuable Work produced in
Great Britain, without rendering the smallest pecuniary regard either to
Authors or to Booksellers. -- The reason is obvious; because the monopoly does
not reach beyond the limits of Great Britain, and cannot extend into any
country governed by an Assembly of Representatives, until they become so
corrupted, as to barter away the birthrights of the people, which they were
elected to preserve, and to increase rather than to diminish. -- Dr. Robertson
did receive for his manuscript copy of Charles V. the sum of Four Thousand
Guineas; and the British Booksellers, who gave this money, were purchasers with
full notice, for they absolutely and positively knew, that, if they were to
give him or any other author Four Hundred Thousand Guineas, they could not
purchase the monopoly of that work in the kingdom of Ireland, nor in the
provinces on the vast Continent of North America. -- The Representatives of the
people in Ireland will never give up this highborn privilege of freely
disseminating knowledge, because the nation, when compared with the former
inhabitants have been by this means, not only Humanified, but almost
Angelified: For it is a Godlike attribute to know.

BUT, least the ^orce of truth, on a subject of such importance, as the Mental
and Commercial interest of Americans, should be diminished by the
inconsequentiality of the Editor, he rejoiceth at this opportunity, of
introducing all his Subscribers to an intimacy with that magnificent Oracle of
knowledge, the learned Judge Blackstone, whose splendid authority will
certainly be acceptable and conclusive.

Extracts from the fourth edition of BLACKSTONE'S Introduction to his
Commentaries on the Laws of England.
SECTION IV. Of the Countries subject to the Laws of ENGLAND.
AS to Ireland, that is still a distinct kingdom; though a dependent,
subordinate kingdom. It was only entitled the dominion or lordship of Ireland,
and the king's style was no other than dominus Hiberniae, lord of Ireland, till
the thirty-third year of king Henry the eighth; when he assumed the title of
King, which is recognized by act of parliament, 35 Hen. VIII. c. 3. But, as
Scotland and England are now one and the same kingdom, and yet differ in their
municipal laws; so England and Ireland are, on the other hand, distinct
kingdoms, and yet in general agree in their laws. The inhabitants of Ireland
are, for the most part, descended from the English, who planted it as a kind of
colony, after the conquest of it by King Henry the second; and the laws of
England were then received and sworn to by the Irish nation, assembled at the
council of Lismore. And as Ireland, thus conquered, planted, and governed,
still continues in a state of dependence, it must necessarily conform to, and
be obliged by, such laws as the superior state thinks proper to prescribe.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

THE islands of Jersey, Guernsey, Sark, Alderney, and their appendages, were
parcel of the duchy of Normandy, and were united to the crown of England by the
first princes of the Norman line.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

BESIDES these adjacent islands, our more distant plantations in America, and
elsewhere, are also in some respects subject to the English laws. Plantations
or colonies in distant countries, are either such where the lands are claimed
by right of occupancy only, by finding them desert and uncultivated, and
peopling them from the mother country; or where, when already cultivated, they
have been either gained by conquest, or ceded to us by treaties. And both these
rights are founded upon the law of nature, or at least upon that of nations.
But there is a difference between these two species of colonies, with respect
to the laws by which they are bound. For it has been held, that if an
uninhabited country be discovered and planted by English subjects, all the
English laws then in being, which are the birthright of every subject, are
immediately there in force. BUT THIS MUST BE UNDERSTOOD WITH VER^ MANY AND VERY
GREAT RESTRICTIONS. Such colonists carry with them only so much of the English
law, as is applicable to their own situation and the condition of an infant
colony; such, for instance, as the general rules of inheritance, and of
protection from personal injuries. The artificial refinements and distinctions
incident to the property of a great and commercial people, the laws of police
and revenue, (such especially as are enforced by penalties) the mode of
maintenance for the established clergy, the jurisdiction of spiritual courts,
and a multitude of other provisions, ARE NEITHER NECESSARY NOR CONVENIENT FOR
THEM, AND THEREFORE ARE NOT IN FORCE. What shall be admitted and what rejected,
at what times, and under what restrictions, must, in case of dispute, be
decided in the first instance by their own provincial judicature, subject to
the reversion and control of the king in council, the whole of their
constitution being also liable to be new-modelled and reformed, by the general
superintending power of the legislature in the mother country. But in conquered
or ceded countries, that have already laws of their own, the king may indeed
alter and change those laws; but, till he does actually change them, the
ancient laws of the country remain, unless such as are against the law of God,
as in the case of an infidel country. Our American plantations are principally
of this latter sort, being obtained in the last century either by right of
conquest and driving out the natives (with what natural justice I shall not at
present enquire) or by treaties. And therefore the common law of England, as
such, has no allowance or authority there; they being no part of the mother
country, but distinct (though dependent) dominions. They are subject however to
the control of the parliament; though (like Ireland, Man, and the rest) not
bound by any acts of parliament, unless particularly named.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

THESE are the several parts of the dominions of the crown of Great Britain, in
which the municipal laws of England are not of force or authority, merely as
the municipal laws of England. Most of them have probably copied the spirit of
their own law from this original; but then it receives its obligation, and
authoritative force, from being the law of the country.

SURELY, the precedent of the people of Ireland's reprinting every work
produced in London, and the great Lawyer Blackstone's authority concerning the
internal legislation of colonies, are demonstrations of the rectitude of
reprinting any, or every work of excellence in America, without the smallest
infringement of the British embargo upon literature. -- Is it not enough that
their embargo prevents Americans from shipping their manufactures of this kind
into Britain. -- Would it not be incompatible with all freedom, if an
American's mind must be entirely starved and enslaved in the barren regions of
fruitless vacuity, because he does not wallow in immense riches equal to some
British Lords, the origin of whose progenitors are lost in the chaos of
antiquity?

THE Editor hops, that the facts above exhibited are sufficient support for
Americans, to persevere in reprinting whatsoever books merit their approbation,
without leave or license from the Bibliopolists or Monopolists of
Great Britain; he is therefore determined, as much as possible, to practice the
advice contained in George Fisher's emphatic lines.

Since to the Pen and Press we mortals owe,
All we believe, and, almost all we know,
Go on ye great preservers of these arts,
Which raise our thoughts and cultivate our parts.
GENTLEMEN AND LADIES, I remain with much respect, every SUBSCRIBER's much
obliged, and most grateful humble servant, ROBERT BELL.
PHILADELPHIA, APRIL 4th, 1771.
ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBERS,
WHOSE Names arrived at the late Union Library, in Third-street, Philadelphia,
since the Alphabetical and Provincial List was printed.

NEW HAMPSHIRE.
The Honorable Leverett Hubbart, Esquire one of the Justices of the Superior Court
in said Province, William Parker, Esquire Attorney at Law, of Portsmouth, John
Pickering, Esquire Attorney at Law, of Portsmouth, Robert Traile, Esquire Comptroller
of the Customs in Portsmouth, Joshua Wentworth, Merchant, of Portsmouth.
MASSACHUSSETS-BAY.
John Leverett, Esquire of Boston, William Mayhew, A. M. Librarian of Harvard
College, Cambridge, Timothy Hillyard, A. M. Tutor of Harvard College,
Cambridge, Ephraim Ward, A. M. of Newton, The Revd. Benjamin Stevens, of
Kittery, Jonathan Loring Austin, A. M. of Kittery, The Revd. Gad Hitchcock, of
Pembroke.
CONNECTICUT.
Stephen W. Hubbard, Merchant, of New Haven, Captain Hezekiah How, of
New Haven, Silas Lewis, Merchant, of Stratford, Samuel Tiley, Merchant, of
Hartford, John M'Kay, Merchant, of Horse-neck.
NEW YORK.
Samuel Wells, Esquire of Brattleburgh, in Cumberland county, Richard Furman,
Merchant, James Thompson, Merchant, -- Andrews, Gent. Hugh Gray, Merchant,
George Traile, Tobacconist, Alexander M'Lean, senior, 6 sets, Alexander M'Lean,
junior.
OF PHILADELPHIA.
John Morris, Esquire George Henry, Student of Law, Alexander Graydon, Student of
Law, David Young, Merchant, William Hollingshead, Student of Divinity, Ensign
John Joyner Ellis, of the 18th Regiment.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Robert Miller, Esquire of Carlisle, Archibald Stuart, of Andover Iron Works,
Robert Innis, Merchant, of Philipsburgh, Francis Oberlin, Merchant, of
Bethlehem, Jacob Moore, Esquire of Lewis-Town, Sussex county. The Revd. Joseph
Montgomery of Newcastle.
MARYLAND.
The Revd. Alexander Williamson, A. M. Rector of Prince George's parish, Robert
Goldsborough, Esquire of Talbot county, The Revd. John Goulden, William Hopper,
junior, John Caldwell, Merchant, of Baltimore, Doctor John Shaw, of Annapolis,
Charles Wallace, Merchant, of Annapolis, Alexander Somerville, of Calvert
county. William Kilgoe of St. Mary's county.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME THE THIRD.
BOOK SEVENTH. Containing Transactions from the Year 1541, to the Year 1546.
RENEWAL of hostilities by Francis, and his motives for it -- The murder of his
ambassadors, his pretext for this -- Francis's industry in preparing for war --
He brings five armies into the field -- Their operations -- Preparations for
another campaign -- The Emperor's negociations with Henry VIII. -- Henry's
rupture with France and Scotland -- Alliance between Charles and Henry --
Francis's negociations with Solomon -- Operations in the Low Countries -- The
Emperor becomes master of the duchy of Cleves -- Besieges Landrecy -- Solomon
invades Hungary -- Barbarossa's descent on Italy -- Preparations for a new
campaign -- Affairs of Germany -- Maurice of Saxony succeeds his father -- The
views and conduct of this young Prince -- The Pope proposes to hold a general
council at Trent -- Summons it to meet -- Obliged to prorogue it -- The Emperor
courts the Protestants -- Their vigorous proceedings -- Diet at Spires -- The
Emperor solicits its aid against France -- His vast concessions in order to
gain the Protestants -- And granted by the Diet -- Charles's negociations with
Denmark and England -- The French take the field in Piedmont -- Invest Carignan
-- The Imperialists march to relieve it -- Battle of Cerisoles -- Effects of it
-- Operations in the Low Countries -- The Emperor invests St. Disier -- Henry
VIII. invests Bologne -- Gallant defense of St. Disier -- The Emperor
penetrates into the heart of France -- Obliged to retire -- Peace between him
and Francis concluded at Crespy -- Motives of concluding it -- War continues
between France and England -- The Dauphin dissatisfied with the peace of Crespy
-- The Emperor's schemes with respect to Germany -- The Pope summons a general
council to meet at Trent -- Diet at Worms -- Ferdinand requires the Germans to
acknowledge the council -- Emperor arrives at Worms -- The Protestants disclaim
all connection with the council of Trent -- Conduct of Maurice of Saxony in
this Diet -- The Protestants begin to suspect the Emperor -- Death of the Duke
of Orleans -- The Pope grants the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to his son --
Henry of Brunswick kindles a war in Germany -- The Reformation of the
Palatinate -- The council assembles at Trent -- Its proceedings --
Apprehensions of the Protestants -- Their deliberations -- The negociations
with the Emperor. From page 1, to page 51.

BOOK EIGHTH. Containing Transactions in and from the Year 1546, to the Year
1547.
DEATH of Luther -- His character -- The Emperor endeavors to amuse and
deceive the Protestants -- Proceedings of the council against the Protestants
-- Charles about to commence hostilities against the Protestants -- Negociates
with the Pope -- Concludes a truce with Solomon -- Gains Maurice and other
Princes of Germany -- Holds a Diet at Ratisbon -- The Protestants alarmed --
The Emperor's treaty with the Pope -- Endeavors still to conceal his
intentions from the Protestants -- The Pope disconcerts his plan -- The
preparations of the Protestants for their own defense -- They solicit the aid
of the Venetians -- Of the Swiss -- Of Francis I. and Henry VIII. --
Protestants take the field with a great army -- The inequality of the Emperor's
forces to theirs -- They imprudently negociate instead of acting -- The Emperor
puts them under the ban of the empire -- They declare war against Charles --
Their first operations -- and ill conduct -- The Pope's troops join the Emperor
-- The confederates advance toward the Imperial army -- The Emperor declines a
battle -- The Flemish troops join the Emperor -- State of both armies -- The
schemes of Maurice of Saxony -- His league with the Emperor -- His artifices in
order to conceal his intentions -- He invades the territories of the Elector of
Saxony -- The confederates make overtures of accommodation to the Emperor --
which he rejects -- The troops of the confederacy separate -- Almost all the
members of the confederacy submit to the Emperor -- The rigorous conditions
imposed by the Emperor -- The Elector returns to Saxony, and recovers
possession of it -- The Emperor prevented from attacking the Elector and
Landgrave -- The Pope recalls his troops -- A conspiracy to overturn the
government of Genoa -- The object of the conspirators -- Fiesco Count of
Lavagna the head of the conspiracy -- Intrigues and preparations of the
conspirators -- The conspirators assemble to execute their plan -- Fiesco's
exhortations to them -- His interview with his wife -- They attack the city --
Cause of their miscarriage. -- Tranquillity re-established in Genoa -- The
Emperor alarmed at this conspiracy -- Suspends his operations in Germany. From
page 52, to page 102.

BOOK NINTH. Containing Transactions from the Year 1547, to the Year 1549.
FRANCIS jealous of the Emperor's power and success -- Negociates with the
Protestants -- With Solomon -- With the Pope and Venetians -- With the Kings of
Denmark and England -- The Emperor greatly alarmed -- Entertains hope from the
declining state of Francis's health -- Death of Francis, and reflections on his
character and rivalship with Charles -- Effects of Francis's death -- Charles
marches against the Elector of Saxony -- Progress of his armies -- Passes the
Elbe -- Ill conduct of the Elector -- Battle of Mulhausen -- The Elector
defeated and taken prisoner -- His harsh reception by the Emperor -- Charles's
progress after his victory -- Invests Wittemberg -- The Emperor's ungenerous
treatment of the Elector -- The Elector's magnanimity -- The distress of his
family -- His treaty with Charles, by which he surrenders the electorate -- And
remains a prisoner -- Maurice put in possession of the electoral dominions --
Negociations with the Landgrave -- The conditions prescribed by the Emperor --
To which he submits -- He repairs to the Imperial court -- The manner in which
the Emperor received him -- He is detained a prisoner -- The Elector of
Brandenburgh and Maurice solicit in vain for his liberty -- His impatience
under restraint -- The rigor of the Emperor's exactions in Germany --
Ferdinand's encroachments on the liberties of his Bohemian subjects -- Diet
held at Augsburgh -- The Emperor exhorts them to submit to the general council
-- Various revolutions in the council -- Translated from Trent to Bologna --
Symptoms of disgust between the Pope and Emperor -- The assassination of the
Pope's son -- The Imperial troops take possession of Placentia -- The Pope
courts the alliance of the French King and the Venetians -- The Diet of
Augsburgh petitions for the return of the council to Trent -- The Pope eludes
the demand -- The Emperor protests against the council of Bologna -- The
Emperor prepares a system, to serve as the rule of faith in Germany -- This,
which was called the Interim, he lays before the Diet -- And exhorts their
approbation of it -- New and fruitless solicitations for the Landgrave's
liberty -- The Interim equally disapproved of by Protestants and Papists -- The
sentiments of the Pope with regard to it -- The Emperor enforces compliance
with the Interim -- The free cities struggle against receiving the Interim --
Compelled by violence to submit -- The Pope dismisses the council assembled at
Bologna -- The Emperor receives his son Philip in the Low Countries. From page
102, to page 150.

BOOK TENTH. Containing Transactions from the Year 1549, to the Year 1552.
THE Pope's schemes against the Emperor -- The election of Julius III. -- His
character and conduct -- His views and proceedings with respect to the general
council -- A Diet at Augsburgh to enforce the Interim -- Maurice begins to form
designs against the Emperor -- The political motives which influenced him --
The passions which co-operated with these -- The caution and address with which
he carries on his schemes -- He enforces the Interim in Saxony -- Makes
professions of zeal for the Protestant religion -- At the same time courts the
Emperor -- Protests against the mode of proceeding in the council -- The Diet
resolve to make war on the city of Magdeburgh -- Appoint Maurice general -- The
council summoned to re-assemble at Trent -- Another fruitless attempt to
procure the Landgrave liberty -- Charles's plan of procuring the Imperial crown
for his son Philip -- The obstacles that stood in its way -- His endeavors to
surmount these -- Philip's character disagreeable to the Germans -- Charles
obliged to relinquish this scheme -- The Pope and Emperor form a design to
recover Parma and Placentia -- Octavio Farnese courts the assistance of France
-- His league with Henry II. -- Occasions the renewal of hostilities between
Charles and Henry -- Retards the meeting of the council -- Henry protests
against the council -- Violence of the Emperor's proceedings against the
Protestants -- His endeavors to support the council -- The siege of Magdeburgh
-- Maurice takes the command of the army which carried on the siege -- The city
surrenders to Maurice -- Maurice's views at this juncture -- The advantages he
derived from his negociations with the Magdeburghers -- His expedient for
keeping an army on foot -- His address in concealing his intentions from the
Emperor -- The affairs of Hungary -- Martinuzzi favors Ferdinand's pretensions
in that kingdom -- The success of his measures -- Appointed governor of that
part of Hungary which was subject to Ferdinand -- Ferdinand begins to form
designs against him -- He is assassinated by his command -- The effect of that
violent action -- Maurice courts the protection of the French King -- His
treaty with him -- Solicits the aid of Edward VI. of England -- Demands once
more that the Landgrave should be set at liberty -- Maurice continues to amuse
the Emperor -- The Emperor conceives some suspicions concerning his intentions
-- Maurice prepares for action -- Circumstances which contributed to deceive
the Emperor -- and his ministers -- Maurice takes the field against the Emperor
-- Publishes a manifesto justifying his conduct -- He is powerfully supported
by the French King -- Maurice's operations in the field -- The Emperor's
astonishment and distress -- Endeavors to gain time by a negotiation --
Progress of the French army -- The negociations between the Emperor and Maurice
of no effect -- Maurice advances toward Inspruck -- Takes the castle of
Ehrenberg -- A mutiny of his troops retards his march -- The Emperor flies in
confusion from Inspruck -- Maurice enters that town -- The Emperor sets the
Elector of Saxony at liberty -- The council of Trent breaks up in great
consternation -- The effects of its decrees -- Character of the historians of
this council -- The French endeavor to surprise Strasburgh -- But without
success -- The operations of Albert of Brandenburgh -- The negociations of
peace at Passau -- The terms which Maurice proposed -- Powerfully supported by
the Princes of the empire -- The motives which influenced the Emperor at this
juncture -- Ferdinand zealous to promote an accommodation -- Circumstances
which retard it -- Maurice's vigorous operations facilitate it -- Maurice
desirous of an accommodation -- The peace of Religion concluded at Passau --
Reflections upon this peace, and upon the conduct of Maurice -- Little
attention paid to the French King in this treaty. From page 150, to page 210.

BOOK ELEVENTH. Containing Transactions in and from the Year 1552, to the Year
1556.
MAURICE marches into Hungary against the Turks -- The Landgrave of Hesse,
recovers his liberty -- Likewise the Elector of Saxony -- The Emperor resolves
to make war upon France -- His preparations for this purpose -- The precautions
of the French for the defense of Metz -- The Duke of Guise appointed governor
of the town -- Prepares for a vigorous defense -- Charles advances toward Metz
-- Invests the towns -- Both parties endeavor to gain Albert of Brandenburgh
-- The gallant behavior of the Duke of Guise and his garrison -- The distress
of the Imperial army -- The Emperor changes the method of attack -- Obliged to
raise the siege -- Ruin of the Imperial army, and humanity of the French -- Bad
situation of the Emperor's affairs in Italy -- The revolt of Siena -- The
Sinese court the assistance of France -- Descent of the Turks in the kingdom of
Naples -- The Emperor sensibly affected with the state of his affairs -- The
violent proceedings of Albert of Brandenburgh -- He is condemned by the
Imperial chamber -- A confederacy formed against him, of which Maurice was head
-- He attacks Albert -- And defeats his army -- But is killed in the battle --
His character -- Albert continues the war -- He is driven out of Germany --
Maurice's brother Augustus succeeds him in the electoral dignity -- Hostilities
in the Low Countries -- The progress of the Imperialists, disquiets the French
King -- The Imperialists unsuccessful in Italy -- And in Hungary -- Ferdinand
obliged to abandon Transylvania -- Solyman's domestic distresses -- The
tragical history of his son Mustapha -- Charles projects a marriage between his
son and Mary of England -- To which Philip gives his consent -- The sentiments
of Mary and of the English with regard to it -- The house of Commons
remonstrate against it -- The marriage treaty concluded -- Discontent and
apprehensions of the English -- Wyat's insurrection -- The marriage celebrated
-- Mary's measures to overturn the Protestant religion in England -- The
obstacles which she had to surmount -- The English jealous of Philip -- The
French King alarmed at the match between Philip and Mary -- His preparations
for a vigorous campaign -- The progress of his arms -- The Emperor little able
to obstruct it -- The French invest Renti -- An action between the two armies
-- The Imperialists invade Picardy -- Affairs of Italy -- Cosmo di Medici's
schemes with regard to Siena -- He negociates with the Emperor -- Enters into
war with France -- Gives the command of his army to Medicino -- Peter Strozzi
entrusted with the command of the French army in Italy -- The imprudence of
this choice -- The battle of Marciano -- In which the French are defeated --
Medicino besieges Siena -- Which is gallantly defended by the citizens and
Monluc -- Medicino converts the siege into a blockade -- The town obliged by
famine to capitulate -- Many of the Sienese retire to Monte-Alcino -- And
establish a free government there -- Hardships to which the citizens of Siena
were subjected -- Cosmo attacks those who had retired -- Operations in Piedmont
-- Charles appoints the Duke of Alva generalissimo there -- His operations
there inconsiderable -- A conspiracy to betray Metz to the Imperialists -- The
plan of it -- Its progress -- Discovered -- A body of Imperialists defeated --
The conspirators punished -- A fruitless negotiation in order to establish
peace -- Affairs of Germany -- Diet held at Augsburgh, and Ferdinand's speech
in it -- Suspicions and fears of the Protestants -- These increased by the
arrival of a nuncio from the Pope to the Diet -- The death of Julius III. --
The nuncio sets out for Rome -- Ferdinand's reasons for wishing to satisfy the
Protestants -- Charles had resumed his plan of altering the succession to the
empire -- The Turks were ready to invade Hungary -- He is alarmed at some steps
taken by the Protestants -- Ferdinand zealous to promote an accommodation --
The pretensions of the Catholics and Protestants -- The peace of religion
established -- Reflections on the progress of the principles of toleration --
Advantages of the religious peace to the Lutherans -- And to the Catholics --
Marcellus II. elected Pope -- His character -- His death -- The election of
Paul IV. -- His rise and character -- The first steps of his administration --
The excess of his attachment to his nephews -- Their ambitious projects --
Reasons of their disgust with the Emperor -- They endeavor to alienate the
Pope from the Emperor -- Induce him to court the King of France -- Constable
Montmorency opposes the alliance with the Pope -- The Duke of Guise favors it
-- Cardinal of Lorrain sent to negociate with the Pope -- Paul enraged at the
proceedings of the Diet of Augsburgh -- And exasperated by his nephews --
Concludes a treaty with France -- The Emperor resolves to resign his hereditary
dominions -- The motives of this resignation -- Circumstances which had
retarded it -- The formalities with which he executed it -- Resolves to fix his
residence in Spain -- Obliged to remain for some time in the Netherlands --
Promotes the negotiation for peace -- A truce concluded -- Ratified by both
Monarchs -- The Pope's astonishment and distress -- He attempts to rekindle the
war -- His negociations for that purpose -- Their effect -- The Pope's violent
proceedings against Philip -- Philip's superstitious scruples -- The Duke of
Alva takes the field against the Pope -- A truce between the Pope and Philip.
From page 194, to page 279.

BOOK TWELFTH. Containing Transactions in and from the Year 1556, to the Year
1560.
CHARLES's new attempt to alter the succession of the empire -- Which proves
unsuccessful -- Charles sets out for Spain -- His arrival and reception there
-- The place of his retreat -- Contrast between the behavior of Charles and
the Pope -- The Duke of Guise leads the French army into Italy -- The Pope
renews hostilities against Philip -- His military preparations inadequate --
Duke of Guise's operations -- Hostilities in the Low Countries -- Philip
endeavors to engage England in the war -- Operations of Philip's army in the
Low Countries -- Invests St. Quintin -- The French endeavor to relieve the
town -- The battle of St. Quintin -- Total defeat of the French -- The first
effects of it -- Philip repairs to his army -- His deliberations concerning the
prosecution of the war -- St. Quintin defended by Admiral Coligny -- Which is
taken by assault -- Henry's measures for the defense of his kingdom -- The
victory of St. Quintin productive of few beneficial consequences -- The French
army recalled out of Italy -- A treaty of peace between the Pope and Philip --
Philip restores Placentia to Octavio Farnese -- Cosmo di Medici's measures for
obtaining Siena -- Their success -- The Duke of Guise's reception in France --
Takes the command of the army -- He invests Calais -- Its defenseless state --
Guise pushes the siege with vigor -- Takes the town -- The splendour and
effects of these conquests -- Charles's resignation of the Imperial crown --
The Pope refuses to acknowledge Ferdinand as Emperor -- Henry endeavors to
excite the Scots against England -- Marriage of the Dauphin with the Queen of
Scots -- The campaign opened -- The French army defeated at Gravelines -- The
Duke of Guise opposed to the victorious army -- An intrigue in the court of
France facilitates it -- Henry commits the negotiation to Montmorency --
Charles's amusements in his retreat -- His more serious occupations -- The
causes of his death -- His character -- Conference in order to peace -- Death
of Mary of England -- Henry and Philip court Elisabeth her successor --
Elisabeth's deliberations concerning her conduct -- She impowers her
ambassadors to treat of peace -- Negociations at Chateau Cambresis --
Difficulties with regard to the claims of England -- Articles of peace between
France and England -- The views of both parties with respect to these -- An
expedient which promotes peace between France and Spain -- The terms of
pacification -- Which establishes tranquillity in Europe -- The peace between
France and Spain -- Death of Henry -- A general review of the whole period --
The nations of Europe in a similar state during the sixteenth century -- A
remarkable change in the state of Europe, during the reign of Charles V. -- The
progress of the house of Austria -- Particularly in Spain -- Also in other
parts of Europe -- Progress of the German branch of the house of Austria --
Acquisition of the Kings of France during the reign of Charles V. -- Enables
them to assume an higher station among the powers of Europe -- Circumstances
which prevented the immediate effects of their power -- Progress of England
with respect to its interior state -- With respect to the affairs of the
continent -- With respect to Scotland -- Changes in the political state of the
secondary powers in Europe -- The most considerable revolution of the sixteenth
century in the court of Rome -- The general revolt against the doctrines of the
church of Rome, and the power of the Popes -- This abridged the extent of the
Pope's dominions, -- and obliged them to change the spirit of their government
-- The Reformation contributed to improve the church both in science and morals
-- The effects of it extend to the characters of the Popes themselves -- State
of the republic of Venice -- Of Tuscany -- Of the Dukes of Savoy -- Of the
United Provinces -- Of Russia -- Of Denmark and Sweden.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VII.
THE calamities which the Emperor suffered in his unfortunate enterprise
against Algiers were great; and the account of these, which augmented in
proportion as it spread at a greater distance from the scene of his disasters,
encouraged Francis to begin hostilities, on which he had been for some time
resolved. But he did not think it prudent, to produce as the motives of this
resolution, either his ancient pretensions to the duchy of Milan, or the
Emperor's disingenuity in violating his repeated promises with regard to the
restitution of that country. The former might have been a good reason against
concluding the truce of Nice, but was none for breaking it; the latter could
not be urged without exposing his own credulity as much as the Emperor's want
of integrity. A violent and unwarrantable action of one of the Imperial
generals furnished him with a reason to justify his taking arms, which was of
greater weight than either of these, and such as would have rouzed him, if he
had been as desirous of peace, as he was eager for war. Francis, by signing the
treaty of truce at Nice, without consulting Solomon, gave (as he foresaw) great
offense to that haughty Monarch, who considered an alliance with him as an
honor of which a Christian Prince had cause to be proud. The French King's
friendly interview with the Emperor in Provence, followed by such extraordinary
appearances of union and confidence as accompanied Charles's reception in
France, induced the Sultan to suspect that the two rivals had at last forgotten
their ancient enmity, in order that they might form such a general confederacy
against the Ottoman power, as had been long wished for in Christendom and often
attempted in vain. Charles, with his usual art, endeavored to confirm and
strengthen these suspicions, by instructing his emissaries at Constantinople,
as well as in those courts with which Solomon held any intelligence, to
represent the concord between him and Francis to be so entire, that their
sentiments, views and pursuits, would be the same for the future Mem. de
Ribier. tom. i. p. 502.
. It was not without difficulty that Francis effaced these impressions; but the
address of Rincon, the French ambassador at the Port, together with the
manifest advantage of carrying on hostilities against the house of Austria in
concert with France, prevailed at length on the Sultan to enter into a closer
conjunction with Francis than ever. Rincon returned into France, in order to
communicate to his master a scheme of the Sultan's for gaining the concurrence
of the Venetians in their operations against the common enemy. Solomon having
lately concluded a peace with that republic, to which the mediation of Francis,
and the good offices of Rincon had greatly contributed, thought it not
impossible to allure the senate by such advantages, as, together with the
example of the French Monarch, might over-balance any scruples arising either
from decency or caution that could operate on the other side. Francis, warmly
approving of this measure, dispatched Rincon back to Constantinople, and
directing him to go by Venice along with Fergoso, a Genoese exile, whom he
appointed his ambassador to that republic, empowered them to negociate the
matter with the senate, to whom Solomon had sent an envoy for the same purpose
Hist. de Venet. de Purata, iv. 125.
. The Marquis del Guasto, governor of the Milanese, an officer of great
abilities, but capable of attempting and executing the most atrocious actions,
got intelligence of the motions and destination of these ambassadors. As he
knew how much his master wished to discover the intentions of the French King,
and of what consequence it was to retard the execution of his measures, he
employed some soldiers belonging to the garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for
Rincon and Fergoso as they sailed down the Po, who murdered them and most of
their attendants, and seized their papers. Upon receiving an account of this
barbarous outrage, committed, during the subsistence of truce, against persons
held sacred by the most uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for the unhappy
fate of two servants whom he loved and trusted, his uneasiness at the
interruption of his schemes by their death, and every other passion were
swallowed up and lost in the indignation which this insult on the honor of his
crown excited. He exclaimed loudly against Guasto, who, having drawn upon
himself all the infamy of assassination without making any discovery of
importance, as the ambassadors had left their instructions and other papers of
consequence behind them, now boldly denied his being accessory in any wise to
the crime. He sent an ambassador to the Emperor to demand suitable reparation
for an indignity, which no Prince, how inconsiderable soever, or pusillanimous,
could tamely endure: And when Charles, impatient at that time to set out on his
African expedition, endeavored to put him off with an evasive answer, he
appealed to all the courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness of the
injury, the spirit of moderation with which he had applied for redress, and the
iniquity of the Emperor in disregarding this just request.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with which Guasto asserted his own innocence,
the accusations of the French gained greater credit than all his protestations;
and Bellay, the French commander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by his
industry and address, such a minute detail of the transactions, with the
testimony of so many of the parties concerned, as amounted almost to a legal
proof of the Marquis's guilt. In consequence of this opinion of the public,
confirmed by such strong evidence, Francis's complaints were universally
allowed to be well founded, and the steps he took toward renewing hostilities
were ascribed not merely to ambition or resentment, but to the unavoidable
necessity of vindicating the honor of his crown Bellay, 367, etc. Jovii Hist.
lib. 40. 268.
.

BUT how just soever Francis might esteem his own cause, he did not trust so
much to that, as to neglect the proper precautions for gaining other allies
besides the Sultan, by whose aid he might counterbalance the Emperor's superior
power. But his negociations to this effect were attended with very little
success. Henry VIII. more and more bent upon schemes against Scotland, which he
knew would at once dissolve his union with France, was inclinable rather to
take part with the Emperor than to contribute in any degree toward favoring
the operations against him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient system
of neutrality. The Venetians, notwithstanding Solyman's solicitations, imitated
the Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with the religious liberty which
they enjoyed, found it more their interest to gratify than to irritate the
Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, who on this occasion were
first drawn in to interest themselves in the quarrels of the more potent
Monarchs of the south, and the Duke of Cleves, who had a dispute with the
Emperor about the possession of Gueldres, were the only confederates Francis
secured. But the dominions of the two former lay at such a distance, and the
power of the latter was so inconsiderable, that he gained little by their
alliance.

FRANCIS, however, supplied all defects by his own activity. Being afflicted at
this time with a distemper, the effect of his irregular pleasures, and which
prevented his pursuing them with the same licentious indulgence, he applied to
business with more than his usual industry. The same cause which occasioned
this extraordinary attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
dissatisfied with the ministers whom he had hitherto employed. This accidental
peevishness of temper being sharpened by reflecting on the false steps into
which he had lately been betrayed, and the insults to which he had been
exposed, some of those in whom he had hitherto placed the greatest confidence,
felt the effects of this change in his temper, and were deprived of their
offices. At last he disgraced Montmorency himself, who had long directed
affairs, as well civil as military, with all the authority of a minister no
less beloved than trusted by his master; and Francis being fond of showing that
the fall of such a powerful favorite did not affect the vigor or prudence of
his administration, this was a new motive to redouble his diligence in
preparing to open the war by some splendid and extraordinary effort.

FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field five armies. One to act in
Luxembourg under the Duke of Orleans, accompanied by the Duke of Lorraine as
his instructor in the art of war. Another commanded by the Dauphin marched
toward the frontiers of Spain. A third led by Van Rossem the marshal of
Guelders, and composed chiefly of the troops of Cleves, had Brabant allotted
for the theater of its operations. A fourth, of which the Duke of Vendome was
general, hovered on the borders of Flanders. The last, consisting of the forces
cantoned in Piedmont, was destined for the Admiral Annibaut. The Dauphin and
his brother were appointed to command where the chief exertion was intended,
and the greatest honor to be reaped; the army of the former amounted to forty
thousand, that of the latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears more
surprising than that Francis did not pour these numerous and irresistible
armies into the Milanese, which had so long been the object of his wishes as
well as enterprises, and that he should choose rather to turn almost his whole
strength into another direction, and toward new conquests. But the remembrance
of the disasters which he had met with in his former expeditions into Italy,
together with the difficulty of supporting a war carried on at such a distance
from his own dominions, had gradually abated his violent inclination to obtain
footing in that country, and made him willing to try the fortune of his arms in
another quarter. At the same time, he expected to make such a powerful
imp^ession on the frontier of Spain, where there were few towns of any
strength, and no army assembled to oppose him, as might enable him to recover
possession of the county of Rousillon, lately dismembered from the French
crown, before Charles could bring into the field any force able to obstruct his
progress. The necessity of supporting his ally the Duke of Cleves, and the hope
of drawing a considerable body of soldiers out of Germany by his means,
determined him to act with vigor in the Low Countries.

THE Dauphin and Duke of Orleans opened the campaign much about the same time,
the former laying siege to Perpignan the capital of Rousillon, and the latter
entering Luxembourg. The Duke of Orleans pushed his operations with the
greatest rapidity and success, one town falling after another, until no place
in that large duchy remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville. Nor could
he have failed of overrunning the adjacent provinces with the same ease, if he
had not voluntarily stopped short in his career of victory. But a report
prevailing that the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle in order to save
Perpignan, on a sudden the Duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or moved,
perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, whom he both envied and hated, abandoned
his own conquests, and hastened toward Rousillon in order to divide with him
the glory of the victory.

ON his departure, some of his troops were disbanded, others deserted their
colors, and the rest, cantoned in the towns which he had taken, remained
inactive. By this conduct, which leaves a dishonorable imputation either on
his understanding or his heart, or on both, he not only renounced whatever he
could have hoped from such a promising opening of the campaign, but gave the
enemy an opportunity of recovering, before the end of summer all the conquests
which he had gained. On the Spanish frontier, the Emperor was not so
inconsiderate as to venture on a battle, the loss of which might have
endangered his kingdom. Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and briskly
attacked, having been largely supplied with ammunition and provisions by the
vigilance of Doria Sigonii Vita A. Doriae, p. 1191.
, was defended so long and so vigorously by the Duke of Alva, the persevering
obstinacy of whose temper fitted him admirably for such service, that at last
the French, after a siege of three months, wasted by diseases, repulsed in
several assaults, and despairing of success, relinquished the undertaking, and
retired into their own country Sandov. Hist. tom. ii. 315.
. Thus all Francis's mighty preparations, either from some defect in his own
conduct, or from the superior power and prudence of his rival, produced no
effects that bore any proportion to his expense and efforts, or such as
gratified, in any degree, his own hopes, or answered the expectation of Europe.
The only solid advantage of the campaign was the acquisition of a few towns in
Piedmont, which Bellay gamed rather by stratagem and address, than by the force
of his arms Sandov. Hist. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, etc. Ferrer. 9. 237.
.

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though both considerably exhausted by such
great but indecisive efforts, discovering no abatement of their mutual
animosity, employed all their attention, tried every expedient, and turned
themselves toward every quarter, in order to acquire new allies, together with
such a reinforcement of strength, as would give them the superiority in the
ensuing campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the terror and resentment of the
Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of their country prevailed on the Cortes of
the several kingdoms to grant him subsidies with a more liberal hand than
usual. At the same time, he borrowed a large sum from John King of Portugal,
putting him in possession by way of security for his being repaid, of the
Molucca isles in the East Indies, with the gainful commerce of precious spices,
which that sequestered corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied with this, he
negociated a marriage between Philip his only son, now in his sixteenth year,
and Mary daughter of that Monarch, with whom her father, the most opulent
Prince in Europe, gave a large dower; and having likewise persuaded the Cortes
of Aragon and Valencia to recognize Philip as the heir of these crowns, he
obtained from them the donative usual on such occasions Ferreras, 9. 238. 241.
Jovii Hist. lib. 42. 298. 6.
. These extraordinary supplies enabled him to make such additions to his forces
in Spain, that he could detach a great body into the Low Countries, and yet
reserve as many as were sufficient for the defense of the kingdom. Having thus
provided for the security of Spain and committed the government of it to his
son, he sailed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But how attentive soever to
raise the funds for carrying on the war, or eager to grasp at any new expedient
for that purpose, he was not so inconsiderate as to accept of the overture
which Paul, knowing his necessities, artfully threw out to him. That ambitious
Pontiff, no less sagacious to discern, than watchful to seize opportunities of
aggrandizing his family, solicited him to grant Octavio his grandchild, whom
the Emperor had admitted to the honor of being his son-in-law, the investiture
of the duchy of Milan, in return for which he promised such a vast sum of
money, as would have gone far toward supplying his present exigencies. But
Charles, as well from unwillingness to alienate a province of so much value, as
from disgust at the Pope, who had hitherto refused to join in the war against
Francis, rejected the proposal. His dissatisfaction with Paul at that juncture
was so great, that he even refused to approve his alienating Parma and
Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter, and settling them on his own son and
grandson as a fief to be held of the holy see. As no other expedient for
raising money among the Italian states remained, he consented to withdraw the
garrisons which he had hitherto kept in the citadels of Florence and Leghorn,
in consideration for which, he received a large present from Cosmo de Medici,
who by this means secured his own independance and got possession of two forts,
which were justly called the fetters of Tuscany Adriani Istoria i. 195. Sleid.
312. Jovii Hist. lib. 43. p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.
.

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned his whole attention toward
raising the sums necessary for defraying the expenses of the year, had not been
negligent of objects more distant, though no less important, and had concluded
a league offensive and defensive with Henry VIII. from which he derived in the
end, greater advantage than from all his other preparations. Several slight
circumstances, which have already been mentioned, had begun to alienate the
affections of that Monarch from Francis, his present ally, and new incidents of
greater moment had occurred to increase his disgust and animosity. Henry,
desirous of establishing an uniformity in religion in Great Britain, as well as
fond of making proselytes to his own opinions, had formed a scheme of
persuading his nephew the King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's supremacy,
and to adopt the same system of reformation which he had introduced into
England. This measure he pursued with his usual eagerness and impetuosity,
making such advantageous overtures to James, whom he considered as not over
scrupulously attached to any religious tenets, that he scarce doubted of
success. His propositions were accordingly received in such a manner that he
flattered himself with having gained his point. But the Scottish ecclesiastics,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the consequence of the King's union
with England; and the partisans of France, no less convinced that it would put
an end to the influence of that crown upon the public councils of Scotland,
combined together, and by their insinuations defeated Henry's scheme at the
very moment when he expected it to have taken effect. Too haughty to brook such
a disappointment, which he imputed as much to the arts of the French, as to the
levity of the Scottish Monarch, he took arms against Scotland, threatening to
subdue the kingdom, since he could not gain the friendship of its King. At the
same time, his resentment at Francis quickened his negociations with the
Emperor, an alliance with whom he was now as forward to accept, as the other
could be to offer it. During this war with Scotland, and before the conclusion
of his negociations with Charles, James V. died, leaving his crown to Mary, his
only daughter, an infant a few days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once
his whole system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning all thoughts of
conquering it, aimed at what was more advantageous as well as practicable, an
union with that kingdom by a marriage between Edward his only son and the young
Queen. But, here too, he apprehended a vigorous opposition from the French
faction in Scotland, which began to bestir itself in order to thwart the
measure. The necessity of crushing this party among the Scots, and of
preventing Francis from furnishing them with any effectual aid, confirmed
Henry's resolution of breaking with France, and pushed him on to put a
finishing hand to the treaty of confederacy with the Emperor.

IN this league were contained first of all, articles for securing their future
amity and mutual defense; then were enumerated the demands which they were
respectively to make upon Francis; and the plan of their proceedings was fixed,
if he should refuse to grant them satisfaction. They agreed to require, that
Francis should not only renounce his alliance with Solomon, which had been the
source of infinite calamities to Christendom, but also that he should make
reparation for the damages which that unnatural union had occasioned; that he
should restore Burgundy to the Emperor; that he should desist immediately from
hostilities, and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common enemy of the
Christian faith; and that he should immediately pay the sums due to Henry, or
put some towns in his hands as security to that effect. If, within forty days,
he did not comply with these demands, they then engaged to invade France each
with twenty thousand foot, and five thousand horse, and not to lay down their
arms until they had recovered Burgundy, together with the towns on the Sum
for the Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or even the whole realm of France
for Henry Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. 238.
. Their heralds, accordingly, set out with these haughty requisitions; but not
being permitted to enter France, could not perform their commission, and the
two Monarchs held themselves fully entitled to execute whatever was stipulated
in their treaty.

FRANCIS, on his part, was no less diligent in preparing for the approaching
campaign. Having early observed the symptoms of Henry's disgust and alienation,
and finding all his endeavors to sooth and reconcile him ineffectual, he knew
his temper too well not to expect that open hostilities would quickly follow
upon this cessa^on of friendship. For this reason he redoubled his endeavors
to obtain from Solomon such aid as might counterbalance the great accession of
strength which the Emperor would receive by his alliance with England. In order
to supply the place of his two ambassadors murdered by Guasto, he sent as his
envoy first to Venice, and then to Constantinople, Paulin, a captain of foot, a
man of a daring and active spirit, and on account of these qualities thought
worthy of this service, to which he was recommended by Bellay, who had trained
him to the arts of negotiation, and made trial of his talents and address on
several occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion conceived of his courage and
abilities. Hastening to Constantinople, without regarding the dangers to which
he was exposed, he urged his master's demands with such boldness, and availed
himself of every circumstance with such dexterity, that he removed all the
Sultan's own difficulties. He silenced likewise some of the Bassas, who either
swayed by opinion, or having been gained by the Emperor, whose emissaries had
made their way even into that court, had declared in the Divan against acting
in concert with France Sandov. Histor. tom ii. 346. Jovii Hist. lib. 41. 285,
etc. 300, etc. Brantome.
. At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to sail with a powerful fleet, and
to regulate all his operations by the directions of the French King. Francis
was not equally successful in his attempts to gain the Princes of the empire.
The extraordinary rigor with which he thought it necessary to punish such of
his subjects as had embraced the Protestant opinions, in order to give some
notable evidence of his own zeal for the Catholic faith, and to wipe off the
imputation to which he was liable from his confederacy with the Turks, placed
an insuperable barrier between him and such of the Germans as interest and
inclination would have prompted most readi^y to join him Seck. lib. iii. 403.
. His chief advantage, however, over the Emperor he derived on this, as on
other occasions, from the contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the
extent of the royal authority in France, which exempted him from all the delays
and disappointments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies provide for the
expenses of government by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence his domestic
preparations were always carried on with vigor and rapidity, while those of
the Emperor, unless when quickened by some foreign supply, or some temporary
expedient, were to the last degree slow and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to oppose him, Francis took the field in
the Low Countries, against which he turned the whole weight of the war. He made
himself master of Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the key to the whole
province of Hainault; and ordered it to be fortified with great care. Turning
from thence to the right, he entered the duchy of Luxembourg, and found it in
the same defenseless state as in the former year. Meanwhile, the Emperor,
having drawn together an army composed of all the different nations subject to
his government, entered the territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had
vowed to inflict exemplary vengeance. This Prince, whose conduct and situation
were similar to that of Robert de la Mark in the first war between Charles and
Francis, resembled him likewise in his fate. Unable with his feeble army, to
face the Emperor, who advanced at the head of forty four thousand men, he
retired at his approach; and the Imperialists being at liberty to act as they
pleased, immediately invested Duren. That town, though gallantly defended, was
won by assault, all the inhabitants put to the sword, and the place itself
reduced to ashes. This dreadful example of severity struck the people of the
country with such general terror, that all the other towns, even such as were
capable of resistance, sent their keys to the Emperor; and before a body of
French, detached to his assistance, could come up, the Duke himself was obliged
to make his submission to Charles in the most abject manner. Being admitted
into the Imperial presence, he kneeled, together with eight of his principal
subjects, and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed him to remain in that
ignominious posture, and eyeing him with an haughty and implacable look,
without deigning to answer a single word, remitted him to his ministers. The
conditions, however, which they prescribed were not so rigorous as he had
reason to have expected after such a reception. He was obliged to renounce his
alliance with France and Denmark; to resign all his pretensions to the duchy
of Guelders; to enter into perpetual amity with the Emperor and King of the
Romans. In return for which all his hereditary dominions were restored, except
two towns which the Emperor kept as pledges of his fidelity during the
continuance of the war, and he was re-instated in his privileges as a Prince of
the empire. Not long after, Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of his
reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of the daughters of his brother
Ferdinand Haraei. Annal. Brabant. t. 1. 628. Becueil des Traites, t. ii. 226.
.

HAVING thus chastised the presumption of the Duke of Cleves, detached one of
his allies from Francis, and added to his dominions in the Low Countries a
considerable province which lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced toward
Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy. There, as the first fruits of his
alliance with Henry, he was joined by six thousand English, under Sir John
Wallop. The garrison, consisting of veteran troops, commanded by de la Land
and Desse, two officers of reputation, made a vigorous resistance. Francis
approached with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles covered the siege;
both were determined to hazard an engagement; and all Europe expected to see
this contest, which had continued so long, decided at last by a battle between
two great armies led by them in person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was such, as put the disadvantage manifestly on his side who should
venture to attack, and neither of them chose to run that risque: Amidst a
variety of movements, in order to draw the enemy into this snare, or to avoid
it themselves, Francis, with admirable conduct, and equal good fortune, threw
first a supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of provisions into the town,
so that the Emperor, despairing of success, withdrew into winter quarters
Bellay 405, etc.
, in order to preserve his army from being entirely ruined by the rigor of the
season.

MEANWHILE, Solomon fulfilled his engagements to the French King with great
punctuality. He himself marched into Hungary with a numerous army, and as the
Princes of the empire made no great effort to save a country which Charles, by
employing his whole force against Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there
was no appearance of any body of troops to oppose his progress. He besieged one
after another, Q^inque Ecclesiae, Alba and Gran, the three most considerable
towns in the kingdom, of which Ferdinand kept possession. The first was taken
by storm; the other two surrendered; and the whole kingdom, a small corner
excepted, was subjected to the Turkish yoke Istuanhaff. Histor. Hung. l. 15.
167. Paliavic. 160.
. About the same time, Barbarossa sailed with a fleet of an hundred and ten
galleys, and coasting along the shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio,
which he plundered and burnt; and advancing from thence to the mouth of the
Tiber, he stopped there to water. The citizens of Rome, ignorant of his
destination, and filled with terror, began to fly with such general
precipitation, that the city would have been left deserted, if they had not
resumed courage upon letters from Polin the French envoy, assuring them that no
violence or injury would be offered by the Turks to any state in alliance with
the King his master Jovii Hist. l. 43. 304, etc.
. From Ostia Barbarossa sailed to Marseilles, and being joined by the French
fleet with a body of land forces on board under the Count d'Enguien, a gallant
young Prince of the house of Bourbon, they directed their course toward Nice,
the sole retreat of the unfortunate Duke of Savoy. There, to the astonishment
and scandal of all Christendom, the Lillies of France and Crescent of Mahomet
appeared in conjunction against the fortress on which the cross of Savoy was
displayed. The town, however, was bravely defended against their combined force
by Montfort, a Savoyard gentleman, who stood a general assault, and repulsed
the enemy with great loss, before he retired into the castle. That sort,
situated upon a rock, on which the artillery made no impression, and which
could not be undermined, he held out so long, that Doria had time to approach
with his fleet, and the Marquis del Guasto to march with a body of troops from
Milan. Upon intelligence of this, the French and Turks raised the siege
Guichenon histoire de Savoye, t. 1. p. 651. Bellay, 425, etc.
; and Francis had not even the consolation of success, to render the infamy,
which he drew on himself by calling in such an auxiliary, more tolerable.

FROM the small progress of either party during this campaign, it was obvious
to what a length the war might be drawn out between two Princes, whose power
was so equally balanced, and who by their own talents or activity, could so
vary and multiply their resources. The trial they had now made of each other's
strength might have taught them the imprudence of persisting in a war, wherein
there was greater appearance of their distressing their own dominions, than of
conquering those of their adversary, and should have disposed both to wish for
peace. If Charles and Francis had been influenced by considerations of interest
or prudence alone, this, without doubt, must have been the manner in which they
would have reasoned, but the personal animosity, which mingled itself in all
their quarrels, had grown to be so violent and implacable, that for the
pleasure of gratifying it, they disregarded every thing else; and were
infinitely more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, than how to secure what
would be of advantage to themselves. No sooner then did the season force them
to suspend hostilities, than without paying any attention to the Pope's
repeated endeavors, or paternal exhortations to re-establish peace, they began
to provide for the operations of the next year with new vigor, and an activity
increasing with their hatred. Charles turned his chief attention toward
gaining the Princes of the empire, and endeavoring to rouse the formidable but
unweildy strength of the Germanic body against Francis. In order to understand
the propriety of the steps which he took for that purpose, it is necessary to
review the chief transactions in that country since the Diet of Ratisbon in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty one.

MUCH about the time that assembly broke up, Maurice succeeded his father Henry
in the government of that part of Saxony which belonged to the Albertine branch
of the Saxon family. This young Prince, then only in his twentieth year, had,
even at that early period, begun to discover the great talents which qualified
him for acting such a distinguished part in the affairs of Germany. As soon as
he entered upon the administration, he struck out into such a new and singular
path, as showed that he aimed, from the beginning, at something great and
uncommon. Though zealously attached to the Protestant opinions both from
education and principle, he refused to accede to the league of Smalkalde, being
determined, as he said, to maintain the purity of religion which was the
original object of that confederacy, but not to entangle himself in the
political interests or combinations to which it had given rise. At the same
time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles and the confederates of Smalkalde,
and perceiving which of them was most likely to prevail in the contest, instead
of that jealousy and distrust which the other Protestants expressed of all the
Emperor's designs, he affected to place in him an unbounded confidence; and
courted his favor with the utmost assiduity. When the other Protestants, in
the year fifteen hundred and forty two, either declined assisting Ferdinand in
Hungary, or afforded him reluctant and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in
person, and rendered himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage. From the same
motive, he had led to the Emperor's assistance, during the former campaign a
body of his own troops; and the gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in
all military exercises, together with his intrepidity which courted and
delighted in dangers, did not distinguish him more in the field, than his great
abilities and insinuating address won upon the Emperor's confidence and favor
Sleid. 317. Seck. l. iii. 371, 386, 428.
. While by this conduct, which appeared extraordinary to those who held the
same opinions with him concerning religion, Maurice endeavored to pay court to
the Emperor, he began to discover some degree of jealousy of his cousin the
Elector of Saxony. This, which proved in the sequel so fatal to the Elector,
had almost occasioned an open rupture between them; and soon after Maurice's
accession to the government, they both took arms with equal rage, upon account
of a dispute about the right of jurisdiction over a paltry town situated on the
Moldaw. They were prevented, however, from coming to blows by the medation of
the Landgrave of Hesse, whose daughter Maurice had married, as well as by the
powerful and authoratative admonitions of Luther Sleid. 292. Seck. l. iii. 403.
.

MEANWHILE the Pope, though extremely irritated at the Emperor's concessions to
the Protestants in the Diet of Ratisbon, was so warmly solicited on all hands,
by such as were most devoutly attached to the sea of Rome, no less than by
those whose fidelity or designs he suspected, to summon a general council, that
he found it impossible to avoid any longer calling that assembly. The
impatience for its meeting, and the expectations of great effects from its
decisions seemed to grow in proportion to the difficulty of obtaining it. He
still adhered, however, to his original resolution of holding it in some town
of Italy, where, by the number of ecclesiastics, retainers to his court, and
depending on his favor, who could repair to it without difficulty or expense,
he might influence and even direct all its proceedings. This proposition,
though often rejected by the Germans, he instructed his nuncio to the Diet held
at Spires, in the year one thousand five hundred and forty two, to renew once
more; and if he found it gave no greater satisfaction than formerly, he
empowered him, as a last concession, to propose for the place of meeting,
Trent, a city in the Tyrol, subject to the King of the Romans, and situated on
the confines between Germany and Italy. The Catholic Princes in the Diet, after
giving it as their opinion that the council might have been held with greater
advantage in Ratisbon, Cologne, or some of the great cities in the empire,
approved of the place which the Pope had named. The Protestants unanimously
expressed their dissatisfaction, declaring that they would pay no regard to a
council held without the precincts of the empire, called by the Pope's
authority, and in which he assumed the right of presiding Sleid. 291. Seck. l.
iii. 283.
.

THE Pope, without taking any notice of their objections, published the bull of
intimation, named three cardinals to preside as his legates, and appointed them
to repair to Trent before the first of November, the day he had fixed for
opening the council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a council as
sincerely as he pretended, he would not have pitched on such an improper time
for calling it. Instead of that general union and tranquillity, without which
the deliberations of a council could neither be conducted with security, nor
attended with authority, such a fierce war was just kindled between the Emperor
and Francis, as rendered it impossible for the ecclesiastics from many parts of
Europe to resort thither in safety. The legates, accordingly, remained several
months at Trent without any persons appearing, except a few prelates from the
ecclesiastical state; upon which the Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and
contempt which this drew upon him from the enemies of the church, recalled them
and prorogued the council F. Paul, p. 97. Sleid 296.
.

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the papal see, at the very time that the German
Protestants took every occasion of pouring contempt upon it, the Emperor and
King of the Romans found it necessary not only to connive at their conduct, but
to court their favor by repeated acts of indulgence. In the same Diet of
Spires, wherein they had protested in the most disrespectful terms against
assembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand, who depended on their aid for the
defense of Hungary, not only permitted that protestation to be inserted in the
records of the Diet, but renewed in their favor all the Emperor's concessions
at Ratisbon, adding to them whatever they could demand for their farther
security. Among other particulars, he granted a suspension of a decree of the
Imperial chamber against the city of Goslar, one of those which had entered
into the league of Smalkalde, on account of its having seized the
ecclesiastical revenues within its domains, and enjoined Henry Duke of
Brunswick to desist from his attempts to carry that decree into execution. But
Henry, a furious bigot, and no less obstinate than rash in all his
undertakings, continuing to disquiet the people of Goslar by his incursions,
the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, that they might not suffer any
member of the Smalkaldic body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, declared
war in form against Henry, and in the space of a few weeks stripped him entirely
of his dominions, and drove him as a wretched exile to take refuge in the court
of Bavaria. By this act of vengeance, no less severe than sudden, they filled
all Germany with dread of their power, and the confederates of Smalkalde
appeared, by this first effort of their arms, to be as prompt as capable to
protect those who had joined their association Sleid. 296. Commemoratio
succincta causarum Belli, etc. a Smalcaldicis, contra Hen. Brunsw. ab iisdem
edita; ap. Scardium. Tom. ii. 307.
.

EMBOLDENED by so many concessions in their favor, as well as by the progress
which their opinions daily made, the Princes of the league of Smalkalde took a
solemn protest against the Imperial chamber, and declined its jurisdiction for
the future, because that court had not been visited or reformed according to
the decree of Ratisbon, and continued to discover a most indecent partiality in
all its proceedings. Not long after this, they ventured a step farther, and
protesting against the recess of a Diet held at Nuremberg, which provided for
the defense of Hungary, refused to furnish their contingent for that purpose,
unless the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full security granted them in
every point with regard to religion Sleid. 304, 307. Seck. l. iii. 404, 416
.

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants had proceeded, and such their
confidence in their own power, when the Emperor returned from the
Low Countries, to hold a Diet, which he had summoned to meet at Spires. The
respect due to the Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs which were
to be laid before it, rendered this assembly extremely full. All the Electors,
a great number of Princes ecclesiastical and secular, with the deputies of most
of the cities were present. Charles soon perceived that this was not a time to
offend the jealous spirit of the Protestants, by asserting in any high tone the
authority and doctrines of the church, or by abridgi^g in the smallest article,
the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that, on the contrary, if he expected
any support from them, or wished to preserve Germany from intestine disorders
while he was engaged in a foreign war, he must sooth them by new concessions,
and a more ample extension of their religious privileges. He began,
accordingly, with courting the Elector of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, the
heads of the Protestant party, and by giving up some things in their favor,
and granting liberal promises with regard to others, he secured himself from
any danger of opposition on their part. Having ascertained this capital point,
he then ventured to address the Diet with greater freedom. He began by
representing his own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to two things most
essential to Christendom, the procuring of a general council, in order to
compose the religious dissensions which had unhappily arisen in Germany, and
the providing some proper means for checking the formidable progress of the
Turkish arms; but that his pious endeavors had been entirely defeated by the
unjustifiable ambition of the French King, who having wantonly kindled the
flame of war in Europe, which had been so lately extinguished by the truce of
Nice, rendered it impossible for the fathers of the church to assemble in
council, or to deliberate with security; and obliged him to employ those forces
in his own defense, which, with greater satisfaction to himself, as well as
more honor to Christendom, he would have turned against the Infidels: That
Francis, not thinking it enough to have called him off from opposing the
Infidels, had, with unexampled impiety, invited them into the heart of
Christendom, and joining his arms to theirs, had openly attacked the Duke of
Savoy, a member of the empire. That Barbarossa's fleet was now in one of the
ports of France, waiting only the return of spring, to carry terror and
desolation to the coast of some Christian state. The in such a situation it was
folly to think of distant expeditions against the Turk, or of marching to
oppose his armies in Hungary, while such a powerful ally received him into the
center of Europe, and gave him footing there. That prudence dictated to oppose,
first of all, the nearest and most imminent danger, and by humbling the power
of France, to deprive Solomon of the advantages, which he derived from the
unnatural confederat^ ^^^ed between him and a Monarch, who still arrogated the
name of Most Christian. That, in truth, a war against the French King and the
Sultan ought to be considered as the same thing; and that every advantage
gained over the former, was a severe and sensible blow to the latter. That,
therefore, he now demanded their aid against Francis, not merely as an enemy of
the Germanic body, or of him who was its head, but as an avowed ally of the
Infidels, and a public enemy to the Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent invective of the Emperor, the
King of the Romans stood up, and related the rapid conquests of the Sultan in
Hungary, occasioned, as he said, by the fatal necessity imposed on his brother
of employing his arms against France; and the ambassadors of Savoy gave a
detail of Barbarossa's operations at Nice, and of the ravages which he had
committed on that coast. All these, added to the general indignation which
Francis's unprecedented union with the Turks excited in Europe, made such an
impression on the Diet as the Emperor wished, and disposed most of the members
to grant him such effectual aid as he had demanded. The ambassadors Francis had
sent to explain the motives of his conduct, were not permitted to enter the
bounds of the empire; and the apology which they published for their master,
vindicating his alliance with Solomon, by examples drawn from Scripture, and
the practice of Christian Princes, was little regarded by men, irritated
already, or prejudiced against him to such a degree, as to be incapable of
allowing their proper weight to any arguments in his behalf.

SUCH being the favorable disposition of the Germans, Charles perceived that
nothing could now obstruct his gaining all that he aimed at, but the fears and
jealousies of the Protestants, which he determined to quiet by granting every
thing, that the utmost solicitude of these passions could desire for the
security of their religion. With this view, he consented to a recess, whereby
all the rigorous edicts, hitherto issued against the Protestants were
suspended; a council either general or national to be assembled in Germany was
declared necessary in order to re-establish peace in the church; until one of
these should be held, (which the Emperor undertook to bring about as soon as
possible) the free and public exercise of the Protestant religion was
authorized; the Imperial chamber was to give no molestation to the Protestants;
and when the term, for which the present judges in that court were elected,
should expire, persons duly qualified were then to be admitted as members,
without any distinction on account of religion. In return for these
extraordinary acts of indulgence, the Protestants concurred, with the other
members of the Diet, in declaring war against Francis, in the name of the
empire; in voting the Emperor a body of twenty-four thousand foot, and four
thousand horse, to be maintained at the public expense for six months, and to
be employed against France; and at the same time the Diet imposed a poll-tax to
be levied throughout all Germany, on every person without exception, for the
support of the war against the Turks.

CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention to the minute and intricate
detail of particulars necessary toward conducting the deliberations of a
numerous and divided assembly to such a successful period, negociated a
separate peace with the King of Denmark, who, though he had hitherto performed
nothing considerable in consequence of his alliance with Francis, had it in his
power, however, to make a formidable diversion in favor of that Monarch Dumont
Corpse Diplom. t. iv. p. ii. p. 274.
. At the same time, he did not neglect proper applications to the King of
England, in order to rouse him to more vigorous efforts against their common
enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this; for such events had
happened in Scotland, as inflamed Henry to the most violent pitch of resentment
against Francis. Having concluded with the parliament of Scotland, a treaty of
marriage between his son and their young Queen, by which he reckoned himself
secure of effecting the union of the two kingdoms, which had been long desired,
and often attempted without success by his predecessors, Mary of Guise, the
Queen mother Cardinal Beatoun, and other partisans of France, (...) means no^
only to break off the match, but to alienate the Scottish nation entirely from
the friendship of England, and to strengthen its ancient attachment to France.
Henry, however, did not abandon an object of so much importance. As the
humbling of Francis, besides the pleasure of taking revenge upon an enemy who
had disappointed a favorite measure, appeared the most effectual method of
bringing the Scots to accept once more of the treaty which they had rejected;
he was so fond of this scheme, that he was ready to second whatever the Emperor
could propose to be attempted against that Monarch. The plan, accordingly,
which they concerted, was such as, if it had been punctually executed, must
have ruined France in the first place, and would have augmented so prodigiously
the Emperor's power and territories as might in the end have proved fatal to
the liberties of Europe. They agreed to invade France, each with an army of
twenty-five thousand men, and, without losing time in besieging the frontier
towns, to advance directly toward the interior provinces, and to join their
forces near Paris Herbert 245. Bellay, 448.
.

MEANWHILE, Francis stood alone in opposition to all the enemies that Charles
was mustering against him. Solomon was the only ally who had not deserted him;
but the assistance he received from him had rendered him so odious to all
Christendom, that he resolved rather to forego all the advantages of his
friendship, than to become, on that account, the object of general horror and
detestation. For this reason, he dismissed Barbarossa as soon as winter was
over, who, after ravaging the coasts of Naples and Tuscany, returned to
Constantinople. As Francis could not hope to equal the forces of his rival, he
endeavored to supply that defect by dispatch, which was more in his power, and
to get the start of him in taking the field. Early in the spring the Count
d'Enguien invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont, which the Marquis de Guasto,
the Imperial general, having surprised the former year, considered as of so
much importance, that he had fortified it at great expense. The Count pushed
the siege with such vigor, that Guasto, fond of his own conquest, and seeing
no other way of saving it from falling into the hands of the French, resolved
to hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began his march from Milan for
this purpose, and as he was at no pains to conceal his intention, it was soon
known in the French camp. Enguien, a gallant and enterprizing young man, wished
passionately to try the fortune of a battle; his troops desired it with no less
ardour; but the peremptory injunction of the King not to venture a general
engagement, flowing from a prudent attention to the present situation of
affairs, as well as from the remembrance of former disasters, tied up his
hands. Unwilling, however, to abandon Carignan, when it was just ready to
yield, and eager to distinguish his command by some memorable action, he
dispatched Monluc to court, in order to lay before the King the advantages of
fighting the enemy, and the hopes which he had of victory. The King referred
the matter to the council; all the ministers declared, one after another,
against fighting, and supported their sentiments by reasons extremely
plausible. While they were delivering their opinions, Monluc, who was permitted
to be present, discovered such visible and extravagant symptoms of impatience
to speak, as well as such dissatisfaction with what he heard, that Francis,
diverted with his appearance, called on him to declare what he could offer in
reply to sentiments which seemed to be as just as they were general. Upon this,
Monluc, a plai^, but spirited soldier, and of known courage, represented the
good condition of the troops, their eagerness to meet the enemy in the field,
their confidence in their officers, together with the everlasting infamy which
the declining of a battle would bring on the French arms; and urged his
arguments with such lively impetuosity, and such a flow of military eloquence,
as gained over to his opinion, not only the King, naturally fond of daring
actions, but several of the council. Francis, catching the same enthusiasm
which had animated his troops, suddenly started up, and having lifted his hands
to heaven, and implored the divine protection and aid, he then addressed
himself to Monluc, "Go," says he, "return to Piedmont, and fight in the name of
God Memoires de Monluc.
."

NO sooner was it known that the King had given Enguien leave to fight the
Imperialists, than such was the martial ardour of the gallant and high spirited
gentlemen of that age, that the court was quite deserted, every person desirous
of reputation, or capable of service, hurrying to Piedmont in order to share,
as volunteers, in the danger and glory of the action. Encouraged by the arrival
of so many brave officers, Enguien immediately prepared for battle, nor did
Guasto decline the combat. The number of cavalry was almost equal, but the
Imperial infantry exceeded the French by at least ten thousand men. They met
near Cerisoles, in an open plain, which afforded to neither any advantage of
ground, and both had full time to form their army in proper order. The shock
was such as might have been expected between veteran troops, violent and
obstinate. The French cavalry running to the charge with their usual vivacity,
bore down every thing that opposed them, but on the other hand, the steady and
disciplined valor of the Spanish infantry having forced the body which they
encountered to give way, victory remained in suspense, ready to declare for
which ever general could make the best use of that critical moment. Guasto,
engaged in that part of his army which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of
falling into the hands of the French, whose vengeance he dreaded on account of
the murder of Rincon and Fregoso, lost his presence of mind, and forgot to
order a large body of reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with admirable
courage and equal conduct, supported, at the head of his gens d'armes, such of
his battalions as began to yield; and at the same time he ordered the Swiss in
his service, who had been victorious wherever they fought, to fall upon the
Spaniards. This motion proved decisive. All that followed was confusion and
slaughter. The Marquis de Guasto wounded in the thigh, escaped only by the
swiftness of his horse. The victory of the French was complete, ten thousand of
the Imperialists being slain, and a considerable number, with all their tents,
baggage and artillery, taken. On the part of the conquerors, their joy was
without allay, a few only being killed, and among these no officer of
distinction Bellay, 429, etc. Memoires de Monluc. Jovii hist. l. 44. p. 327. 6.
.

THIS splendid action, besides the reputation with which it was attended,
delivered France from an imminent danger, as it ruined the army with which
Guasto had intended to invade the country between the Rhosne and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular forces to oppose his progress.
But it was not in Francis's power to pursue the victory with such vigor as to
reap the advantages which it might have yielded; for though the Milanese
remained now almost defenseless; though the inhabitants who had long murmured
under the rigor of the Imperial government, were ready to throw off the yoke;
though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the King to seize this happy
opportunity of recovering a country, the acquisition of which had been long his
favorite object; yet as the Emperor and King of England were preparing to
break in upon the opposite frontier of France with such superior force, it
became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts of conquest to the public safety,
and to recall twelve thousand of Enguien's best troops to be employed in defense
of the kingdom. Enguien's subsequent operations were, of consequence, so
languid and inconsiderable, that the reduction of Carignan and some other towns
in Piedmont, was all he gained by his great victory at Cerisoles Bellay, 438,
etc.
.

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the field, but he appeared, toward
the beginning of June, at the head of an army more numerous, and better
appointed than any which he had hitherto led against France. It amounted almost
to fifty thousand men, and part of it having reduced Luxembourg and some other
towns in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it, he now marched with the
whole toward the frontiers of Champagne. Charles, according to his agreement
with the King of England, ought to have advanced directly toward Paris; and
the Dauphin, who commanded the only army to which Francis trusted for the
security of his dominions, was in no condition to oppose him. But the success
with which the French had defended Provence in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-six, had taught them the most effectual method of
distressing an invading enemy. Champagne, a country abounding more in vines
than corn, was incapable of maintaining a great army, and before the Emperor's
approach, whatever could be of any use to him had been carried off or
destroyed. This rendered it necessary for him to be master of some places of
strength, in order to secure the convoys on which alone he now perceived that
he must depend for subsistence; and he found the frontier towns so ill provided
for defense, that he hoped it would not be a work either of much time or
difficulty to reduce them. Accordingly, Ligny and Commercy, which he first
attacked, surrendered after a short resistance. He then invested St. Disier,
which, though it commanded an important pass on the Marne, was destitute of
every thing necessary for sustaining a siege. But the Count de Sancerre and M.
de la Land, who had acquired such reputation by the defense of Landrecy,
generously threw themselves into the town, and undertook to hold it out to the
last extremity. The Emperor soon found how capable they were of making good
their promise, and that he could not expect to take the town without besieging
it in form. This accordingly he undertook; and as it was his nature never to
abandon any enterprise in which he had once engaged, he persisted in it with an
inconsiderate obstinacy.

THE King of England's preparations for the campaign were complete long before
the Emperor's; but as he did not choose, on the one hand, to encounter alone
the whole power of France, and was unwilling, on the other, that his troops
should remain unactive, he took that opportunity of chastising the Scots, by
sending his fleet, together with a considerable part of his infantry, under the
Earl of Hertford, to invade their country. Hertford executed his commission
with vigor, plundered and burnt Edinburgh and Leith, laid waste the adjacent
country, and reimbarked his men with such dispatch, that they joined their
Sovereign soon after his landing in France. When Henry arrived in that kingdom,
he found the Emperor engaged in the siege of St. Disier; an ambassador,
however, whom he sent to congratulate the English Monarch on his safe arrival
on the continent, solicited him to march, in terms of the treaty, directly to
Paris. But Charles had set his ally such an ill example of fulfilling the
conditions of their confederacy with exactness, that Henry, observing him
employ his time and forces in taking towns for his own behoof, saw no reason
why he should not attempt the reduction of some places that lay conveniently
for himself. Without paying any regard to the Emperor's remonstrances, he
immediately invested Bologne, and commanded the Duke of Norfolk to press the
siege of Montreuil, which had been begun before his arrival, by a body of
Flemings, in conjunction with some English troops. While Charles and Henry
showed such attention each to his own interest, they both neglected the common
cause; and, instead of the union and confidence requisite toward conducting
the great plan they had formed, they early discovered a mutual jealousy of each
other, which, by degrees, begot distrust, and ended in open hatred Herbert.
.

MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied industry, drawn together an army
capable, as well from the number as from the valor of the troops, of making
head against the enemy. But the Dauphin, who still acted as general, prudently
declining a battle, the loss of which would have endangered the kingdom,
satisfied himself with harassing the Emperor with his light troops, cutting off
his convoys, and laying waste the country around him. Though extremely
distressed by these operations, Charles still pressed the siege of St. Disier,
which Sancerre defended with astonishing fortitude and conduct. He stood
repeated assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all; and undismayed even by the
death of the brave de la Land, who was killed by a cannon ball, he continued
to show the same bold countenance and obstinate resolution. At the end of five
weeks he was still capable of holding out some time longer, when an artifice of
Granvelle's induced him to surrender. That crafty politician, having
intercepted the key to the cipher which the Duke of Guise used in communicating
intelligence to Sancerre, forged a letter in his name, authorizing Sancerre to
capitulate, as the King, though highly satisfied with his behavior, thought it
imprudent to hazard a battle for his relief. This letter he conveyed into the
town in a manner which could raise no suspicion, and the governor fell into the
snare. Even then, he obtained such honorable conditions as his gallant defense
merited, and among others a cessation of hostilities for eight days, at the
expiration of which he bound himself to open the gates, if Francis, during that
time, did not attack the Imperial army, and throw fresh troops into the town
Brantome, tom. vi. 489.
. Thus Sancerre, by detaining the Emperor so long before an inconsiderable
place, afforded his Sovereign full time to assemble all his forces, and, what
rarely falls to an officer in such an inferior command, acquired the glory of
having saved his country.

AS soon as St. Disier surrendered, the Emperor advanced into the heart of
Champagne, but Sancerre's obstinate resistance had damped his sanguine hopes of
penetrating to Paris, and led him seriously to reflect on what he might expect
before towns of greater strength, and defended by more numerous garrisons. At
the same time, the procuring subsistence for his army was attended with great
difficulty, which increased in proportion as he withdrew from his own frontier.
He had lost a great number of his best troops in the siege of St. Disier, and
many fell daily in skirmishes, which it was not in his power to avoid, though
they wasted his army insensibly, without leading to any decisive action. The
season advanced apace, and he had not yet the command either of a sufficient
extent of territory, or of any such considerable town as rendered it safe to
winter in the enemy's country. Great arrears too, were due to his soldiers, who
were upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while he knew not from what
funds to satisfy them. All these considerations induced him to listen to the
overtures of peace which a Spanish Dominican, the confessor of h^^ sister the
Queen of France, had secretly made to his confessor, a monk of the same order.
In consequence of this, plenipotentiaries were named on both sides, and began
their conferences in Chausse, a small village near Chalons. At the same time,
Charles, either from a desire of making one great final effort against France,
or merely to gain a pretext for deserting his ally and concluding a separate
peace, sent an ambassador formally to require Henry, according to the
stipulation in their treaty, to advance toward Paris. While he expected a
return from him, and waited the issue of the conferences at Chausse, he
continued to march forward, though in the utmost distress from scarcity of
provisions. But at last, by a fortunate motion on his part, or through some
neglect or treachery on that of the French, he surprised first Espernay and
then Chateau Thierry, in both which were considerable magazines. No sooner was
it known that these towns, the latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than that great capital, defenseless,
and susceptible of any violent alarm in proportion to its greatness, was filled
with consternation. The inhabitants, as if the Emperor had been already at
their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and despair, many sending their
wives and children down the Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans, and the towns
upon the Loire. Francis himself, more afflicted with this than with any other
event during his reign, and sensible as well of the triumph his rival would
enjoy in insulting his capital, as of the danger to which the kingdom was
exposed, could not refrain, in the first emotion of his surprise and sorrow,
from crying out, "How dear, O my God, do I pay for this crown, which I thought
thou had granted me freely Brantome, tom. vi. 381.
." But recovering in a moment from this sudden sally of peevishness and
impatience, he devoutly added, "Thy will, however, be done;" and proceeded to
issue the necessary orders for opposing the enemy with his usual composure and
presence of mind. The Dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris, which
revived the courage of the affrighted citizens; he threw a strong garrison into
Meaux, and by a forced march, got into Ferte, between the Imperialists and the
capital.

UPON this, the Emperor who began again to feel the want of provisions,
perceiving that the Dauphin still prudently declined a battle, and not daring
to attack his camp with forces so much shattered and reduced by hard service,
turned suddenly to the right, and began to fall back toward Soissons. Having
about this time received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to abandon the
sieges of Bologne and Montreuil, of both which he expected every moment to get
possession, he thought himself absolved from all obligations of adhering to the
treaty with him, and at full liberty to consult his own interest in what manner
soever he pleased. He consented, therefore, to renew the conference, which the
surprise of Espernay had broke off. To conclude a peace between two Princes,
one of whom greatly desired, and the other greatly needed it, did not require a
long negotiation. It was signed at Crespy, a small town near Meaux, on the
eighteenth of September. The chief articles of it were, That all the conquests
which either party had made since the truce of Nice shall be restored; that the
Emperor shall give in marriage to the Duke of Orleans, either his own eldest
daughter, or the second daughter of his brother Ferdinand; that if he chose to
bestow on him his own daughter, he shall settle on her all the provinces of the
Low Countries, to be erected into an independent state, which shall descend to
the male issue of the marriage; that if he determined to give ^is niece, he
shall, with her, grant him the investiture of Milan and its dependencies; that
he shall within four months declare which of these two Princesses he had
pitched upon, and fulfill the respective conditions upon the consummation of the
marriage, which shall take place within a year from the date of the treaty;
that as soon as the Duke of Orleans is put in possession either of the
Low Countries or of Milan, Francis shall restore to the Duke of Savoy all that
he now possesses of his territories, except Pignerol and Montmilian; that
Francis shall renounce all pretensions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the
sovereignty of Flanders and Artois, and Charles shall give up his claim to the
duchy of Burgundy and county of Charolois; that Francis shall give no aid to
the exiled King of Navarre; that both Monarchs shall join in making war upon
the Turk, toward which the King shall furnish, when required by the Emperor
and empire, six hundred men at arms, and ten thousand foot Recueil des ^rai^ez,
t. i. 227. Bellus de causis Pacis Crepiac. in Actis Erudit. Lips. 1763.
.

BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace arising from the distress of his
army through want of provisions; from the difficulty of retreating out of
France; and the impossibility of securing winter quarters there; the Emperor
was influenced by other considerations, more distant, indeed, but not less
weighty. The Pope was offended to a great degree, as well at his concessions to
the Protestants in the late Diet, as at his consenting to call a council, and
to admit of public disputations in Germany, with a view of determining the
doctrines in controversy; and considering both these steps as sacrilegious
encroachments on the jurisdiction as well as privileges of the holy see, he had
addressed to him a remonstrance, rather than a letter on this subject, written
with such acrimony of language, and in a style of such high authority, as
discovered more of an intention to draw on a quarrel, than of a desire to
reclaim him. This ill humor was not a little enflamed by the Emperor's league
with Henry, which being contracted with an heretic, excommunicated by the
apostolic see, appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was not less
dreaded by him, than that of Francis with Solomon. Paul's son and grandson,
highly incensed at the Emperor for having refused to gratify them with regard
to the alienation of Parma and Placentia, contributed by their infusions to
sour and disgust him still more. To all which was added the powerful operation
of the flattery and promises which Francis incessantly employed to gain him.
Though from his desire of maintaining a neutrality, the Pope had hitherto
suppressed his own resentment, had eluded the artifices of his own family, and
resisted the solicitations of the French King, it was not safe to rely much on
the steadiness of a man whom his passions, his friends, and his interest
combined to shake. The union of the Pope with France, Charles well knew would
instantly expose his dominions in Italy to be attacked. The Venetians, he
foresaw, would probably follow the example of a Pontiff, who was considered as
a model of a political wisdom among the Italians; and thus, at a juncture, when
he felt himself scarce equal to the burden of the present war, he would be
overwhelmed with the weight of a new confederacy against him F. Paul, 100.
Pall^vic, 163.
. At the same time, the Turks, almost unresisted, made such progress in
Hungary, reducing town after town, that they approached near to the confines of
the Austrian provinces Isluanhaffii. Hist. Hung. 177.
. Above all these, the extraordinary progress of the Protestant doctrines in
Germany, and the dangerous combination into which the Princes of that
profession had entered, called for his immediate attention. Almost one half of
Germany had revolted from the established church; the fidelity of the rest was
much shaken; the nobility of Austria had demanded of Ferdinand the free
exercise of religion Sleid. 285.
; the Bohemians, among whom some seeds of the doctrines of Huss still remained,
openly favored the new opinions; the archbishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare
among ecclesiastics, had begun the reformation of his diocese; nor was it
possible, unless some timely and effectual check were given to the spirit of
innovation, to foresee where it would end. He himself had been a witness, in
the late Diet, to the peremptory and decisive tone which the Protestants had
now assumed; and had seen how, from confidence in their number and union, they
had forgotten the humble style of their first petitions, having grown to such
boldness as openly to despise the Pope, and to show no great reverence for the
Imperial dignity itself. If, therefore, he wished to maintain either the
ancient religion, or his own authority, and would not choose to dwindle into a
mere nominal head of the empire, some vigorous effort was requisite, which
could not be made during a war that required the greatest exertion of his
strength against a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to peace, he had the address to frame the
treaty of Crespy, so as to promote all the ends which he had in view. By coming
to an agreement with Francis, he took from the Pope all prospect of advantage,
in courting the friendship of that Monarch, in preference to his. By the
proviso with regard to a war with the Turks, he not only deprived Solomon of a
powerful ally, but turned the arms of that ally against him. By a private
article, not inserted in the treaty, that it might not raise any unseasonable
alarm, he agreed with Francis that both should exert all their influence and
power, in order to procure a general council, to assert its authority, and to
exterminate the Protestant heresy out of their dominions. This cut off all
hopes of assistance which the confederates of Smalkalde might expect from the
French King Seck. l. iii. 496.
; and lest their solicitations, or his jealousy of an ancient rival, should
hereafter tempt Francis to forget this engagement, he left him embarassed with
a war against England, which would put it out of his power to take any part in
the affairs of Germany.

HENRY, possessed at all times with an high idea of his own power and
importance, felt, in the most sensible manner, the neglect with which the
Emperor had treated him in concluding a separate peace. But the situation of
his affairs was such as somewhat alleviated the mortification which this
occasioned. For though he was obliged to recall the Duke of Norfolk from the
siege of Montreuil, because the Flemish troops received orders to retire,
Bologne had surrendered before the negociations at Crespy were brought to an
issue. While elated with vanity on account of this conquest, and inflamed with
indignation against the Emperor, the ambassadors whom Francis sent to make
overtures of peace, found him too arrogant to grant what was moderate or
equitable. His demands were indeed extravagant, and made in the tone of a
conqueror; that Francis should renounce his alliance with Scotland, and not
only pay up the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the money which he had
expended in the present war. Francis, though sincerely desirous of peace, and
willing to yield a great deal, in order to obtain it, being now free from the
pressure of the Imperial arms, rejected these ignominious propositions with
disdain; and Henry departing for England, hostilities continued between the two
nations Mem. de Ribier, t. i. p. 572. Herbert, 244.
.

THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to the people of France, whom it
delivered from the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into the heart of the
kingdom, was loudly complained of by the Dauphin. He considered it as a
manifest proof of the King his father's extraordinary partiality toward his
younger brother, now Duke of Orleans, and complained that from his eagerness to
gain an establishment for a favorite son, he had sacrificed the honor of the
kingdom, and renounced the most ancient and valuable rights of the crown. But
as he durst not venture to offend the King by refusing to ratify it, though
extremely desirous at the same time of securing to himself the privilege of
reclaiming what was now alienated so much to his detriment, he secretly
protested, in presence of some of his adherents, against the whole transaction;
and declared, whatever he should be obliged to do in order to confirm it, null
in itself, and void of all obligation. The parliament of Thoulouse, probably by
the instigation of his partisans, did the same Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235,
238.
. But Francis, highly pleased as well with having delivered his subjects from
the miseries of an invasion, as with the prospect of acquiring an independent
settlement for his son, at no greater price than the renouncing conquests to
which he had no just claim; titles which had hitherto proved the source of
expense or disasters to the nation; and rights grown to be obsolete, and of no
value; ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles, within the time prescribed
by the treaty, declared his intention of giving Ferdinand's daughter in
marriage to the Duke of Orleans, together with the duchy of Milan, as her
dowry Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 238.
. Every circumstance seemed to promise the continuance of peace. The Emperor,
cruelly afflicted with the gout, appeared to be in no condition to undertake
any enterprise where great activity was requisite, or much fatigue to be
endured. He himself felt this, or wished at least that it should be believed;
and being so much disabled by this excrutiating distemper, when a French
ambassador followed him to Brussels, in order to be present at his ratification
of the treaty of peace, that it was with the utmost difficulty he signed his
name; he observed, that there was no great danger of his violating these
articles, as a hand that could scarce hold a pen, was little able to brandish a
lance.

THE violence of his disease confined the Emperor several months in Brussels,
and was the apparent cause of putting off the execution of the vast schemes
which he had formed in order to humble the Protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For, how prevalent soever the motives
were which determined him to undertake this enterprise, the nature of that
great body which he was about to attack, as well as the situation of his own
affairs, made it necessary to deliberate long, to proceed with caution, and not
to throw aside too suddenly the veil under which he had hitherto concealed his
real sentiments and schemes. He was sensible that the Protestants, conscious of
their own strength, but under continual apprehensions of his designs, had all
the boldness of a powerful party, and all the jealousy of a feeble faction; and
were no less quick-sighted to discern the first appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the same time, he continued
involved in a Turkish war; and though, in order to deliver himself from this
encumbrance, he had determined to send an envoy to the Port, with most
advantageous, and even submissive overtures of peace, the resolutions of that
haughty court were so uncertain, that before these were known, it would have
been the height of imprudence to have kindled the flames of civil war in his
own dominions.

UPON this account, he appeared dissatisfied with a bull issued by the Pope
immediately after the peace of Crespy, summoning the council to assemble at
Trent early next spring, and exhorting all Christian Princes to embrace the
opportuity that the present happy interval of tranquillity afforded them, of
suppressing those heresies which threatened to subvert whatever was sacred or
venerable among Christians. But after such a slight expression of dislike, as
was necessary, in order to cover his designs, he determined to countenance the
council, which might become no inconsiderable instrument toward accomplishing
his projects, and therefore not only appointed ambassadors to appear there in
his name, but ordered the ecclesiastics in his dominions to attend at the time
prefixed F. Paul, 104.
.

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Imperial Diet, after several
prorogations, was opened at Worms. The Protestants, who enjoyed the free
exercise of their religion by a very precarious tenure, having no other
security for it than the recess of the last Diet, which was to continue in
force only until the meeting of a council, wished earnestly to establish that
important privilege upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a perpetual, not
a temporary title. But, instead of offering them any additional security,
Ferdinand opened the Diet with observing, that there were two points, chiefly,
which required consideration; the prosecution of the war against the Turks, and
the state of religion; that the former was the most urgent, as Solomon, after
conquering the greatest part of Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the
Austrian provinces; that the Emperor, who, from the beginning of his reign, had
neglected no opportunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and with the hazard
of his own person, had resisted his attacks, being animated still with the same
zeal, had now consented to stop short in the career of his success against
France, that, in conjunction with his ancient rival, he might turn his arms
with greater vigor against the common adversary of the Christian faith; that
it became all the members of the empire to second these pious endeavors of its
head; that, therefore, they ought, without delay, to vote him such effectual
aid as both their duty, and their interest, called upon them to furnish; that
the controversies about religion were so intricate, and of such difficult
discussion, as to give no hope of its being possible to bring them at present
to any final issue; that by perseverance and repeated solicitations the Emperor
had at length prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for which they had so
often wished and petitioned; that the time appointed for its meeting was now
come, and both parties ought to wait for its decrees, and submit to them as the
decisions of the universal church.

THE popish members of the Diet received this declaration with great applause,
and signified their entire acquiescence in every particular which it contained.
The Protestants expressed great surprise at propositions, which were so
manifestly repugnant to the recess of the former Diet; they insisted that the
questions with regard to religion, as first in dignity and importance, ought to
come first under deliberation; that alarming as the progress of the Turks was
to all Germany, the securing the free exercise of their religion touched them
still more nearly, nor could they prosecute a foreign war with spirit, while
solicitous and concerned about their domestic tranquillity; that if the latter
were once rendered firm and permanent, they would concur with their countrymen
in pushing the former, and yield to none of them in activity or zeal. But if
the danger from the Turkish arms was indeed so imminent, as not to admit of
such a delay as would be occasioned by an immediate examination of the
controverted points in religion, they required that a Diet should be instantly
appointed, to which the final settlement of their religious disputes should be
referred; and that, in the mean time, the decree of the former Diet, concerning
religion, should be explained in a point which they deemed essential. By the
recess of Spires it was provided, that they should enjoy unmolested the public
exercise of their religion, until the meeting of a legal council; but as the
Pope had now called a council, to which Ferdinand had required them to submit,
they began to suspect that their adversaries might take advantage of an
ambiguity in the terms of the recess, and pretending that the event therein
mentioned had taken place, might pronounce them to be no longer entitled to the
same indulgence. In order to guard against this interpretation, they renewed
their former remonstrances against a council called to meet without the bounds
of the empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and in which he assumed the
right of presiding; and declared, that notwithstanding the convocation of any
such illegal assembly, they still held the recess of the late Diet to be in
full force.

AT other junctures, when the Emperor thought it of advantage to sooth and gain
the Protestants, he had devised expedients for giving them satisfaction, with
regard to demands seemingly more extravagant; but his views at present being
very different, Ferdinand, by his command, adhered inflexibly to his first
propositions, and would make no concessions which had the most remote tendency
to throw discredit on the council, or to weaken its authority. The Protestants,
on their part, were no less inflexible; and after much time spent in fruitless
endeavors to convince each other, they came to no conclusion. Nor did the
presence of the Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at Worms, contribute in
any degree to render the Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced that they
were maintaining the cause of God and of truth, they showed themselves superior
to the allurements of interest, or the suggestions of fear; and in proportion
as the Emperor redoubled his solicitations, or discovered his designs, their
boldness seems to have increased. At last they openly declared, that they would
not even deign to vindicate their tenets in presence of a council, assembled
not to examine, but to condemn them; and that they would pay no regard to an
assembly held under the influence of a Pope, who had already precluded himself
from all title to act as a judge, by his having stigmatized their opinions with
the name of heresy, and denounced against them the heaviest censures, which, in
the plenitude of his usurped power, he could inflict Sleid. 343, etc. Seck.
iii. 543, etc. Thuan. Histor. lib. ii. p. 56.
.

WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well as firmness, rejected all
intercourse with the council, and refused their assent to the Imperial demands
in respect to the Turkish war, Maurice of Saxony alone showed an inclination to
gratify the Emperor with regard to both. Though he professed an inviolable
regard for the Protestant religion, he assumed an appearance of moderation
peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the favorable sentiments that the
Emperor already entertained of him, and gradually paved the way for executing
the ambitious designs which always occupied his active and enterprizing mind
Seck. iii. 571.
. His example, however, had little influence upon such as agreed with him in
their religious opinions; and Charles perceived, that he could not hope either
to procure present aid from the Protestants against the Turks, or to quiet
their fears and jealousies on account of their religion. But as his schemes
were not yet ripe for execution, nor his preparations so far advanced that he
could force their compliance, or punish their obstinacy, he artfully concealed
his own intentions; and that he might augment their security, he appointed a
Diet to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in order to adjust what was now
left undetermined; and previous to it, he agreed that a certain number of
divines of each party should meet, in order to confer upon the points in
dispute Sleid. 351.
.

BUT how far soever this appearance of a desire to maintain the present
tranquillity might have imposed upon the Protestants, the Emperor was incapable
of such uniform and thorough dissimulation, as to hide altogether from their
view the dangerous designs which he was meditating against them. Herman Count
de Wied, Archbishop and Elector of Cologne, a prelate, conspicuous for his
virtue and primitive simplicity of manners, though not more distinguished for
learning than the other descendants of noble families, who in that age
possessed most of the great benefices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the doctrines of the Reformers, had begun in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty-three, with the assistance of Melacthon and Bucer, to abolish the
ancient superstition in his diocese, and to introduce in its place the rites
established among the Protestants. But the canons of his cathedral, who were
not possessed with the same spirit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal the
levelling genius of the new sect would prove to their dignity and wealth,
opposed, from the beginning, this unprecedented enterprise of their archbishop
with all the zeal flowing from reverence for old institutions, heightened by
concern for their own interest. This opposition, which the archbishop
considered only as a new argument to demonstrate the necessity of a
reformation, neither shook his resolution nor slackened his ardour in
prosecuting his plan. The canons, perceiving all their endeavors to check his
career to be ineffectual, solemnly protested against his proceedings, and
appealed for redress to the Pope and Emperor, the former as his ecclesiastical,
the latter as his civil superior. This appeal being laid before the Emperor,
during his residence in Worms, he took the canons of Cologne under his
immediate protection; enjoined them to proceed with rigor against all who
revolted from the established church; prohibited the archbishop to make any
innovation in his diocese; and summoned him to appear at Brussels within thirty
days, to answer the accusations which should be preferred against him Sleid
310, 340, 351. Seckend. iii, 443, 553.
.

TO this clear evidence of his hostile intentions against the Protestant party,
Charles added other proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary dominions of
the Low Countries, he persecuted all who were suspected of Lutheranism with
unrelenting vigor. As soon as he arrived at Worms, he silenced the Protestant
preachers in that city. He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to call upon him, as he regarded
the favor of God, to exterminate that pestilent heresy. He dispatched the
embassy, which has been already mentioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of
peace, that he might be free from any apprehensions of danger or interruption
from that quarter. Nor did any of these steps, or their dangerous tendency,
escape the jealous observation of the Protestants, or fail to alarm their
fears, and to excite their solicitude for the safety of their sect.

MEANWHILE Charles's good fortune which predominated on all occasions over that
of his rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty, from which, with all
his sagacity and address, he would have found it no easy matter to have
disentangled himself. Just about the time when the Duke of Orleans should have
received Ferdinand's daughter in marriage, and together with her the possession
of the Milanese, he died of a pestilential fever. By this event, the Emperor
was freed from the necessity of giving up an important province into the hands
of an enemy, or from the indecency of violating a recent and solemn engagement,
which must have occasioned an immediate rupture with France. He affected,
however, to express great sorrow for the untimely, death of a young Prince, who
was to have been so nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided entering
into any fresh discussions concerning the Milanese, and would not listen to a
proposal which came from Francis of new-modelling the treaty of Crespy, so as
to make him some reparation for the advantages which he had lost by the demise
of his son. In the more active and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a
declaration of war would have been the certain and instantaneous consequence of
such a flat refusal to comply with a demand seemingly so equitable; but the
declining state of his own health, the exhausted condition of his kingdoms,
together with the burden of the war against England, obliged him, at present,
to dissemble his resentment, and to put off thoughts of revenge to some other
juncture. In consequence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of Savoy lost all
hope of obtaining the restitution of his territories; and the rights or claims
relinquished by the treaty of Crespy, returned in full force to the crown of
France, to serve as pretexts for future wars Balcarii Comment. 769. Paruta,
Hist. Venet. iv. p. 177.
.

UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of Orleans's death, the confederates
of Smalkalde flattered themselves that the essential alterations which it
occasioned could scarce fail of producing a rupture, which would prove the
means of their safety. But they were not more disappointed with regard to this,
than in their expectations from an event which seemed to be the certain prelude
of a quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope. Paul, whose passion for
aggrandizing his family, increased as he advanced in years, and as he saw the
dignity and power which they derived immediately from him, becoming more
precarious, finding that he could not bring the Emperor to approve of his
ambitious schemes, ventured, though at the risque of incurring his displeasure,
to grant his son Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia. At a time
when a great part of Europe inveighed openly against the corrupt manners and
exorbitant power of ecclesiastics, and when a council was summoned to reform
the disorders in the church, this indecent grant of such a principality to a
son of whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought to have been ashamed, and whose
licentious morals all good men detested, gave general offense. Some cardinals
in the Imperial interest remonstrated against such an unbecoming alienation of
the patrimony of the church; the Spanish ambassador would not be present at the
solemnity of his enfeofment; and the Emperor peremptorily refused, upon pretext
that these cities were part of the Milanese state, to confirm the deed of
investiture. But both the Emperor and Pope being intent upon one common object
in Germany, sacrificed their particular passions to that public cause, and
suppressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment which were rising on this
occasion, that they might jointly pursue what each esteemed of greater
importance Paruta, Hist. Venet. iv. 178. Pallavii 180.
.

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was disturbed by a violent but short
eruption of Henry Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, though still stripped of his
dominions, which the Emperor held in sequestration, until his differences with
the confederates of Smalkalde should be adjusted, possessed, however, so much
credit in Germany, that he undertook to raise for the French King, a
considerable body of troops to be employed in the war against England. The
money stipulated for this purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the troops were
levied; but Henry, instead of leading them toward France, suddenly entered his
own dominions at their head, in hopes of recovering them before any army could
be assembled to oppose him. The confederates were not more surprised at this
unexpected attack, than the King of France was astonished at a mean thievish
fraud, so unbecoming the character of a Prince. But the Landgrave of Hesse,
with incredible expedition, collected as many men as put a stop to the progress
of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being joined by his son-in-law Maurice,
and some of the troops of the Elector of Saxony, he gained such advantages over
Henry, who was rash and bold in forming his schemes, but feeble and
undetermined in executing them, as obliged him to disband his army, and to
surrender himself, together with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion. He
was kept in close confinement, until a new reverse of affairs procured him
liberty Sleid. 352. Seck. iii. 567.
.

AS this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise added new reputation to the arms of
the Protestants, the reformation of the Palatinate brought a great accession of
strength to their party. Frederick, who succeeded his brother Lewis in that
Electorate, had long been suspected of a secret propensity to the doctrines of
the Reformers, which, upon his accession to the principality, he openly
manifested. But as he expected that something effectual toward a general and
legal establishment of religion would be the fruit of so many Diets,
conferences, and negociations, he did not at first attempt any public
innovation in his dominions. Finding all these issue in nothing, he thought
himself called, at length, to countenance by his authority the system which he
approved of, and to gratify the wishes of his subjects, who by their
intercourse with the Protestant states had universally imbibed their opinions.
As the warmth and impetuosity which accompanied the spirit of Reformation in
its first efforts had somewhat abated, this change was made with great order
and regularity; the ancient rights were abolished, and new forms introduced
without any act of violence, or symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adopted
the religious system of the Protestants, he imitated the example of Maurice,
and did not accede to the league of Smalkalde Sleid. 356. Seck. l. iii. 616.
.

A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Palatinate, the general council was
opened with the accustomed solemnities at Trent. The eyes of the Catholic
states were turned with much expectation toward an assembly, which all had
considered as a natural and adequate remedy for the disorders of the church
when they first broke out, though many were afraid that it was now too late to
hope for great benefit from it, when the malady, by being suffered to make
progress during twenty-eight years, had become inveterate, and grown to such
extreme violence. The Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had appointed the
first meeting to be held in March. But his views and those of the Emperor were
so different, that almost the whole year was spent in negotiations. Charles,
who foresaw that the rigorous decrees of the council against the Protestants
would soon drive them, in self-defence, as well as from resentment, to some
desperate extreme, labored to put off its meeting until his warlike
preparations were so far advanced that he might be in a condition to second its
decisions by the force of his arms. The Pope, who had early sent to Trent the
legates who were to preside in his name, knowing to what contempt it would
expose his authority, and what suspicions it would beget of his intentions, if
the fathers of the council should remain in a state of inactivity, when the
church was in such danger as to require their immediate and vigorous
interposition, insisted either upon translating the council to some city in
Italy, or upon suspending its proceedings at that juncture, or upon authorizing
it to begin its deliberations immediately. The Emperor rejected the two former
as equally offensive to the Germans of every denomination; but finding it
impossible to elude the latter, he proposed that the council should begin with
reforming the disorders in the church, before it proceeded to examine or define
articles of faith. This was the very thing which the court of Rome dreaded
most, and which had prompted it to employ so many artifices, in order to
prevent the meeting of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul, though more compliant
than some of his predecessors with regard to calling a council, was no less
jealous than they had been of its jurisdiction, and saw what matter of triumph
such a method of proceeding would afford the heretics. He apprehended
consequences not only humbling, but fatal to the papal see, if the council came
to consider an inquest into abuses as their only business; or if inferior
prelates were allowed to gratify their own envy and peevishness, by prescribing
rules to those who were exalted above them in dignity and power. Without
listening, therefore, to this insidious proposal of the Emperor, he instructed
his legates to open the council.

THE first session was spent in matters of form. In a subsequent one, it was
agreed that the framing of a confession of faith, containing all the articles
which the church required its members to believe, ought to be the first and
principal business of the council; but that, at the same time, it should give
attention to what was necessary toward the reformation of manners and
discipline. From this first symptom of the spirit with which the council was
animated, from the high tone of authority which the legates who presided in it
assumed, and from the implicit deference with which most of the members
followed their directions, the Protestants conjectured with ease what decisions
they might expect. It astonished them, however, to see forty prelates, (for no
greater number was yet assembled) assume authority as representatives of the
universal church, and proceed to determine the most important points of
doctrine in its name. Sensible of this indecency, as well as of the ridicule
with which it might be attended, the council advanced slowly in its
deliberations, and all its proceedings were for some time languishing and
feeble F. Paul. 120, etc. Pallavic, p. 180, etc.
. As soon as the confederates of Smalkalde received information of the opening
of the council, they published a long manifesto, containing a renewal of their
protest against its meeting, together with the reasons which induced them to
decline its jurisdictions Seckend. l. iii. 602, etc.
. The Pope and Emperor, meanwhile, were so little solicitous to quicken or add
vigor to its operations, as plainly discovered that some object of greater
importance occupied and interested them.

THE Protestants, as they were not inattentive or unconcerned spectators of
their motions, entertained every day more violent suspicions of their
intentions, and received intelligence from different quarters of the
machinations carrying on against them. The King of England informed them, that
the Emperor having long resolved to exterminate their opinions, would not fail
to employ this interval of tranquillity which he now enjoyed, as the most
favorable juncture for carrying his design into execution. The merchants of
Augsburg, which was at that time a city of extensive trade, received advice by
means of their correspondents in Italy, among whom were some who secretly
favored the Protestant cause Seck. l. iii. 579.
, that a dangerous confederacy against it was forming between the Pope and
Emperor. In confirmation of this, they heard from the Low Countries that
Charles had issued orders, though with every precaution which could keep the
measure concealed, for raising troops both there and in other parts of his
dominions. Such a variety of information, corroborating with all that their own
jealousy or observation led them to apprehend, left the Protestants little
reason to doubt of the Emperor's hostile intentions. Under this impression, the
deputies of the confederates of Smalkalde assembled at Frankfort, and by
communicating their intelligence and sentiments to each other, reciprocally
heightened their sense of the impending danger. But their union was not such as
their situation required, or the preparations of their enemies rendered
necessary. Their league had now subsisted ten years. Among so many members
whose territories were intermingled with each other, and who, according to the
custom of Germany, had created an infinite variety of mutual rights and claims
by intermarriages, alliances, and contracts of different kinds, subjects of
jealousy and discord had unavoidably arisen. Some of the confederates, being
connected with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly disgusted with the Landgrave,
on account of the rigor with which he had treated that rash but unfortunate
Prince. Others taxed the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the
league, with having involved the members in unnecessary and exorbitant expenses
by their profuseness or want of economy. The views, likewise, of these two
great Princes, who, by their superior power and authority, influenced and
directed the whole body, being extremely different, rendered all its motions
languid, at a time when the utmost vigor and dispatch were requisite. The
Landgrave, of a violent and enterprizing temper, but not forgetful, amidst his
zeal for religion, of the usual maxims of human policy, insisted that the
danger which threatened them, being manifest and unavoidable, they should have
recourse to the most effectual expedient for securing their own safety, by
courting the protection of the Kings of France and England, or by joining in
alliance with the Protestant cantons of Switzerland, from whom they might
expect such powerful and present assistance as their situation demanded. The
Elector, on the other hand, with the most upright intentions of any Prince in
that age, and with talents which might have qualified him abundantly for the
administration of government in any tranquil period, was possessed with such
superstitious veneration for all the parts of the Lutheran system, and such
bigoted attachment to all its tenets, as made him averse to an union with
those who differed from him in any article of faith, and rendered him very
incapable of undertaking its defense in times of difficulty and danger. He
seemed to think, that the concerns of religion were to be regulated entirely by
principles and maxims different from those which apply to the common affairs of
life; and being swayed too much by the opinions of Luther, who was not only a
stranger to the rules of political conduct, but despised them; he often
discovered an uncomplying spirit, which proved of the greatest detriment to the
cause that he wished to support. Influenced, on this occasion, by the severe
and rigid notions of that reformer, he refused to enter into any confederacy
with Francis, because he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit the
friendship of Henry, because he was no less impious and profane than the Pope
himself; or even to join in alliance with the Swiss, because they differed from
him in several essential articles of faith. This dissension, about a point of
such consequence, produced its natural effects. Each secretly censured and
reproached the other. The Landgrave considered the Elector as fettered by
narrow prejudices, unworthy of a Prince called to act a chief part in a scene
of such importance. The Elector suspected him of loose principles and ambitious
views, which corresponded ill with the sacred cause in which they were engaged.
But though the Elector's scruples prevented their timely application for
foreign aid; and the jealousy or discontent of the other Princes defeated a
proposal for renewing their original confederacy, the term during which it was
to continue in force being on the point of expiring; yet the sense of their
common danger induced them to agree with regard to other points; particularly
that they would never acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a lawful council,
nor suffer the archbishop of Cologne to be oppressed on account of the steps
which he had taken toward the reformation of his diocese Seck. l. iii. 566,
570, 613. Sleid. 355.
.

THE Landgrave, meanwhile, desirous of penetrating to the bottom of the
Emperor's intentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to be thoroughly
acquainted with all his master's schemes, informing him of the several
particulars which raised the suspicions of the Protestants, and begging an
explicit declaration of what they had to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return,
assured them that the intelligence which they had received of the Emperor's
military preparations was exaggerated, and all their suspicions destitute of
foundation; that, though in order to guard his frontiers against any insult of
the French or English, he had commanded a small body of men to be raised in the
Low Countries, he was as solicitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in Germany
Sleid. 356.
.

BUT the Emperor's actions did not correspond with these professions. For,
instead of appointing men of known moderation and a pacific temper, to appear
in defense of the Catholic doctrines, at the conference which had been agreed
on, he made choice of fierce bigots, attached to their own system with a blind
obstinacy, which rendered all hope of reconcilement desperate. Malvenda, a
Spanish divine, who took the conduct of the debate on the part of the
Catholics, managed it with all the subtle dexterity of a scholastic
metaphysician, more studious to perplex his adversaries, than to convince them,
and more intent on palliating error than on discovering truth. The Protestants
filled with indignation, as well at his sophistry, as at some regulations which
the Emperor endeavored to impose on the disputants, broke off the conference
abruptly, being fully convinced of the Emperor's having had nothing in view but
to amuse them, and to gain time for ripening his own schemes Sleid. 358. Seck.
l. iii. 620.
.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VIII.
WHILE appearances of danger daily increased, and the tempest which had been so
long a gathering was ready to break forth in all its violence against the
Protestant church, Luther was saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or
beholding its destructive rage. Having gone, though in a declining state of
health, and during a rigorous season, to his native city of Eysleben, in order
to compose, by his authority, a dissension among the Counts of Mansfield, he
was seized with a violent inflammation in his stomach, which in a few days put
an end to his life, in the sixty-third year of his age. As he was raised up by
Providence to be the author of one of the greatest and most interesting
revolutions recorded in history, there is not any person perhaps whose
character has been drawn with such opposite colors. In his own age, one party,
struck with horror, and inflamed with rage, when they saw with what a daring
hand he overturned every thing which they held to be sacred, or valued as
beneficial, imputed to him not only all the defects and vices of a man, but the
qualities of a demon. The other, warmed with admiration and gratitude, which
they thought he merited as the restorer of light and liberty to the Christian
church, ascribed to him perfections above the condition of humanity, and viewed
all his actions with a veneration bordering on that which should be paid only
to those who are guided by the immediate inspiration of heaven. It is his own
conduct, not the undistinguishing censure, or the exaggerated praise of his
contemporaries, which ought to regulate the opinions of the present age
concerning him. Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted intrepidity to
maintain it, abilities both natural and acquired to defend it, and unwearied
industry to propagate it, are virtues which shine so conspicuously in every
part of his behavior, that even his enemies must allow him to have possessed
them in an eminent degree. To these may be added with equal justice, such
purity and even austerity of manners, as became one who assumed the character
of a Reformer; such sanctity of life as suited the doctrine which he delivered;
and such perfect disinterestedness as affords no slight presumption of his
sincerity. Superior to all selfish considerations, a stranger to the elegancies
of life, and despising its pleasures, he left the honors and emoluments of the
church to his disciples, remaining satisfied himself in his original state of
professor in the University, and pastor of the town of Wittemberg, with the
moderate appointments annexed to these offices. His extraordinary qualities
were allayed with no inconsiderable mixture of human frailty and human
passions. These, however, were of such a nature, that they cannot be imputed to
malevolence or corruption of heart, but seem to have taken their rise from the
same source with many of his virtues, his mind forcible and vehement in all its
operations, rouzed by great objects, or agitated by violent passions, broke
out, on many occasions, with an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler
spirits, or such as are placed in a more tranquil situation. By carrying some
praiseworthy dispositions to excess, he bordered sometimes on what was
culpable, and was often betrayed into actions which exposed him to censure. His
confidence that his own opinions were well founded, approached to arrogance;
his courage in asserting them, to rashness; his firmness in adhering to them,
to obstinacy; and his zeal in confuting his adversaries, to rage and
scurrility. Accustomed himself to consider every thing as subordinate to truth,
he expected the same deference for it from other men; and without making any
allowances for their timidity or prejudices, he poured forth against those, who
disappointed him in this particular, a torrent of invective mingled with
contempt. Regardless of any distinction of rank or character when his doctrines
were attacked, he chastised all his adversaries, indiscriminately, with the
same rough hand; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII. nor the eminent
learning and abilities of Erasmus, screened them from the same gross abuse with
which he treated Tetzel or Eccius.

BUT these indecencies of which Luther was guilty, must not be imputed wholly
to the violence of his temper. They ought to be charged, in part, on the
manners of the age. Among a rude people, unacquainted with those maxims, which,
by putting continual restraints on the passions of individuals, have polished
society, and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were managed with
heat, and strong emotions were uttered in their natural language, without
reserve or delicacy. At the same time, the works of learned men were all
composed in Latin, and they were not only authorized, by the example of eminent
writers in that language to use their antagonists with the most illiberal
scurrility; but in a dead tongue indecencies of every kind appear less shocking
than in a living language, whose idioms and phrases seem gross, because they
are familiar.

IN passing judgment upon the characters of men, we ought to try them by the
principles and maxims of their own age, not by those of another. For, although
virtue and vice are at all times the same, manners and customs vary
continually. Some parts of Luther's behavior, which to us appear most
culpable, gave no disgust to his contemporaries. It was even by some of those
qualities, which we are now apt to blame, that he was fitted for accomplishing
the great work which he undertook. To rouse mankind, when sunk in ignorance or
superstition, and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed with power, required
the utmost vehemence of zeal, and a temper daring to excess. A gentle call
would neither have reached, nor have excited those to whom it was addressed. A
spirit, more amiable, but less vigorous than Luther's, would have shrunk back
from the dangers which he braved and surmounted. Toward the close of Luther's
life, though without any perceptible declension of his zeal or abilities, the
infirmities of his temper increased upon him, so that he grew daily more
peevish, more irascible, and more impatient of contradiction. Having lived to
be witness of his own amazing success; to see a great part of Europe embrace
his doctrines; and to shake the foundation of the papal throne, before which
the mightiest Monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some occasions, symptoms
of vanity and self-applause. He must have been indeed more than man, if, upon
contemplating all that he actually accomplished, he had never felt any
sentiment of this kind rising in his breast A remarkable instance of this, as
well as of a certain singularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his
Last Will. Though the effects which he had to bequeath were very
inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a testament, but scorned to
frame it with the usual legal formalities. Notus sum, says he, in coelo, in
terra, and in inferno, and auctoritatem ad hoc sufricientem habeo, ut mihi soli
credatur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, and miserabili peccatori, ex
paterna misericordia Evangelium filii sui crediderit, dederitque ut in eo verax
and fidelis fuerim, ita ut multi in mundo illud per me acceperint, and me pro
doctore veritatis agnoverint, spreto banno Papae Caesaris, Regum, Principum and
sacerdotum, immo omnium daemonum odio. Quid ni igitur, ad dispositionem hanc,
in re exigua, s^f^iciat, si adsit manus meae testimonium, and dici possit, haec
scripsit D. Martinus Luther, Notarius Lei, and testis Evangelii ejus. Seck. l.
iii. p. 651.
.

SOME time before his death he felt his strength declining, his constitution
being worn out by a prodigious multiplicity of business, added to the labor of
discharging his ministerial function with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue
of constant study, besides the composition of works as voluminous as if he had
enjoyed uninterrupted leisure and retirement. His natural intrepidity did not
forsake him at the approach of death; his last conversation with his friends
was concerning the happiness reserved for good men in a future world, of which
he spoke with the fervor and delight natural to one who expected and wished to
enter soon upon the enjoyment of it Sleid. 362. Seck. lib iii. 632, etc.
. The account of his death filled the Roman Catholic party with excessive as
well as indecent joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers; neither
party sufficiently considering that his doctrines were now so firmly rooted, as
to be in a condition to flourish independent of the hand which first had
planted them. His funeral was celebrated by order of the Elector of Saxony with
extraordinary pomp. He left several children by his wife Catharine Bore, who
survived him; toward the end of the last century, there were in Saxony some of
his descendants in decent and honorable stations Seck. l. iii. 651.
.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of dissimulation with which he had
set out, employing every art to amuse the Protestants, and to quiet their fears
and jealousies. For this purpose he contrived to have an interview with the
Landgrave of Hesse, the most active of all the confederates, and the most
suspicious of his designs. To him he made such warm professions of his concern
for the happiness of Germany, and of his aversion to all violent measures; he
denied, in such express terms, his having entered into any league, or having
begun any military preparations which should give cause of alarm to the
Protestants, as seem to have dispelled all the Landgrave's doubts and
apprehensions, and sent him away fully satisfied of his pacific intentions.
This artifice was of great advantage, and effectually answered the purpose for
which it was intended. The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where he had been
admitted to this interview, went to Worms, where the Smalkaldic confederates
were assembled, and gave them such a flattering representation of the Emperor's
favorable disposition toward them, that they, too apt, as well from the
temper of the German nation, as from the genius of all great associations or
bodies of men, to be slow and dilatory, and undecisive in their deliberations,
thought there was no necessity of taking any immediate measures against danger,
which appeared to be distant or imaginary Sleid. Hist. 367, 373.
.

SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as staggered the credit which the
Protestants had given to the Emperor's declarations. The council of Trent,
though still composed of a small number of Italian and Spanish prelates,
without a single deputy from many of the kingdoms which it assumed the right of
binding by its decrees, being ashamed of its long inactivity, proceeded now to
settle articles of the greatest importance. Having begun with examining the
first and chief point in controversy between the church of Rome and the
Reformers, concerning the rule which should be held supreme, or decisive, in
matters of faith, the council, by its infallible authority, determined, "That
the books to which the designation of Apocryphal has been given, are of equal
authority with those which were received by the Jews and primitive Christians
into the sacred canon; that the traditions handed down from the apostolic age,
and preserved in the church, are entitled to as much regard as the doctrines
and precepts which the inspired authors have committed to writing; that the
Latin translation of the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome, and known
by the name of the Vulgate translation, should be read in churches, and
appealed to in the schools as authentic and canonical." Against all who
disclaimed the truth of these tenets, anathemas were denounced in the name and
by the authority of the Holy Ghost. The decision of these points, which
undermined the main pillar of the Lutheran system, was a plain warning to the
Protestants what judgment they might expect when the council should have
leisure to take into consideration the particular and subordinate articles of
their Creed F. Paul. 141. Pallav. 206.
.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to condemn their opinions, was soon
followed by a striking instance of the Pope's resolution to punish such as
embraced them. The appeal of the canons of Cologne against their archbishop
having been carried to Rome, Paul eagerly seized on that opportunity, both of
displaying the extent of his own authority, and of teaching the German
ecclesiastics the danger of revolting from the established church. As no person
appeared in behalf of the archbishop, he was held to be convicted of the crime
of heresy, and a papal bull was issued, depriving him of his ecclesiastical
dignity, inflicting on him the sentence of excommunication, and absolving his
subjects from the oath of allegiance which they had taken to him as their civil
superior. The countenance which he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the
only crime imputed to him, as well as the only reason assigned to justify the
extraordinary rigor of this decree. The Protestants could scarce believe that
Paul, how zealous soever to defend the established system, or to humble those
who invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to such extremities against a
Prince and Elector of the empire, without having previously secured such
powerful protection as would render his censure something more than an impotent
and despicable sally of resentment. They were of course deeply alarmed at this
sentence against the archbishop, considering it as a sure indication of the
malevolent intentions not only of the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the
whole party Sleid. 354 F. Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.
.

UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with such violence as is natural to
men rouzed from a false security, and conscious of their having been deceived,
Charles saw that it was now necessary to throw aside the veil, and to declare
openly what part he determined to act. By a long series of artifice and
fallacy, he had gained so much time, that his measures, though not altogether
ripe for execution, were greatly matured. The Pope, by his proceedings against
the Elector of Cologne, as well as by the decree of the council, had
precipitated matters into such a situation, as rendered a breach between the
Emperor and the Protestants almost unavoidable. Charles had no choice left him,
but either to take part with them in overturning what the sea of Rome had
determined, or to support the authority of the church openly by force of arms.
Nor did the Pope think it enough to have brought the Emperor under a necessity
of acting; he pressed him to begin his operations, by promising to second him
with such vigor, as could scarce fail of securing his success. Transported by
his zeal against heresy, he forgot all the prudent and cautious maxims of the
papal see, with regard to the danger of extending the Imperial authority beyond
due bounds, and in order to crush the Lutherans, he was willing to contribute
toward raising up a master that might prove formidable to himself as well as
to the rest of Italy.

BUT besides the certain expectation of assistance from the Pope, Charles was
now secure from any danger of interruption to his designs by the Turkish arms.
His negociations at the Port, which he had carried on with great assiduity
since the peace of Crespy, were on the point of being terminated in such a
manner as he desired. Solomon, partly in compliance with the French King, who,
in order to avoid the disagreeable obligation of joining the Emperor against
his ancient ally, labored with great zeal to bring about an accommodation
between them; and partly from its being necessary to turn his arms toward the
east, where the Persians threatened to invade his dominions, consented without
difficulty to a truce for five years. The chief article of it was, that each
should retain possession of what he now held in Hungary; and Ferdinand, as a
sacrifice to the pride of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tribute of
fifty thousand crowns Istuanhaffii Hist. Hung. 180. Mem. de Ribier. tom. i. 582.
.

BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the Germans themselves that the
Emperor relied with the greatest confidence. The Germanic body, he knew, was of
such vast strength, as to be invincible if it were united, and that it was only
by employing its own force that he could hope to subdue it. Happily for him,
the union of the several members in this great system was so feeble, the whole
frame was so loosely compacted, and its different parts tended so violently
toward separation from each other, that it was almost impossible for it, on
any important emergence, to join in a general or vigorous effort. In the
present juncture, the sources of discord were as many, and as various as had
been known on any occasion. The Roman Catholics, animated with a zeal in
defense of their religion proportional to the fierceness with which it had been
attacked, were eager to second any attempt to humble those innovators, who had
overturned it in many provinces, and endangered it in more. John and Albert of
Brandenburgh, as well as several other Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and
rigor with which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated by the confederates of
Smalkalde, were impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged on them. Charles
observed, with satisfaction, the working of these passions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he should think it proper to act,
he found it, meanwhile, more necessary to moderate than to inflame their rage.

SUCH was the situation of affairs, such the discernment with which the Emperor
foresaw and provided for every event, when the Diet of the empire met at
Ratisbon. Many of the Roman Catholic members appeared there in person, but most
of the confederates of Smalkalde, under pretense of their being unable to bear
the expense occasioned by the late unnecessary frequency of such assemblies,
sent only deputies. Their jealousy of the Emperor, and apprehensions that
violence, perhaps, might be employed in order to force their approbation of
what he should propose in the Diet, was the true cause of their absence. The
speech with which the Emperor opened the Diet was extremely artful. After
professing, in common form, his regard for the prosperity of the Germanic body,
and declaring, that in order to bestow his whole attention upon the
re-establishment of its order and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned all
other cares, rejected the most pressing solicitations of his other subjects to
reside among them, and postponed affairs of the greatest importance; he took
notice, with some indignation, that his disinterested example had not been
imitated; many members of chief consideration having neglected to attend an
assembly to which he had repaired with such manifest inconvenience to himself.
He then mentioned their unhappy dissensions about religion; lamented the ill
success of his past endeavors to compose them; complained of the abrupt
dissolution of the late conference, and craved their advice with regard to the
best and most effectual method of restoring union to the churches of Germany,
together with that happy agreement in articles of faith, which their ancestors
had found to be of no less advantage to their civil interest, than becoming
their Christian profession.

BY this gracious and popular method of consulting the members of the Diet,
rather than of obtruding upon them any opinion of his own, besides the
appearance of great moderation, and the merit of paying much respect to their
judgment, the Emperor dexterously avoided discovering his own sentiments, and
reserved to himself, as his only part, that of carrying into execution what
they should recommend. Nor was he less secure of such a decision as he wished
for by referring it wholly to themselves. The Roman Catholic members, prompted
by their own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues, joined immediately in
representing that the authority of the council, now met at Trent, ought to be
final in all matters of controversy; that all Christians should submit to its
decrees as the infallible rule of their faith; and therefore they besought him
to exert the power with which he was invested by the Almighty, in protecting
that assembly, and in compelling the Protestants to acquiesce in its
determinations. The Protestants, on the other hand, presented a memorial, in
which, after repeating their objections to the council of Trent, they proposed,
as the only effectual method of deciding the points in dispute, that either a
free general council should be assembled in Germany, or a national council of
the empire should be called, or a select number of divines should be appointed
out of each party to examine and define articles of faith; they mentioned the
recesses of several Diets favorable to this proposition, and which gave them
hope of terminating all their differences in this amicable manner; they now
conjured the Emperor not to depart from his former plan, and by offering
violence to their consciences to bring calamities upon Germany, the very
thought of which must fill every lover of his country with horror. The Emperor
receiving this paper with a contemptuous smile, paid no farther regard to it.
Having already taken his final resolution, and perceiving that nothing but
force could compel them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of Trent
to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance with the Pope, the terms of which
were already agreed on; he commanded a body of troops, levied on purpose in the
Low Countries, to advance toward Germany; he gave commissions to several
officers for raising men in different parts of the empire; he warned John and
Albert of Brandenburgh, that now was the proper time of exerting themselves, in
order to rescue their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from captivity Sleid. 374.
Seck. iii. 658.
.

ALL these things could not be transacted without the observation and knowledge
of the Protestants. The secret was now in many hands; under whatever veil of
artifice, or secrecy, the Emperor still affected to conceal his designs, his
officers kept no such mysterious reserve, and his allies and subjects spoke out
his intentions plainly. Alarmed with reports of this kind, from every quarter,
as well as with the preparations of war which they saw begun, the deputies of
the confederates demanded audience of the Emperor, and in the name of their
masters, required to know whether these military preparations were carried on
by his command, and for what end, and against what enemy. To a question put in
such a tone, and at a time when facts were become too notorious to be denied,
it was necessary to give an explicit answer. He owned the orders which he had
issued, and professing his purpose not to molest any on account of religion who
should act as dutiful subjects, declared that he had nothing in view but to
maintain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial dignity, and by punishing
some factious members to preserve the ancient constitution of the empire from
being impaired or dissolved by their irregular or licentious conduct. Though
the Emperor did not name the persons whom he charged with such high crimes, and
destined to be the objects of his vengeance, it was obvious that he had the
Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse in view. Their deputies, considering
what he had said, as a plain declaration of his hostile intentions, immediately
retired from Ratisbon Sleid. 376.
.

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult matter to treat with the Pope, who
having at length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan which he had long
recommended, assented with eagerness to every article that he proposed. The
league was signed a few days after the Cardinal's arrival at Rome. The
pernicious heresies which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of the Protestants
in rejecting the holy council assembled at Trent, and the necessity of
maintaining sound doctrine, together with good order in the church, are
mentioned as the motives of this union between the contracting parties. In
order to check the growth of these evils, and to punish such as had impiously
contributed to spread them, the Emperor, having long and without success made
trial of gentler remedies, engaged instantly to take the field with a
sufficient army, that he might compel by force all who disowned the council, or
had apostatized from the religion of their forefathers, to return into the
bosom of the church, and to submit with due obedience to the holy see. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace with them during six months
without the Pope's consent, nor without assigning him his share in any conquest
which should be made upon them; and that even after that period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be detrimental to the church, or the
interest of religion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to deposit a large sum
in the bank of Venice* toward defraying the expense of the war; to maintain at
his own charge, during the space of six months, twelve thousand foot, and five
hundred horse; to grant the Emperor for one year half of the ecclesiastical
revenues throughout Spain; to authorize him by a bull to alienate as much of
the lands belonging to religious houses in that country, as would amount to the
sum of five hundred thousand crowns; and to employ not only spiritual censures,
but military force against any Prince who should attempt to interrupt or defeat
the execution of this treaty Sleid. 381. Pallav. 255. Dumont Corpse Diplom. 11.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in which the extirpation of heresy was
declared to be the object of the war which was to follow upon this treaty,
Charles still endeavored to persuade the Germans that he had no design to
abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed only at vindicating his own
authority, and repressing the insolence of those who had encroached upon it.
With this view he wrote circular letters, in the same strain with his answer to
the deputies at Ratisbon, to most of the free cities, and to several of the
Princes who had embraced the Protestant doctrines. In these he complained
loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt into which the Imperial dignity
had fallen, and of the presumptuous as well as disorderly behavior of some
members of the empire. He declared he now took arms, not in a religious but in
a civil quarrel; not to oppress those who continued to behave as quiet and
dutiful subjects, but to humble the arrogance of such as had thrown off all
sense of that subordination in which they were placed under him as head of the
Germanic body. Gross as this deception was, and manifest as it might have
appeared to all who considered the Emperor's conduct with attention, it became
necessary for him to make trial of its effect; and such was the confidence and
dexterity with which he employed it, that he derived the most solid advantages
from this artifice. If he had avowed at once an intention of overturning the
Protestant church, and of reducing all Germany under its ancient state of
subjection to the papal see, none of the cities or Princes who had embraced the
new opinions could have remained neutral after such a declaration, far less
could they have ventured to assist the Emperor in such an enterprise. Whereas,
by concealing and even disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not only
saved himself from the danger of being overwhelmed by a general confederacy of
all the Protestant states, but he furnished the timid with an excuse for
continuing inactive, and the designing or interested with a pretext for joining
him without exposing themselves to the infamy of abandoning their own
principles, or having an active hand in suppressing them. At the same time, the
Emperor well knew, that if he were enabled, by their assistance, to break the
power of the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave, he might afterward prescribe
what terms he pleased to the feeble remains of a party without union or
leaders, who would then regret, too late, their mistaken confidence in him, and
their inconsiderate desertion of their associates.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen display of his zeal, had well nigh
disconcerted this plan which the Emperor had formed with so much care and art.
Proud of having been the author of such a formidable confederacy against the
Lutheran heresy, and happy in thinking that the glory of extirpating it was
reserved for his Pontificate, he published the articles of his league with the
Emperor as a proof of their pious intention, as well as of the extraordinary
efforts which he himself was about to make for maintaining the faith in its
purity. Not satisfied with this, he soon after issued a bull containing most
liberal promises of indulgence to all who should engage in this holy
enterprise, together with warm exhortations to such as could not bear a part in
it themselves, to increase the fervor of their prayers, and the severity of
their mortifications, that they might draw down the blessing of heaven upon
those who undertook it Du Mont, Corpse Diplom.
. Nor was it zeal alone which pushed the Pope to make declarations so
inconsistent with the account which the Emperor himself gave of his motives for
taking arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's dissimulation in such a
cause; at his seeming to be ashamed of owning his zeal for the church; and at
his endeavors to make that pass for a political contest, which he ought to
have gloried in as a war which had no other object than the defense of
religion. With as much solicitude, therefore, as the Emperor labored to
disguise the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope endeavor to publish
their real plan, in order that they might come at once to a rupture with the
Protestants, that all hope of reconcilement might be cut off, and that Charles
might be under fewer temptations, and have it less in his power than at
present, to betray the interests of the church by an accommodation beneficial
to himself F. Paul, 188. Thuan. Hist. i. 61.
.

THE Emperor, though not a little offended at the Pope's indiscretion or malice
in making this discovery, continued boldly to pursue his own plan, and to
assert his intentions to be no other than what he had originally avowed.
Several of the Protestant states, whom he had previously gained, thought
themselves justified in some measure, by his declarations, for abandoning their
associates, and even for giving assistance to him.

BUT these artifices did not impose on the greater and sounder part of the
Protestant confederates. They clearly perceived it to be against the reformed
religion that the Emperor had taken arms, and that not only the suppression of
it, but the extinction of the German liberties, would be the certain
consequence of his obtaining such an entire superiority as would enable him to
execute his schemes in their full extent. They determined, therefore, to
prepare for their own defense, and neither to renounce those religious truths,
to the knowledge of which they had attained by means so wonderful, nor to
abandon those civil rights which had been transmitted to them by their
ancestors. In order to give the necessary directions for this purpose, their
deputies met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure from Ratisbon. Their
deliberations were now conducted with such vigor and unanimity, as the
imminent danger which threatened them required. The contingent of troops, which
each of the confederates was to furnish having been fixed by the original
treaty of union, orders were given for bringing them immediately into the
field. Being sensible, at last, that through the narrow prejudices of some of
their members, and the imprudent security of others, they had neglected too
long to strengthen themselves by foreign alliances, they now applied with great
earnestness to the Venetians and Swiss.

TO the former, they represented the Emperor's intention of overturning the
present system of Germany, and of raising himself to absolute power in that
countr^ by means of foreign force furnished by the Pope; the warned them how
fatal this event would prove to (...) liberties of Italy, and that by suffering
Charles to ^^quire unlimited authority in the one country, they wou^^ soon feel
his dominion to be no less despotic in (...) other; they besought them,
therefore, not to grant (...) passage through their territories to those
troops, which ought to be treated as common enemies; because, ^ subduing
Germany they prepared chains for the rest ^ Europe. These reflections had not
escaped the fag^^ of those wise republicans. They had communica^ their
sentiments to the Pope, and had endeavored ^ divert him from an alliance which
tended to render ^ resistible the power of a potentate, whose ambition he ^
ready knew to be boundless. But they had found ^ so eager in the prosecution of
his own plan, that he ^ regarded all their remonstrances Adriani Istoria di
suoi tempi, live. v. p. 332.
. They would do ^ thing more toward preventing the dangers which they foresaw;
and in return to the application from the confederates of Smalkalde, informed
them, that they co^ not obstruct the march of the Pope's troops through ^ open
country, but by levying an army strong enough ^ face them in the field, and
that this would draw upon themselves the whole weight of his as well as of the
Emperor's indignation. For the same reason they declined lending a sum of
money, which the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them,
toward carrying on the war Sleid. 381. Paruta Istor. Venet. tom. iv. 184.
Lambert^ Hortensius de bello Germanico apud Scardium, vol. ii. p. 547.
.

THEIR demands upon the Swiss were not confined ^ the obstructing of the
entrance of foreigners into Germany; they required of them, as the nearest
neighbors, and closest allies of the empire, to interpose w^ their wonted
vigor for the preservation of its liberties, and not to stand as inactive
spectators, while their brethren were oppressed and enslaved. But with what
zeal soever the reformed cantons might have been disposed ^ act when the cause
of the Reformation was in danger, the Helvetic body was so divided with regard
to religion, as rendered it unsafe for the Protestants to take any step without
consulting their associates; and among them the emissaries of the Pope and
Emperor had such influence, that a resolution of maintaining an exact
neutrality between the contending parties, was the utmost which could be
procured Sleid. 392.
.

BEING disappointed in both these applications, they not long after had
recourse to the Kings of France and England; the approach of danger either
overcoming the Elector of Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield to the
importunities of his confederates. The situation of the two Monarchs flattered
them with hopes of success. Hostilities between them had continued for some
time after the peace of Crespy. But becoming weary at last of a war, attended
with no glory or advantage to either, they had lately terminated all their
differences by a peace concluded at Camp, near Ardres. Francis having with
great difficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that concession he engaged to pay a great sum, which Henry
demanded as due to him on several accounts, and he left Bologne in the hands of
the English as a pledge for his faithful performance of that article. But
though the re-establishment of peace seemed to leave the two Monarchs at
liberty to turn their attention toward Germany, so unfortunate were the
Protestants, that they derived no immediate advantage from this circumstance.
Henry appeared unwilling to enter into any alliance with them, but on such
conditions as would render him not only the head, but the supreme director of
their league, a pre-eminence which, as the bonds of union or interest between
them were but feeble, and as he differed from them so widely in his religious
sentiments, they had no inclination to admit Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, 25^.
. Francis, more powerfully inclined by political considerations to furnish them
with assistance, found his kingdom so much exhausted by a long war, and was so
much afraid of irritating the Pope by entering into close union with
excommunicated Heretics, that he durst not undertake the protection of the
Smalkaldic league. By this ill timed caution, or superstition deference to
scruples, to which at other times he was not much addicted, he lost the most
promising opportunity of mortifying and distressing his rival, which presented
itself during his whole reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their negociations with foreign
courts, the confederates found no difficulty at home, in bringing a sufficient
force into the field. Germany abounded at that time in inhabitants the feudal
institutions subsisted in full force, and enables the nobles to call out their
numerous vassals, and to put them in motion on the shortest warning; the
martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or enervated by the introduction of
commerce and arts, had acquired additional vigor during the continual wars in
which they had been employed for half a century, either in the pay of the
Emperors, or Kings of France. Upon every opportunity of entering into service,
they were accustomed to run eagerly to arms; and to every standard that was
erected, volunteers flocked from all quarters Seck. l. iii. 161.
. Zeal seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour. Men, o^ whom the
doctrines of the Reformation had made that deep impression which accompanies
truth when first discovered, prepared to maintain it with proportional vigor;
and among a warlike people, it appeared infamous to remain inactive, when the
defense of religion was the motive for taking arms. Accident combined with all
these circumstances in facilitating the levy of soldiers among the
confederates. A considerable number of Germans in the pay of France, being
dismissed by the King on the prospect of peace with England, joined in a body
the standard of the Protestants Thuan. l. i. 68.
. By such a concurrence of causes, they were enabled to assemble as a few weeks
an army composed of seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse, provided
with a train of an hundred and twenty cannon, eight hundred ammunition wagons,
eight thousand beasts of burden, and six thousand pioneers Thuan. l. i. 601.
Ludovici ab Avila and Zunga Commentariorum de bell. Germ. lib. ^uo Antw. 1550.
12mo. p. 13, a.
. Nor was this army, one of the most numerous, and undoubtedly the best
appointed of any which had been levied in Europe during that century, raised by
the united effort of the whole Protestant body. The Elector of Saxony, the
Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhault, and the
Imperial cities of Augsburgh, Ulm, and Strasburgh, were the only powers which
contributed toward this great armament: The Electors of Cologne, of
Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine, overawed by the Emperor's threats, or
deceived by his professions, remained ne^ter. John Marquis of Brandenburgh
Bareith, and Albert of Brandenburgh Anspach, though both early converts to
Lutheranism, entered openly into the Emperor's service, under pretext of having
obtained his promise for the security of the Protestant religion; and Maurice
of Saxony soon followed their example.

THE immense number of their troops, as well as the amazing rapidity wherewith,
they had assembled them, astonished the Emperor, and filled him with the most
disquieting apprehensions. He was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a
mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great strength, whose
inhabitants being mostly Lutherans, would have been more ready to betray than
to assist him, with only three thousand Spanish foot, whom he had called from
the frontiers of Hungary, and about five thousand Germans who had joined him
from different parts of the empire, he must. have been overwhelmed by the
approach of such a numerous army, which he could not fight, nor even hope to
retreat from it in safety. The Pope's troops, though in full march to his
relief, had scarce reached the frontiers of Germany; the forces which he
expected from the Low Countries had not yet begun to move, and were even far
from being complete Sleid. 389. Avila, 8, a.
. His situation, however, called for more immediate succor, nor did it seem
practicable for him to wait for such distant auxiliaries, with whom his
junction was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that the confederates did not avail
themselves of the advantage which lay so full in their view. In civil wars, the
first steps are commonly taken with much timidity and ^sitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance of moderation and equity;
they strive to gain partisans (...) adhere strictly to known forms; nor can
they be brought, at once, to violate those established institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed to reverence; hence their
proceedings are often feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most vigorous
and decisive. Influenced by these considerations, which happily for the peace
of society, operate powerfully on the human mind, the confederates could not
think of throwing off that allegiance which they regularly owed to the head of
the empire, of turning their arms against him without one solemn appeal more to
his candor, and the impartial judgment of their fellow subjects. For this
purpose, they addressed a letter to the Emperor, and a manifesto to all the
inhabitants of Germany. The tenor of both was the same. They represented their
own conduct with regard to civil affairs, as dutiful and submissive; they
mentioned the unviolable union in which they had lived with the Emperor, as
well as the many and rece^^ marks of his good will and gratitude wherewithal
they had been honored; they asserted religion to be the so^^ cause of the
violence which the Emperor now meditated against them; and in proof of this
adduced many arguments to convince those who were so weak as to be deceived by
the artifices with which he endeavored to cover his real intentions; they
declared their own resolution to risque every thing in maintenance of their
religious rights, and foretold the dissolution of the German constitution, if
the Emperor should finally prevail against them Sleid. 384.
.

BUT Charles, though in such a perilous situation ^ might have inspired him
with moderate sentiments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if his affairs
had been in the most prosperous state. His only reply to the address and
manifesto of the Protestants, was to publish the ban of the empire against the
Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all who
should dare to assist them. By this sentence, the ultimate and most rigorous
one which the German jurisprudence has provided for the punishment of traitors,
or enemies to their country, they were declared rebels and outlaws, and
deprived of every privilege which they enjoyed as ^bers of the Germanic body;
their goods were confiscated; their subjects absolved from their oath of
allegiance; and it became not only lawful but meritorious to invade their
territories. The nobles, and free cities, who framed or perfected the
constitution of the German government, had not been so negligent of their own
safety and privileges as to trust the Emperor with this formidable
jurisdiction. The authority of a Diet of the empire ought to have been
interposed before any of its members could be put under the ban. But Charles
overlooked that formality, well knowing, that if his arms were crowned with
success, there would remain none who would have either power or courage to call
in question what he had done Sleid. 386. Du Mont Corpse Diplom. iv. p. 11. 314.
Pseffel Hist. Abrege du Droit. Publ. 168, 736, 151.
. The Emperor, however, did not found his sentence against the Elector and
Landgrave on their revolt from the established church, or their conduct with
regard to religion; he affected to assign for it reasons purely civil, and
these too expressed in such general and ambiguous terms, without specifying the
nature or circumstances of their guilt, as rendered it more like an act of
despotic power, than of a legal and limited jurisdiction, Nor was it altogether
from choice, or to conceal his intentions that Charles had recourse to the
ambiguity of general expressions, he durst not mention too particularly the
causes of his sentence, as every action which he could have, charged upon the
Elector and Landgrave as a crime, might have been employed with equal justice
to condemn such of the Protestants whom he still pretended to consider as
faithful subjects, and whom it would have been, extremely imprudent to alarm or
disgust.

THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes of accommodation to be at an end,
had only to choose whether they would submit without reserve to the Emperor's
will, or proceed to open hostilities. Nor did they want public spirit and
resolution to make the proper choice. A few days after the ban of the empire
was published, they, according to the custom of that age, sent a herald to the
Imperial camp with a solemn declaration of war against Charles, to whom they no
longer gave any other title than that of pretended Emperor and renounced all
allegiance, homage or duty he might claim, or they had hitherto yielded to him.
But previous to this formality, part of their troops had begun ^ act. The
command of a considerable body of troops raised by the city of Augsburgh having
been given to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who by the booty he had
got when the Imperialists plundered Rome, together with the merit of long
service, had acquired wealth and authority, which placed him on a level with
the chief of the German nobles, that gallant veteran resolved before he joined
the main body of the conferates, to attempt something suitable to his former
same, and to the expectation of his countrymen. As the Pope's forces were
hastening toward Tyrol, in order to penetrate into Germany, by the narrow
passes through the mountains which run across that country, he advanced thither
with the utmost rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffstein, two strong
castles which commanded the principal defiles. Without stopping a moment, he
continued his march toward Inspruck, by getting possession of which, he would
have obliged the Italians to stop short, and with a small body of men could
have resisted all the efforts of the greatest armies. Castlealto the governor
of Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would be to the Emperor, all whose
designs must have proved abortive, if his Italian auxiliaries had been
intercepted, raised a few troops with the utmost dispatch, and threw himself
into the town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the enterprise, and was
preparing to attack the place, when the intelligence of the approach of the
Italians, and an order from the Elector and Landgrave obliged him to desist. By
his retreat the passes were left open, and the Italians entered Germany without
any opposition, but from the garrisons that Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg
and Cuffstein, which having no hopes of bei^ ^lieved, were not long in
surrendering Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Istoria di suoi tempi, lib. 335.
Seckendorf, the industrious author of the Commentarius Apologeticus de
Lutheranismo, whom I have so long and safely followed as my guide in German
affairs, was descended from Schertel. With the care and solicitude of a German,
who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has published a long digression
concerning his ancestor, calculated chiefly to show how Schertel was ennobled,
and his posterity allied to many of the most ancient families in the empire.
Among other curious particulars, he gives us an account of his wealth, the
chief source of which was the plunder he got at Rome. His landed estate was
sold by his grandsons for six hundred thousand florins. By this we may form
some idea of the riches amasied by the Condottieri, or commanders of mercenary
bands in that age. At the taking of Rome, Schertel was only a captain. Seckend.
lib. ii. 73.
.

NOR was the recalling of Sche^^^l the only error of which the confederates
were guilty. As the supreme command of their army was committed, in terms of
the league of Smalkalde, to the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse with
equal authority, all the inconveniences arising from a divided and coordinate
jurisdiction, which is always of fatal consequence in the operations of war,
were immediately felt. The Elector, though intrepid in his own person to
excess, and most ardently zealous in the cause was slow in deliberating,
uncertain as well as irresolute in his determinations, and constantly preferred
measures which were cautious and safek, to such as were bold and decisive. The
Landgrave, of a more active and enterprizing nature, formed all his resolutions
with promptitude, wished to execute them with spirit, and uniformly preferred
such schemes as tended to bring the contest to a speedy issue. Thus their
maxims with regard to the conduct of the war, differed as widely as those by
which they were influenced in preparing for it. Such perpetual contrariety in
their sentiments gave rise, imperceptibly, to jealousy and the spirit of
contention. These multiplied the dissensions flowing from the incompatibility
of their natural temper, and rendered them more violent. The other members of
the league, considering themselves as independent, and subject to the Elector
and Landgrave, only in consequence of a voluntary confederacy, did not long
retain a proper veneration for commanders, who proceeded with so little
unanimity; and the numerous army of the Protestants, like a vast machine whose
parts are all compacted, and which is destitute of any power sufficient to move
and regulate the whole, acted with no consistency, vigor or effect.

THE Emperor, who was afraid, that by remaining ^ Ratisbon, he would render it
impossible for the Pope's forces to join him, having boldly advanced to
Landshut on the Iser, the confederates lost some days in deliberating whether
it was proper to follow him into the territories of the Duke of Bavaria, a
neutral Prince. When at last they surmounted that scruple, and began to more
toward his camp, they suddenly abandoned the design and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave only a small garrison. Meanwhile,
the papal troops amounting fully to that number which Paul had stipulated to
furnish, reached Landshut, and were followed by six thousand Spaniards of the
veteran bands stationed in Naples. The confederates, after Schertel's spirited
but fruitless expedition, seem to have permitted these forces to advance
unmolested to the place of ren^ezvous, without any attempt to attack either
them or the Emperor separately, or to prevent their junction Adriani Istoria di
suoi tempi, lib. 4 340.
. The Imperial army amounted now to thirty-six thousand men, and was still more
formidable by the discipline and valor of the troops, than by their number,
Avila, commander of Alcantara, who had been present in all the wars carried on
by Charles, and had served in the armies which gained the memorable victory at
Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and invaded France, gives this the preference to
any martial force he had ever seen assembled Avila, 18.
. Octavio Farnese, the Pope's grandson, assisted by the ablest officers, formed
in the long wars between Charles and Francis, commanded the Italian
auxiliaries. His brother the Cardinal Farnese, accompanied him, as papal
legate; and in order to give the war the appearance of a religious enterprise,
he proposed to march at the head of the army, with a cross carried before him,
and to publish indulgences wherever he came to all who should give them any
assistance, ^ had anciently been the practice in the Cruzades against the
Infidels. But this the Emperor strictly prohibited as inconsistent with all the
declarations which he (...) made to the Germans of his own party; and (...)
perceiving, to his astonishment, that the exercise of the Protestant religion,
the extirpation of which he considered as the sole object of the war, was
publicly permitted in the Imperial camp, soon returned in disgust to Italy F.
Paul. 191.
.

THE arrival of these troops enabled the Emperor to send such a reinforcement
to the garrison of Ratisbon, that the confederates relinquishing all hopes of
reducing that town, marched toward Ingoldstadt on the Danube, near to which
Charles was now encamped. Meanwhile, they exclaimed loudly against the
Emperor's notorious violation of the laws and constitution of the empire, in
having called in foreigners to lay waste Germany, and to oppress its liberties.
As in that age, the dominion of the Roman see was so odious to the Protestants,
that the name of the Pope was sufficient to inspire them with horror at any
enterprise which he countenanced, and to raise in their minds the blackest
suspicions, it came to be universally believed among them, that Paul, not
satisfied with attacking them openly by force of arms, had dispersed his
emissaries all over Germany to set on fire their towns and magazines, and to
poison the wells and fountains of water. Nor did this rumor spread only among
the vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful enough to make a deep
impression on their credulity; even the leaders of the party, blinded by their
prejudices, published a declaration, in which they accused the Pope of having
employed these antichristian and diabolical arts against them Sleid. 399.
. These sentiments of the confederates were confirmed in some measure, by the
behavior of the papal troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous toward
Heretics anathematized by the church, were guilty of great excesses in the
Lutheran territories, and aggravated the calamities of war, by mingling with it
all the cruelty of bigoted zeal.

THE first operations in the field, however, did not correspond with the
violence of those passions which animated individuals. The Emperor had
prudently taken the resolution of avoiding an action with an enemy so far
superior in number Avila, 78. a.
, especially as he foresaw that nothing could keep a body composed of so many
and such dissimilar members from falling to pieces, but the pressing to attack
it with, an inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates, though it was no less
evident to them that every moment's delay was pernicious, were still prevented
by the weakness or division of their leaders from exerting that vigor, with
which their situation, as well as the ardour of their soldiers, ought to have
inspired them. On their arrival at Ingoldstadt, they found the Emperor in a
camp not remarkable for strength, and surrounded only by a slight entrenchment.
Before the camp lay a plain of such extent, as afforded sufficient space for
drawing out their whole army, and bringing it to act at once. Every
consideration should have determined them to have seized this opportunity of
attacking the Emperor; and their vast superiority in numbers, the eagerness of
their troops, together with the stability of the German infantry in pitched
battles, afforded them the most probable expectation of victory. The Landgrave
urged this with great warmth, declaring, that if the sole command were vested
in him, he would terminate the war on that occasion, and decide by one general
action the fate of the two parties. But the Elector reflecting on the valor
and discipline of the enemies forces, animated by the presence of the Emperor,
and conducted by the best officers of the age, would not venture upon an
action, which he thought to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body of
veterans on ground which they themselves had chosen, and while covered by
fortifications, which, though imperfect would afford them no small advantage in
the combat. Notwithstanding his hesitation and remonstrances, it was agreed, to
advance toward the enemies camp in battle array, in order to make trial
whether by that insult, and by a furious cannonade which they began, they could
draw the Imperialists out of their works. But the Emperor had too much sagacity
to fall into this snare. He adhered to his own system with inflexible
constancy; and drawing up his soldiers behind their trenches, that they might
be ready to receive the confederates if they should venture upon an assault,
calmly waited their approach, and carefully restrained his own men from any
excursions or skirmishes that might bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addressing the troops of the different nations in their
own language, encouraged them by the cheerfulness of his voice and countenance;
he exposed himself in places of the greatest danger, and amidst the warmest
fire of the enemies artillery, the most numerous that had hitherto been brought
into the field by any army. Rouzed by his example, not a man quitted his ranks;
it was thought infamous to discover any symptom of fear when the Emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier plainly perceived, that their
declining the combat at present was not the effect of timidity in their
general, but the result of a well weighed caution. The confederates, after
firing several hours on the Imperialists, with more noise and terror than
execution, seeing no prospect of alluring them to fight on equal terms, retired
to their own camp. The Emperor employed the night with such diligence in
strengthening his works, that the confederates, returning the cannonade next
day, found that, though they had now been willing to venture upon such a bold
experiment, the opportunity of making an attack with advantage was lost Sleid.
395, ^97. Avila 27. a. Lamb. Hortens, ap. Leard. li.
.

AFTER such a discovery, from their own feebleness and irresolution, and of the
prudence as well as firmness of the Emperor's conduct, the confederates turned
their whole attention toward preventing the arrival of a powerful
reinforcement of ten thousand foot, and four thousand horse, which the Count de
Buren was bringing to the Emperor from the Low Countries. But though that
general had to traverse such an extent of country; though his route lay through
the territories of several states warmly disposed to favor the confederates;
though they were apprized of his approach, and by their vast superiority in
numbers might easily have detached a force sufficient to overpower him, he
advanced with such rapidity, and by such well concerted movements, while they
opposed him with such remissness, and so little military skill, that he
conducted this body to the Imperial camp without any loss Sleid. 403.
.

AFTER the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he placed great confidence, the
Emperor altered, in some degree, his plan of operations, and began to act more
upon the offensive, though he still avoided a battle with the utmost industry.
He made himself master of Neoburgh, Dillingen, and Donawert on the Danube; of
Nordlingen, and several other towns, situated on the most considerable streams
that fall into that mighty river. By this he got the command of a great extent
of country, though not without being obliged to engage in several encounters,
of which the success was various, nor without the most imminent danger oftener
than once of being drawn into a battle. In this manner the whole autumn was
spent; neither party gained any remarkable superiority over the other, and
nothing was yet done toward bringing the war to a period. The Emperor had
often foretold, with confidence, that discord and the want of money would
compel the confederates to disperse that unwieldy body, which they had neither
abilities to guide, nor funds to support Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Graeco
sermon scriptus a Joach. Camerario ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.
; but though he waited with impatience for the accomplishment of his
prediction, there was no prospect of that event being at hand. Meanwhile, he
himself began to suffer from the want of forage and provisions; even the
Catholic provinces being so much incensed at the introduction of foreigners
into the empire, that they supplied them with reluctance, while the camp of the
confederates abounded with a profusion of necessaries, which the zeal of their
friends in the adjacent countries furnished with the utmost liberality and
good will. Great numbers of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the
climate or food of Germany, were become unfit for service through sickness
Camerar. ap. Freher. 483.
. Considerable, arrears were now due to the troops, who had scarce received any
money from the beginning of the campaign; the Emperor, experiencing on this as
well as on former occasions, that his jurisdiction was more extensive than his
revenues, and that the former enabled him to assemble a greater number of
soldiers, than the latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all these accounts, he
found it difficult to keep his army in the field; some of his ablest generals,
and even the Duke of Alva himself, persevering and obstinate as he usually was
in the prosecution of every measure, advising him to disperse his troops into
winter quarters. But as the arguments urged against any plan which he had
adopted, rarely made much impression upon the Emperor, he paid no regard to
their opinion, and determined to continue his efforts in order to weary out the
confederates; being well assured that if he could once oblige them to separate,
their was little probability of their uniting again in a body Thuan. 83.
. Still, however, it remained a doubtful point, whether his steadiness was most
likely to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It was still uncertain which
party, by first dividing its forces, would give the superiority to the other;
when an unexpected event decided the contest, and occasioned a fatal reverse in
the affairs of the confederates.

MAURICE of Saxony having, by the arts which have already been described,
insinuated himself into the Emperor's confidence, no sooner saw hostilities
ready to break out between him and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
prospects of ambition began to open upon him. That portion of Saxony, which
descended to him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying his aspiring mind;
and he perceived with pleasure the approach of civil war, as amidst the
revolutions or convulsions which it occasions, opportunities which at other
times are sought in vain, of aco^iring new power as well as additional dignity,
present themselves to an enterprizing spirit. As he was thoroughly acquainted
with the state of the two contending parties, and the qualities of their
leaders, he did not hesitate long in determining on which side the greatest
advantages were to be expected. Having revolved all these things in his own
mind, and having taken his final resolution at joining the Emperor, he
prudently determined to declare early in his favor; that, by the merit of
this, he might acquire a title to a proportional recompense. With the view he
had repaired to Ratisbon in the month of May, under pretext of attending the
Diet; and after many conferences with Charles or his ministers, concluded,
though with the most mysterious secrecy, a treaty, in which he engaged to
concur in assisting the Emperor as a faithful subject; and Charles, in return,
stipulated to bestow on him all the spoils of the Elector of Saxony, his
dignities as well as territories Haraec. Annal. Barbant. vol. i. 628. Struvii
Corp. 1048. Thuan. 84.
. History scarce records any treaty which can be considered as a more manifest
violation of those just principles which ought to influence human actions.
Maurice, a professed Protestant, at a time when the belief of religion, as well
as zeal for its interests, took strong possession of every mind, binds himself
to contribute his assistance toward carrying on a war, which had manifestly no
other object than the extirpation of the Protestant doctrines. He engages to
take arms against his father-in-law, and to strip his nearest relation of his
honors and dominions. He joins a dubious friend against a known benefactor, to
whom his obligations were both great and recent. Nor was the Prince who
ventured upon all this, one of those audacious politicians, who, provided they
can accomplish their ends, and secure their interest, disregard avowedly the
most sacred obligations, and glory in contemning whatever is honorable or
decent. Maurice's conduct, if the whole must be ascribed to policy, was more
artful and masterly; he executed his plan in all its parts, and yet endeavored
to preserve, in every step which he took, the appearance of what was fair, and
virtuous, and laudable. It is probable from his subsequent behavior, that with
regard to the Protestant religion at least, his intentions were upright, that
he fondly trusted to the Emperor's promises for its security, but that,
according to the fate of all who refine too much in policy, and who tread in
dark and crooked paths, in attempting to deceive others, he himself was, in
some degree, deceived.

HIS first care, however, was to keep these engagements with the Emperor
closely concealed: And so perfect a master was he in the art of dissimulation,
that the confederates, notwithstanding his declining all connections with them,
and his remarkable assiduity in paying court to the Emperor, seemed to have
entertained no suspicion of his designs. Even the Elector of Saxony, when he
marched at the beginning of the campaign to join his associates, committed his
dominions to his protection, which Maurice, with an insidious appearance of
friendship, readily undertook Struvii Corp. 1046.
. But scarce had the Elector taken the field, when Maurice began to consult
privately with the King of the Romans how to invade those very territories,
with the defense of which he was entrusted. Soon after, the Emperor sent him a
copy of the Imperial ban denounced against the Elector and Landgrave. As he was
next heir to the former, and particularly interested in preventing strangers
from getting his dominions into their possession, Charles required him, not
only for his own sake, but upon the allegiance and duty which he owed to the
head of the empire, instantly to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited
estates of the Elector; warning him, at the same time, that if he neglected to
obey these commands, he should be held as accessory to the crimes of his
kinsman, and be liable to the same punishment Sleid. 391. Thuan. 84.
.

THIS artifice, which, it is probable Maurice himself suggested, was employed
by him in order that his conduct toward the Elector might seem a ma^^er of
necessity, but not of choice, an act of obedience to his superior, rather than
a voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman and ally. But in order to
give some more specious appearance to this thin veil with which he endeavored
to cover his ambition, he had called together, soon after his return from
Ratisbon, the states of his country; and representing to them that a civil war
between the Emperor and confederates of Smalkalde was now become unavoidable,
desired their advice with regard to the part he should act in that event. They
being prepared, no doubt, and tutored beforehand, as well as desirous of
gratifying their Prince, whom they both esteemed and loved, gave such counsel
as they knew would be most agreeable; advising him to offer his mediation
toward reconciling the contending parties; but if that were rejected, and he
could obtain proper security for the Protestant religion, they delivered it as
their opinion that he ought, in all other points, to yield obedience to the
Emperor. Upon receiving the Imperial rescript, together with the ban against
the Elector and Landgrave, he summoned the states of his country a second time;
he laid before them the orders which he had received, and the punishment with
which he was threatened in case of disobedience; he acquainted them that the
confederates had refused to admit of his mediation, and that the Emperor had
given him the most satisfactory declarations with regard to religion; he
mentioned his own interest in securing possession of the electoral dominions,
together with the danger of allowing strangers to obtain an establishment in
Saxony; and, upon the whole, as the point under deliberation respected his
subjects no less than himself, he desired to know their sentiments how he
should steer in that difficult and arduous conjuncture. The states, no less
obsequious and complaisant, than formerly, relying on the Emperor's promises as
a perfect security for their religion, proposed, that before he had recourse to
more violent methods, they would write to the Elector, exhorting him, as the
best means of appeasing the Emperor, and of preventing his dominions from being
seized by foreign or hostile powers, to give his consent that Maurice should
take possession of them quietly, and without opposition. Maurice himself
seconded their arguments in a letter to the Landgrave, his father-in-law. Such
an extravagant proposition was rejected with the scorn and indignation which it
deserved. The Landgrave, in return to Maurice, taxed him with his treachery and
ingratitude toward a kinsman to whom he was so deeply indebted; be treated
with contempt his affectation of executing the Imperial ban, which he could not
but know to be altogether void, by the unconstitutional and arbitrary manner in
which it had been issued; he besought him, not to suffer himself to be so far
blinded by ambition, as to forget the obligations of honor and friendship, or
to betray the Protestant religion, the extirpation of which out of Germany,
even by the acknowledgment of the Pope himself, was the great object of the
present war Sleid. 405, etc. Thuan. 85. Camerar 484.
.

BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be diverted from pursuing his plan by
reproaches or arguments. Nothing now remained, but to execute with vigor what
he had hitherto carried on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his boldness
in action inferior to his subtilty in contrivance. Having assembled about
twelve thousand men, he suddenly invaded one part of the electoral provinces,
while Ferdinand with an army composed of Bohemians and Hungarians, overran the
other. Maurice, in two sharp encounters, defeated the troops which the Elector
had left to guard his country; and improving these advantages to the utmost,
made himself master of the whole electorate, except Wittemberg, Gotha and
Eisenach, which being places of considerable strength, and defended by
sufficient garrisons, refused to open their gates. The news of these rapid
conquests soon reached the Imperial and confederate camps. In the former, their
satisfaction with an event, which it was foreseen would be productive of the
most important consequences, was expressed by every possible demonstration of
joy. The latter was filled with astonishment and terror. The name of Maurice
was mentioned with execration, as an apostate from religion, a betrayer of the
German liberty, and a contemner of the most sacred and natural ties. Every
thing that the rage or invention of the party could suggest, in order to
blacken and render him odious; invectives, satires and lampoons, the furious
declamations of their preachers, together with the rude wit of their authors,
were all employed against him. While he, trusting to the arts which he had so
long practiced, as if his actions could have admitted of any serious
justification, published a manifesto, containing the same frivolous reasons for
his conduct, which he had formerly alleged in the meeting of his states, and
in his letter to the Landgrave Sleid. 409, 410.
.

THE Elector, upon the first intelligence of Maurice^ motions, proposed to
return home with his troops for the defense of Saxony. But the deputies of the
league, assembled at Ulm, prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with the
army, and to prefer the success of the common cause before the security of his
own dominions. At length the sufferings and complaints of his subjects
increased so much, that he discovered the utmost impatience to set out, in
order to rescue them from the oppression of Maurice, and from the cruelty of
the Hungarians, who having been accustomed to that licentious and merciless
species of war which was thought lawful against the Turks, committed, where
ever they came, the wildest acts of rapine and violence. This desire of the
Elector's was so natural and so warmly urged, that the deputies at Ulm, though
fully sensible of the unhappy consequences of dividing their army, durst not
refuse their consent, how unwilling soever to grant it. In the perplexity, they
repaired to the camp of the confederates at Giengen on the Brenz, in order to
consult their constituents. Nor were they less at a loss what ^^ determine in
this pressing emergence. But, after having considered seriously the open
desertion of some of their allies; the scandalous lukewarmness of others who
had hitherto contributed nothing toward the war; the intolerable load which
had fallen, of consequence, upon such members as were most zealous for the
cause, or most faithful to their engagements; the ill success of all their
endeavors to obtain foreign aid; the unusual length of the campaign; the
rigor of the season; together with the great number of soldiers, and even
officers, who had, on that account, quitted the service; they concluded that
nothing could save them, but either the bringing the contest to the immediate
decision of a battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an accommodation of all
their differences with Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency and
dejection which now oppressed the part^, that of these two they chose what was
most feeble and unmanly, empowering a minster of the Elector of Brandenburgh to
propound overtures of peace in their name to the Emperor.

NO sooner did Charles perceive this haughty confederacy, which had so lately
threatened to drive him out of Germany, condescending to make the first
advances toward an agreement, than concluding their spirit to be gone, or
their union to be broken, he immediately assumed the tone of a conqueror; and,
as if they had been already at his mercy, would not hear of a negotiation, but
upon condition of the Elector of Saxony's consenting previously to give up
himself and his dominions absolutely to his disposal Hortentius ap. Scard. ii.
485.
. As nothing more intolerable or ignominious could have been prescribed, even
in the worst situation of their affairs, it is no wonder this proposition was
rejected by a party, humbled and disconcerted rather than subdued. But though
they refused to submit tamely to the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to
pursue the only plan which could have preserved their independence; and
forgetting that it was the union of their troops in one body which had hitherto
rendered the confederacy formidable, and had more than once obliged the
Imperialists to think of quitting the field; they inconsiderately abandoned
that advantage, which, in spite of the diversion in Saxony, would still have
kept the Emperor in awe; and yielding to the Elector's entreaties, consented to
his proposal of dividing the army. Nine thousand men were left in the duchy of
Wurtemberg, in order to protect that province, as well as the free cities of
Upper Germany; a considerable body marched with the Elector toward Saxony; but
the greater part returned with their respective leaders into their own
countries, and were dispersed there Sleid. 411.
.

THE moment the troops separated, the confederacy ceased to be the object of
terror; and the members of it, who, while they composed part of a great body,
had felt but little anxiety about their own security, began to tremble when
they reflected that they now stood exposed singly to the whole weight of the
Emperor's vengeance. Charles did not allow them leisure to recover from their
consternation, or to form any new schemes of union. As soon as the confederates
began to retire, he put his army in motion, and though it was now the depth of
winter, he resolved to keep the field, in order to make the most of that
favorable juncture for which he had waited so long. Some small towns in which
the enemy had left garrisons immediately opened their gates. Norlingen,
Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial cities, submitted soon after. Though Charles could
not prevent the Elector from levying, as he retreated, large contributions upon
the archbishop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other ecclesiastics Thuan. 88.
, this was more than balanced by the submission of Ulm, one of the chief cities
of Suabia, highly distinguished by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league. As soon
as an example was set of deserting the common cause, the rest of the members
became instantly impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid lest others, by
getting the start of them in returning to their duty, should, on that account,
obtain more favorable terms. The Elector Palatine, a weak Prince, who,
notwithstanding his professions of neutrality, had very preposterously, sent to
the confederates four hundred horse, a body so inconsiderable as to be scarce
any addition to their strength, but great enough to render him guilty in the
eyes of the Emperor, made his acknowledgments in the most abject manner. The
inhabitants of Augsburgh, shaken by so many instances of apostasy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted such conditions as the Emperor
was pleased to grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the first who had offered to submit, was
obliged to sue for pardon on his knees, and even after this mortifying
humiliation obtained it with difficulty Mem. de Ribier. tom. i. 589.
. Memmingen, and other free cities in the circle of Suabia, being now abandoned
by all their former associates, found it necessary to provide for their own
safety by throwing themselves on the Emperor's mercy. Strasburgh and Frankfort
on the Maine, cities far remote from the seat of danger, discovered no greater
steadiness than those which lay more exposed. Thus, a confederacy, lately so
powerful as to shake the Imperial throne, fell to pieces and was dissolved in
the space of a few weeks; scarce any member of that formidable combination now
remaining in arms, but the Elector and Landgrave, whom the Emperor, having from
the beginning marked out as the victims of his vengeance, was at no pains to
reconcile. Nor did he grant those who submitted to him a generous and
unconditional pardon. Conscious of his own superiority, he treated them both
with haughtiness and rigor. All the Princes in person, and the cities, by
their deputies, were compelled to implore mercy in the humble posture of
supplicants. As the Emperor labored under great difficulties from the want of
money, he imposed heavy fines upon them, which he levied with most rapacious
exactness. The Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred thousand crowns; the city
of Augsburgh an hundred and fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Frankfort
eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand; and the rest in proportion to their
abilities, or their different degrees of guilt. They were obliged, besides, to
renounce the league of Smalkalde; to furnish assistance, if required, toward
executing the Imperial ban against the Elector and Landgrave; to give up their
artillery and warlike stores to the Emperor; to admit garrisons into their
principal cities and places of strength; and in this disarmed and dependent
situation, to expect the final award which the Emperor should think proper to
pronounce when the war came to an issue Sleid. 411, etc. Thuan. lib. iv. p.
125. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 606.
. But, amidst the great variety of articles dictated by Charles on this
occasion, he, in conformity to his original plan, took care that nothing
relating to religion should be inserted, and to such a degree were the
confederates humbled or overawed, that, forgetting the zeal which had so long
animated them, they were solicitous only about their safety, without venturing
to insist on a point, the mention of which they saw him avoiding with so much
industry. The inhabitants of Memmingen alone made some feeble efforts to
procure a promise of protection in the exercise of their religion, but were
checked so severely by the Emperor's ministers, that they instantly fell from
their demand.

THE Elector or Cologne, whom, notwithstanding the sentence of excommunication
issued against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto allowed to remain in
possession of the archiepiscopal see, being now required by the Emperor to
submit to the censures of the church this virtuous and disinterested prelate,
unwilling to expose his subjects, on his account, to the miseries of war,
voluntarily resigned that high dignity. With a moderation becoming his age and
character, he chose to enjoy truth, together with the exercise of his religion,
in the retirement of a private life, rather than to disturb society by engaging
in a doubtful and violent struggle in order to retain his office Sleid. 418.
Thuan. lib. iv. 128.
.

MEANWHILE the Elector of Saxony reached the frontiers of his country. As
Maurice could assemble no force equal to the army which accompanied him, he,
in, a short time, not only recovered possession of his own territories, but
overran Misnir, and stripped his rival of all that belonged to him, except
Dresden and Leipsic, which being towns of some strength could not be suddenly
reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit the field, and to shut himself up in his
capital, dispatched courier after courier to the Emperor, representing his
dangerous situation, and soliciting him with the most earnest importunity to
march immediately to his relief. But Charles, busy at that time in prescribing
terms to such members of the league as were daily returning to their
allegiance, thought it sufficient to detach Albert Marquis of Brandenburgh
Anspach with three thousand men to his assistance. Albert, though an
enterprizing and active officer, allowed himself to be surprised by the
Elector, who killed many of his troops, dispersed the remainder, and took him
prisoner Avila 99. 6. ^^^n. de Ribier, tom. i. 620.
. Maurice continued as much exposed as formerly; and if his enemy had known how
to improve the opportunity which presented itself, his ruin must have been
immediate and unavoidable. But the Elector, no less slow and dilatory when
invested with the sole command, than he had been formerly when joined in
authority with a partner, never gave any proof of military activity but in this
enterprise against Albert. Instead of marching directly toward Maurice, whom
the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed, he inconsiderately listened to
overtures of accommodation, which his artful antagonist proposed with no other
intention than to amuse him, and to slacken the vigor of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the posture of the Emperor's affairs that he could not march
instantly to the relief of his ally. Soon after the separation of the
confederate army, he, in order to ease himself of the burden of maintaining a
superfluous number of troops, had dismissed the Count of Buren with his
Flemings Avila 83 6. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 592.
, imagining that the Spaniards and Germans, together with the papal forces,
would be fully sufficient to crush any degree of vigor that yet remained among
the members of the league. But Paul, growing wise too late, began now to
discover the imprudence of that measure, from which the more sagacious
Venetians had endeavored in vain to dissuade him. The rapid progress of the
Imperial arms, and the ease with which they had broken a combination that
appeared so firm and powerful, opened at length his eyes, made him forget at
once all the advantages which he had expected from such a complete triumph over
heresy, and placed, in the strongest light, his own impolitic conduct, in
having contributed toward acquiring for Charles such an immense increase of
power, as would enable him, after oppressing the liberties of Germany, to give
law with absolute authority to all the states of Italy. The moment he perceived
his error, he endeavored to correct it. Without giving the Emperor any warning
of his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson, to return instantly to
Italy with all the troops under his command, and at the same time recalled the
license which he had granted Charles, of appropriating to his own use, a large
share of the churchlands in Spain. He was not destitute of pretenses to justify
this abrupt desertion of his ally. The term of six months, during which the
stipulations in their treaty were to continue in force, was now expired; the
league, in opposition to which their alliance had been framed, seemed to be
entirely dissipated; Charles, in all his negociations with the Princes and
cities which had submitted to his will, had neither consulted the Pope, nor had
allotted him any part of the conquests which he had made, nor had communicated
to him any share in the vast contributions that he had raised. He had not even
made any provision for the suppression of heresy, or the re-establishment of
the Catholic religion, which were Paul's chief inducements to bestow the
treasures of the church so liberally in carrying on the war. These colors, how
specious soever, did not conceal from the Emperor that secret jealousy which
was the true motive of the Pope's conduct. But, as Paul's orders with regard to
the march of his troops were no less peremptory than unexpected, it was
impossible to prevent their retreat. Charles exclaimed loudly against this
treachery, in abandoning him so unseasonably, while he was prosecuting a war
undertaken in compliance with his earnest solicitations, and from which, if
successful, so much honor and advantage would redound to the church. To
complaints he added threats and expostulations. But Paul remained inflexible;
his troops continued their march toward the ecclesiastical state; and in an
elaborate memorial, intended as an apology for his behavior, he discovered new
and more manifest symptoms of alienation from the Emperor, together with a
deep-rooted terror of his power F. Paul. 208. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thuan.
126.
. Charles weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body from his army, which
was already much diminished by the number of garrisons that he had been obliged
to throw into the towns which had capitulated, found it necessary to recruit
his forces by new levies, before he could venture to march in person toward
Saxony.

THE fame and splendor of his success could not have failed of attracting such
multitudes of soldiers into his service from all the extensive territories now
subject to his authority, as must have soon put him in a condition of taking
the field against the Elector; but the sudden and violent eruption of a
conspiracy at Genoa, as well as the great revolutions which that event,
extremely mysterious in its first appearances, seemed to portend, obliged him
to avoid entangling himself in new operations in Germany, before he had fully
discovered its source and tendency. The form of government which had been
established in Genoa, at the time when Andrew Doria restored liberty to his
country, though calculated to obliterate the memory of former dissensions, and
received at first with eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near twenty
years, give universal satisfaction to these turbulent and factious republicans.
As the entire administration of affairs was now lodged in a certain number of
noble families, many, envying them that pre-eminence, wished for the
restitution of a popular government, to which they had been accustomed; and
though all reverenced the disinterested virtue of Doria, and admired his
talents, not a few were jealous of that ascendant which he had acquired in all
the councils of the commonwealth. His age, however, his moderation, and love of
liberty, afforded ample security to his countrymen that he would not abuse his
power, nor stain the close of his days by attempting to overturn that fabric,
which it had been the labor and pride of his life to erect. But that authority
and influence, which in his hands were innocent, they easily saw would prove
destructive, if usurped by any citizen of greater ambition, or less virtue. A
citizen of this dangerous character had actually formed such pretensions, and
with some prospect of success. Giannetino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew
destined to be the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise at being his
successor in power. His temper haughty, insolent, and overbearing to such a
degree as would scarce have been tolerated in one born to reign, was altogether
insupportable in the citizen of a free state; and the more sagacious among the
Genoese already feared and hated him as the enemy of those liberties for which
they were indebted to his uncle. While Andrew himself, blinded by that violent
and undiscerning affection which persons in advanced age often contract for the
younger members of their family, set no bounds to the indulgence with which he
treated him; seeming less solicitous to secure and perpetuate the freedom of
the commonwealth, than to aggrandize that undeserving kinsman.

BUT, whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or whatever dissatisfaction with
the system of administration in the commonwealth, these circumstances might
have occasioned, they would have ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis Fiesco, Count of Lavagna, observing
this growing disgust, had not been encouraged by it to attempt one of the
boldest actions recorded in history. That young nobleman, the richest and most
illustrious subject in the republic, possessed, in an eminent degree, all the
qualities which win upon the human heart, which command respect, or secure
attachment. He was graceful and majestic in his person; magnificent to
profusion; of a generosity that prevented the wishes of his friends, and
exceeded the expectations of strangers; of an insinuating address, gentle
manners, and a flowing affability. But under the appearance of these virtues,
which seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning civil life, he concealed all
the dispositions which mark men out for taking the lead in the most dangerous
and dark conspiracies; an insatiable and restless ambition, a courage
unacquainted with fear, and a mind that disdained subordination. Such a temper
could ill brook that station of inferiority, wherein he was placed in the
republic; and as he envied the power which the elder Doria had acquired, he was
filled with indignation at the thoughts of its descending, like an hereditary
possession, to Giannetino. These various passions, preying with violence on his
turbulent and aspiring mind, determined him to attempt overturning that
domination to which he could not submit.

AT first he thought of an alliance with Francis, and even proposed it to the
French ambassador at Rome, as the most effectual means of accomplishing this;
and after expelling Doria together with the Imperial faction by his assistance,
he resolved to put the republic once more under the protection of that Monarch
hoping in return for that service to be entrusted with the principal share in
the administration of government. But having communicated his scheme to a few
chosen confidence, from whom he kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of
them, a man of desperate fortune, capable alike of advising and of executing
the most audacious deeds, remonstrated with earnestness against the folly of
exposing himself to the most imminent danger, while he allowed another to reap
all the fruits of his success; and exhorted him warmly to aim himself at that
pre-eminence in his country, to which he was destined by his illustrious birth,
was called by the voice of his fellow-citizens, and would be raised by the zeal
of his friends. This discourse opened such vast prospects to Fiesco, and so
suitable to his genius, that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly adopted that
of Verrina. The other persons present, though sensible of the hazardous nature
of the undertaking, did not choose to condemn what their patron had so warmly
approved. It was instantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to assassinate the two
Dorias, as well as the principal persons of their party, to overturn the
established system of government, and to place Fiesco on the ducal throne of
Genoa. Time, however, and preparations were requisite to ripen such a design
for execution; and while he was employed in carrying on these, Fiesco made it
his chief care to guard against every thing that might betray his secret, or
create suspicion. The disguise he assumed was of all others the most
impenetrable. He seemed to be abandoned entirely to pleasure and dissipation. A
perpetual gaiety, diversified by the pursuit of all the amusements becoming his
age and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole of his time and thoughts. But
amidst this hurry of dissipation, he prosecuted his plan with the most cool
attention, neither retarding the design by a timid hesitation, nor
precipitating the execution by an excess of impatience. He continued his
correspondence with the French ambassador at Rome, though without communicating
to him his real intentions, that by his means he might secure the protection of
the French arms, if hereafter he should find it necessary to call them to his
aid. He entered into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of Parma, who being
disgusted with the Emperor for refusing to grant him the investiture of that
duchy, was eager, to promote any measure that tended to diminish his influence
in Italy, or to ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as that of Doria.
Being sensible, that in a maritime state, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased four galleys from the Pope, who
probably was not unacquainted with the design which he had formed, and did not
disapprove of it. Under color of fitting out one of these galleys to sail on a
cruize against the Turks, he not only assembled a good number of his own
vassals, but engaged in his service many bold adventurers, whom the truce
between the Emperor and Solomon had deprived of their usual occupation and
subsistence.

WHILE Fiesco was taking these important steps, he preserved so admirably his
usual appearance of being devoted entirely to pleasure and amusement, and paid
court with such artful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not only on the
generous and unsuspicious mind of Andrew, but deceived Giannetino, who,
conscious of his own criminal intentions, was more apt to distrust the designs
of others. So many instruments being now prepared, nothing remained but to
strike the blow. Various consultations were held by Fiesco with his confidents,
in order to settle the manner of doing it with the greatest certainty and
effect. At first, they proposed to murder the Dorias and their chief adherents,
during the celebration of high mass in the principal church; but as Andrew was
often absent from these religious solemnities, on account of his great age,
that design was laid aside. It was then concerted that Fiesco should invite the
uncle and nephew, with all their friends whom he had marked out as victims, to
his house; where it would be easy to cut them off at once without danger or
resistance; but as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town on the day which
they had chosen, it became necessary likewise to alter this plan. They at last
determined to attempt by open force, what they found difficult to effect by
stratagem, and fixed on the night between the second and third of January, for
the execution of their enterprise. The time was chosen with great propriety;
for, as the Doge of the former year was to quit his office, according to
custom, on the first of the month, and his successor could not be elected
sooner than the fourth, the republic remained during that interval in a sort of
anarchy, and Fiesco might with less violence take possession of the vacant
dignity.

THE morning of that day Fiesco employed in visiting his friends, passing some
hours among them with a spirit as gay and unembarassed as at other-times.
Toward evening he paid court to the Dorias with his usual marks of respect,
and surveying their countenance and behavior with the attention natural in his
situation, was happy to observe the perfect security in which they remained,
without the least foresight or dread of that storm which had been so long a
gathering, and was now ready to burst over their heads. From their palace he
hastened to his own, which stood by itself in the middle of a large court,
surrounded by a high wall. The gates had been set open in the morning, and all
persons, without distinction, were allowed to enter, but strong guards posted
within the court suffered no one to return. Verrina, meanwhile, and a few
persons trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, after conducting Fiesco's
vassals, as well as the crews of his galleys into the palace in small bodies,
with as little noise as possible, dispersed themselves through the city, and in
the name of their patron, invited to an entertaiment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the administration of the Dorias, and to
have both inclination and courage to attempt a change in the government. Of the
vast number of persons who now filled the palace, a few only knew for what
purpose they were assembled, the rest astonished at finding, instead of the
preparations for a feast, a court crowded with armed men, and apartments filled
with the instruments of war, gazed on each other with a mixture of impatience,
curiosity and terror.

WHILE their minds were in this state of suspense and agitation, Fiesco
appeared. With a look full of alacrity and confidence, he addressed himself to
the persons of chief distinction, telling them, that they were not now called
to partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join in a deed of
valor, which would lead them to liberty and immortal renown. He set before
their eyes the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority of the elder Doria,
which the ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of the Emperor to a family
more devoted to him than to their country, was about to enlarge and to render
perpetual. This unrighteous domination, continued he, you have it now in your
power to subvert, and to establish the freedom of your country on a firm basis.
The tyrants must be cut off. I have taken the most effectual measures for this
purpose. My associates are numerous. I can depend on allies and protectors if
necessary. Happily the tyrants are as secure as I have been provident. Their
insolent contempt of their countrymen, has banished the suspicion and timidity
which usually render the guilty quick-sighted to discern, as well as sagacious
to guard against the vengeance which they deserve. They will now feel the blow,
before they suspect any hostile hand to be nigh. Let us then sally forth, that
we may deliver our country by one generous effort, almost unaccompanied with
danger, and certain of success. These words, uttered with that irresistible
fervor which animates the mind when rouzed by great objects, made the desired
impression on the audience. Fiesco's vassals, ready to execute whatever their
master should command, received his discourse with a murmur of applause. To
many whose fortunes were desperate, the license and confusion of an
insurrection afforded an agreeable prospect. Those of higher rank and more
virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the surprise or horror with which they
were struck at the proposal of an enterprise so unexpected and attrocious; as
each imagined the other to be in the secret of the conspiracy, and saw himself
surrounded by persons who waited only a signal from their leader to perpetrate
the greatest crime. With one voice then all applauded, or feigned to applaud,
the undertaking.

HAVING thus fixed and encouraged his associates, before he gave them his last
orders, he hastened for a moment to the apartment of his wife, a lady of the
noble house of Cibo, whom he loved with tender affection, and whose beauty and
virtue rendered her worthy of his love. The noise of the armed men who crowded
the court and palace, having long before this reached her ears, she concluded
some hazardous enterprise to be in hand, and she trembled for her husband. He
found her in all the anguish of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now
impossible to keep his design concealed, he informed her of what he had
undertaken. The prospect of a scene so full of horror as well as danger,
completed her agony; and foreboding immediately in her mind the fatal issue of
it, she endeavored, by her tears, her entreaties and her despair, to divert
him from his purpose. Fiesco, after trying in vain to sooth and to inspire her
with hope, broke from a situation into which an excess of tenderness had
unwarily seduced him, though it could not shake his resolution. "Farewell,"
cried he, as he quitted her apartment, "you shall either never see me more, or
you shall behold tomorrow every thing in Genoa subject to your power."

AS soon as he rejoined his companions, he allotted each his proper station;
some were appointed to assault and seize the different gates of the city; some
to make themselves masters of the different streets or places of strength:
Fiesco reserved for himself the attack of the harbor where Doria's galleys
were laid up, as the post of chief importance, and of greatest danger. It was
now midnight, and the citizens slept in the security of peace, when this band
of conspirators, numerous, desperate and well armed, rushed out to execute
their plan. They surprised, without resistance, some of the gates. They got
possession of others after a sharp conflict with the soldiers on guard.
Verrina, with the galley that had been fitted out against the Turks, blocked up
the mouth of the Darsena or little harbor where Doria's fleet lay. All
possibility of escape being by this precaution cut off, when Fiesco attempted
to enter the galleys from the shore to which they were made fast, as they were
unrigged and disarmed, having no crew on board but the slaves chained to the
oar, they were in no condition to make resistance. Every quarter of the city
was now filled with noise and tumult, and all the streets resounding with the
cry of Fiesco and liberty. At that name, so popular and beloved, many of the
lower rank took arms, and joined the conspirators. The nobles and partisans of
the aristocracy, astonished or affrighted, shut the gates of their houses, and
thought of nothing but securing them from pillage. At last, the noise excited
by this scene of violence and confusion, reached the palace of Doria;
Giannetino started immediately from his bed, and imagining that it was
occasioned by some mutiny among the sailors, rushed out with a few attendants,
and hurried toward the harbor. The gate of St. Thomas through which he had to
pass, was already in the possession of the conspirators, who, the moment he
entered, fall upon him with the utmost fury, and murdered him upon the spot.
The same must have been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiesco had
executed his brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately to attack him in his
palace; but he, from the sordid consideration of preventing its being plundered
amidst the confusion, having forbid his followers to advance. Andrew got
intelligence of his nephew's death, as well as of his own danger; and mounting
on horseback, saved himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few senators that had the
courage to assemble in the palace of the republic Il palazza della de Signoria.
. At first, some of the most daring among them attempted to rally the scattered
soldiers, and to attack a body of the conspirators; but being repulsed with
loss, all agreed that nothing now remained, but to treat with the party which
seemed to be irresistible. Deputies were accordingly sent to learn of Fiesco
what were the concessions with which he would be satisfied, or rather to submit
to whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiesco, with whom they were empowered to negociate, was no
more. Just as he was going to leave the harbor, where every thing had
succeeded to his wish, that he might join his victorious companions, he heard
some extraordinary uproar on board the Admiral galley. Alarmed at the noise,
and fearing that the slaves might break their chains, and overpower his
associates, he ran thither; but the plank which reached from the shore to the
vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the sea, whilst he hurried forward
too precipitately. Being loaded with heavy armor, he sunk to the bottom, and
perished in the very moment when he must have taken full possession of every
thing that his ambitious heart could desire. Verrina was the first who
discovered this fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its consequences,
concealed it with the utmost industry from every one but a few leaders of the
conspiracy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the darkness and confusion of the
night, to have kept it secret, until a treaty with the senators should have put
the city in the power of the conspirators. All their hopes of this were
disconcerted by the imprudence of Jerome Fiesco, who, when the deputies of the
senate enquired for his brother, the Count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposals to him, replied with a childish vanity, "I am now the only
person to whom that title belongs, and with me you must treat." These words
discovered both to his friends and enemies what had happened, and made the
impression that might have been expected upon both. The deputies, encouraged by
this event, the only one which could occasion such a sudden revolution as might
turn to their advantage, assumed instantly, with admirable presence of mind, a
new tone, suitable to the change in their circumstances, and made high demands.
While they endeavored to gain time by protracting the negotiation, the rest of
the senators were busy in assembling their partisans, and forming a body
capable of defending the palace of the republic. On the other hand, the
conspirators, astonished at the death of a man whom they adored and trusted,
and placing no confidence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage ^^^away,
and their arms fall from their hands. That profound and amazing secrecy with
which the conspiracy had been concerted, and which had contributed hitherto so
much to its success, proved now the chief cause of its miscarriage. The leader
was gone, the greater part of those who acted under him, knew not his
confidents, and were strangers to the object at which he aimed. There was no
person among them whose authority or abilities entitled him to assume Fiesco's
place, or to finish his plan; after having lost the spirit which animated it,
life and activity deserted the whole body. Many of the conspirators withdrew to
their houses, hoping, that amidst the darkness of the night they had passed
unobserved, and might remain unknown. Others sought for safety by a timely
retreat; and before break of day, all of them fled with precipitation from a
city, which, but a few hours before, was ready to acknowledge them as masters.

NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa; not an enemy was to be seen; few
marks of the violence of the former night appeared, the conspirators having
conducted their enterprise with more noise than bloodshed, and gained all their
advantages by surprise rather than by force of arms. Toward evening Andrew
Doria returned to the city, being met by all the inhabitants, who received him
with acclamations of joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger of the
preceding night, were fresh in his mind, and the mangled body of his kinsman
still before his eyes, such was his moderation and magnanimity, that the decree
issued by the senate against the conspirators, did not exceed that just measure
of severity which was requisite for the support of government, and was dictated
neither by the violence of resentment, not the rancour of revenge Thuan. 93.
Sigonii vita Andreae Doria, 1196. La Conjuration de Comte de Fiesque par
Cardin. de Retz. Adriani Istoria, lib. vi. 369. Folietae Conjuratio Jo. Lud.
Fiesci ap. Graev. These. Ital. i. 883.
It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz composed, at the age of eighteen, a
history of this conspiracy, containing such a discovery of his admiration of
Fiesco and his enterprise, that it is not surprising that a minister, so
jealous and discerning as Richeleu, should be led by the perusal of it to
predict the turbulent and dangerous spirit of that young ecclesiastic. Mem. de
Retz, tom, i. p. 13.
.

AFTER taking the necessary precautions for preventing the flame, which was now
so happily extinguished, from breaking out anew, the first care of the senate
was to send an ambassador to the Emperor to give him a particular detail of
what had happened, and to beg his assistance toward the reduction of
Montobbio, a strong fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiesci, in which
Jerome had shut himself up. Charles was no less alarmed than astonished at an
event so strange and unexpected. He could not believe that Fiesco, how bold or
adventrous soever, durst have attempted such an enterprise, but on foreign
suggestion, and from hope of foreign aid. Being informed that the Duke of Parma
was well acquainted with the plan of the conspirators, he immediately supposed
that the Pope could not be ignorant of a measure, which his son had
countenanced. Proceeding from this to a farther conjecture, which Paul's
cautious maxims of policy in other instances, rendered extremely probable, he
concluded that the French King must have known and approved of the design; and
he began to apprehend that this spark might again kindle the flame of war which
had raged so long in Italy. As he had drained his Italian territories of troops
on account of the German war, he was altogether unprovided for resisting any
hostile attack in that country; and on the first appearance of danger he must
have detached thither the greatest part of its forces for its defense. In this
situation of affairs, it would not have been altogether prudent in the Emperor
to have advanced in person against the Elector, until he should learn with some
degree of certainty whether such a scene were not about to open in Italy, as
might put it out of his power to keep the field with an army sufficient to
oppose him.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IX.
THE Emperor's dread of the hostile intentions of the Pope and French King did
not proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded suspicion. Paul had already
given the strongest proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could not
hope, that Francis, after a rivalship of so long continuance, would behold the
great advantages which he had gained over the confederate Protestants, without
feeling his ancient emulation revive. He was not deceived in this conjecture.
Francis had observed the rapid progress of his arms with deep concern, and
though prevented hitherto, by circumstances which have been mentioned, from
interposing in order to check them, he was now convinced that, if he did not
make some extraordinary and timely effort, Charles must acquire such a degree
of power as would enable him to give law to the rest of Europe. This
apprehension, which did not take its rise from the envy of rivalship alone, but
was entertained by the wisest politicians of the age, suggested various
expedients which might serve to retard the course of the Emperor's victories,
and to form, by degrees, such a combination against him as might put a stop to
his dangerous career.

WITH this view, Francis instructed his emissaries in Germany to employ all
their address in order to revive the courage of the confederates, and to
prevent them from submitting to the Emperor. He made liberal offers of his
assistance, and entering into a close correspondence with the Elector and
Landgrave, whom he knew to be the most zealous, as well as the most powerful of
the whole body, he used every argument, and proposed every advantage which
could either confirm their dread of the Emperor's designs, or determine them
not to imitate the inconsiderate credulity of their associates in giving up
their religion and liberties to his disposal. While he took this step toward
continuing the civil war which raged in Germany, he endeavored, likewise, to
stir up foreign enemies against the Emperor. He solicited Solomon to seize this
favorable opportunity of invading Hungary, which had been drained of all the
troops necessary for its defense, in order to form the army against the
confederates of Smalkalde. He exhorted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he had been guilty in contributing to
raise the Emperor to such a formidable height of power. Finding Paul, both from
the consciousness of his own mistake, and his dread of its consequences,
abundantly disposed to listen to his exhortations, he availed himself of this
favorable disposition which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argument to
gain the Venetians. He endeavored to convince them that nothing could save
Italy, and even Europe from oppression and servitude, but their joining the
Pope and him, in giving the first beginning to a general confederacy, in order
to humble that ambitious Potentate, whom they had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot these negociations in the southern courts, he turned his
attention next toward those in the north of Europe. As the King of Denmark had
particular reasons to be offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined that he
would not be backward to approve of the league which he had projected; and lest
considerations of caution or prudence should restrain him from joining in it,
he attempted to overcome these, by offering him the young Queen of Scots in
marriage to his son Mem. de Rib. i. 600, 606.
. As the ministers who governed England in the name of Edward VI. had openly
declared themselves converts to the opinions of the Reformers, as soon as it
became safe upon Henry's death to lay aside that disguise, which his
unforgiving bigotry had forced them to assume, Francis flattered himself, that
their zeal would not allow them to remain inactive spectators of the overthrow
and destruction of those who professed the same faith with themselves; and he
hoped, that notwithstanding the struggles of faction incident to a minority,
and the prospect of an approaching rupture with the Scots, he might prevail on
them likewise to take part in the common cause Mem. de Rib. i. 635.
.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of expedients* and exerted himself with
such extraordinary activity, ^ rouse the different states of Europe against his
rival, he did not neglect what depended on himself alone. He levied troops in
all parts of his dominions; he collected military stores; he contracted with
the Swiss contou^ for a considerable body of men; he put his finances in
admirable order; he remitted considerable sums to the Elector and Landgrave;
and took all the other steps necessary toward commencing hostilities on the
shortest warning, and with proper vigor Mem. de Rib. i. 595.
.

OPERATIONS so complicated, and which required the putting so many instruments
in motion, did not escape the Emperor's observation. He was soon informed of
Francis's intrigues in the several courts, as well as of his domestic
preparations; and sensible how fatal an interruption a foreign war would prove
to his designs in Germany, he trembled at the prospect of that event. The
danger, however, appeared to him as unavoidable as it was great. He knew the
insatiable and well directed ambition of Solomon, and that he always chose the
season for beginning his military enterprises with prudence equal to the valor
with which he conducted them. The Pope, as he had good reason to believe,
wanted not pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclinations to begin
hostilities. He had already made some discovery of his sentiments, by
expressing a joy altogether unbecoming the head of the church, upon receiving
an account of the advantage which the Elector of Saxony had gained over Albert
of Br^ndenburgh; and as he was now secure of finding in the French King, an
ally of sufficient power to support him, he was at no pains to conceal the
violence and the extent of his enmity Mem. de Rib. tom. i 637.
. The Venetians, Charles was well assured, had long observed the growth of his
power with jealousy, which added to the solicitations and promises of France,
might at last quicken their flow counsels, and overcome their natural caution.
The Danes and English, it was evident, had both peculiar reason to be
disgusted, as well as strong motives to act against him. But above all, he
dreaded the active emulation of Francis himself, whom he considered as the soul
and mover of any confederacy that could be formed against him; and as that
Monarch had afforded protection to Verrina, who sailed directly to Marseilles
upon the miscarriage of Fiesco's, conspiracy, Charles expected every moment the
commencement of these hostile operations in Italy, of which he conceived the
insurrection in Genoa to have been only the pre^^de.

BUT while he remained in this state of suspense and solicitude, there was one
circumstance which afforded him some prospect of escaping the danger. The
French King's health began to decline. A disease, the effect of his
intemperance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually on his
constitution. The preparations of war, as well as the negociations in the
different courts, began to languish, together with the Monarch, who gave spirit
to both. The Genoese, during that interval, reduced Montobbio, took Jerome
Fiesco prisoner, and putting him, together with his chief adherents to death,
extinguished all remains of the conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in
Germany, despairing of timely assistance from France, submitted to the Emperor.
Even the Landgrave seemed disposed to abandon the Elector, and to bring matters
to a speedy accommodation, on such terms as he could obtain. In the mean time,
Charles waited with impatience the issue of a distemper, which was to decide
whether he must relinquish all other schemes, in order to prepare for resisting
a combination of the greater part of Europe against him, or whether he might
proceed to invade Saxony, without interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious to his family, that some historians
have called it the Star of the House of Austria, did not desert him on this
occasion. Francis died at Rambouillet, on the last day of March, in the
fifty-third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his reign. During
twenty-eight years of that time, as avowed rivalship subsisted between him and
the Emperor, which involved not only their own dominions, but the greater part
of Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent animosity, and drawn out to a
greater length, than had been known in any former period. Many circumstances
contributed to both. Their animosity was founded in opposition of interest,
heightened by personal emulation, and exasperated not only by mutual injuries,
but by reciprocal insults. At the same time, whatever advantage one seemed to
possess toward gaining the ascendant, was wonderfully balanced by some
favorable circumstance, peculiar to the other. The Emperor's dominions were of
great extent, the French King's lay more compact; Francis governed his kingdom
with absolute power; that of Charles was limited, but he supplied the want of
authority by address; the troops of the former were more impetuous and
enterprizing; those of the latter better disciplined, and more patient of
fatigue. The talents and abilities of the two Monarchs were as different as the
advantages which they possessed, and contributed no less to prolong the contest
between them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly, prosecuted them at first
with warmth, and pushed them into execution with a most adventrous courage; but
being destitute of the perseverance necessary to surmount difficulties, he
often abandoned his designs, or relaxed the vigor of pursuit, from impatience,
and sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long, and determined with
coolness; but, having once fixed his plan, he adhered to it with inflexible
obstinacy, and neither danger nor discouragement could turn him aside from the
execution of it. The success of their enterprises was altogether as different
as their characters, and was uniformly influenced by them. Francis, by his
impetuous activity, often disconcerted the Emperor's best laid schemes;
Charles, by a more calm but steady prosecution of his designs, checked the
rapidity of his rival's career, and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous
efforts. The former, at the opening of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon
his enemy with the violence of a torrent, and carried all before him; the
latter, waiting until he saw the force of his rival begin to abate, recovered
in the end not only all that he had lost, but made new acquisitions. Few of the
French Monarch's attempts toward conquest, whatever promising aspect they
might wear at first, were conducted to an happy issue; many of the Emperor's
enterprises, even after they appeared desperate and impracticable, terminated
in the most prosperous manner. Francis was dazzled with the splendor of an
undertaking; Charles was allured by the prospect of its turning to his
advantage. The degree, however, of their comparative merit and reputation, has
not been fixed either by a strict scrutiny into their abilities for government,
or by an impartial consideration of the greatness and success of their
undertakings; and Francis is one of those Monarchs who occupies a higher rank
in the temple of fame, than either his talents or performances entitle him to
hold. This pre-eminence he owed to many different circumstances. The
superiority which Charles acquired by the victory of Pavia, and which from that
period he preserved through the remainder of his reign, was so manifest, that
Francis's struggle against his exorbitant and growing dominion was viewed by
most of the other powers, not only with the partiality which naturally arises
for those who gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with the favor due to
one who was resisting a common enemy, and endeavoring to set bounds to a
Monarch equally formidable to them all. The characters of Princes, too,
especially among their contemporaries, depend not only upon their talents for
government, but upon their qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the many
errors conspicuous in his foreign policy and domestic administration, was
nevertheless humane, beneficent and generous. He possessed dignity without
pride; affability free from meanness; and courtesy exempt from deceit. All who
had access to him, and no man of merit was ever denied that privilege,
respected and loved him. Captivated with his personal qualities, he subjects
forgot his defects as a Monarch, and admiring him as the most accomplished and
amiable gentleman in his dominions, they never murmured at acts of
maladministration, which in a Prince of less engaging dispositions, would
have been deemed unpardonable. This admiration, however, must have been
temporary only, and would have died away with the courtiers who bestowed it;
the illusion arising from his private virtues must have ceased, and posterity
would have judged of his public conduct with its usual impartiality; but
another circumstance prevented this, and his name has been transmitted to
posterity with increasing reputation. Science and the arts had, at that time,
made little progress in France. They were just beginning to advance beyond the
limits of Italy, where they had revived, and which had hitherto been their only
seat. Francis took them immediately under his protection, and vied with Leo
himself, in the zeal and munificence with which he encouraged them. He invited
learned men to his court, he conversed with them familiarly, he employed them
in business, he raised them to offices of dignity, and honored them with his
confidence. That race of men, not more prone to complain when denied the
respect to which they fancy themselves entitled, than apt to be pleased when
treated with the distinction which they consider as their due, thought they
could not exceed in gratitude to such a benefactor, and strained their
invention, and employed all their ingenuity in panegyric. Succeeding authors,
warmed with their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted their encomiums,
and refined upon them. The appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, has rendered his memory sacred among historians, and they seem to
have regarded it as a sort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to point
out his defects. Thus Francis, notwithstanding his inferior abilities, and want
of success, has more than equalled the fame of Charles. The virtues which he
possessed as a man, have entitled him to greater admiration and praise than
have been bestowed upon the extensive genius and fortunate arts of a more
capable, but less amiable rival.

BY his death, a considerable change was made in the state of Europe. Charles,
grown old in the arts of government and command, had now to contend only with
younger Monarchs, who could not be regarded as an equal match for him, who had
stood the encounter with Henry VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honor in
all th^se different contests. By this event he was eased of all his
disquietude, and was happy to find that he might begin with safety those
operations against the Elector of Saxony, which he had hitherto been obliged to
suspend. He knew the abilities of Henry II. who had just mounted the throne of
France, to be greatly inferior to those of his father, and foresaw that he
would be so much occupied for some time in displacing the late King's
ministers, whom he hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands of his own
favorites, that he had nothing to dread, either from his personal efforts, or
from any confederacy which this unexperienced Prince could form.

BUT as it was uncertain how long such an interval of security might continue,
Charles determined instantly to improve it; and as soon as he heard of
Francis's demise, he began his march from Egra, on the borders of Bohemia. But
the departure or the papal troops, together with the retreat of the Flemings,
had so much diminished his army, that sixteen thousand men were all he could
assemble. With this inconsiderable body he set out on an expedition, the event
of which was to decide what degree of authority he should possess from that
period in Germany; but as this little army consisted chiefly of the veteran
Spanish and Italian bands, he did not, in trusting to them, commit much to the
decision of chance, and even with so small a force he had reason to entertain
the most sanguine hopes of success. The Elector, it is true, had levied an army
greatly superior in number; but neither the experience and discipline of his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to be compared with those of
the Emperor. The Elector, besides, (...) already been guilty of an error, which
deprived him o^ all the advantage which he might have derived from (...)
superiority in number, and was alone sufficient to have occasioned his ruin.
Instead of keeping his forces united, detached one great body toward the
frontiers of Bohemia, in order to facilitate his junction with the man contents
of that kingdom, and cantoned a considerable part of what remained in different
places of Saxony, where he expected the Emperor would make the first
impression, vainly imagining, that these open town, with small garrisons, might
be rendered tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontier of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon
the Elster. The folly of the measure which the Elector had taken was
immediately seen, the troops posted in that town surrendering without
resistance; and those in all the other places between that and the Elbe, either
imitated their example, or (...) as the Imperialists approached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panic with which they seemed to be struck,
advanced without losing a moment. The Elector, who had fixed his head quarters
at Meisse^, continued in his wonted state of fluctuation and uncertainty. He
even became more undetermined, in proportion as the danger grew near and called
for prompt and decisive resolutions. Sometimes he acted, as if he had resolved
to defend the banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon
as the detachments which he had called were able to join him. At other times,
he abandoned this as rash and perilous, seeming to adopt the more prudent
councils of those who advised him to endeavor at protracting the war, and for
that end to retire under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the
Imperialists could not attack him without manifest disadvantage, and where he
might wait in safety for the succors which he expected from Meckle^burgh,
Pomerania, and the Protestant cities on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either
of these plans, he broke down the bridge at Meissen, and marched along the east
bank of the Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew, and after much
hesitation, adopted one of these middle schemes, which are always acceptable to
feeble minds incapable of deciding. He left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose
the Imperialists, if they should attempt to pass at that place, and advancing a
few miles with his main body, encamped there in expectation of the event,
according to which he proposed to regulate his subsequent motions.

CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward incessantly, arrived the evening of the
twenty-third of April on the banks of the Elbe opposite to Muhlberg. The river,
at that place, was three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth,
its current rapid, and the bank possessed by the Saxons was higher than that
which he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all these obstactles, he called
together his general officers, and without asking their opinions, communicated
to them his intention of attempting next morning to force his passage over the
river, and to attack the enemy wherever he could come up with them. They all
expressed their astonishment at such a bold resolution, and even the Duke of
Alva, though naturally daring and impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony,
notwithstanding his impatience to crush his rival the Elector, remonstrated
earnestly against it. But the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment, or good
fortune, paid no regard to their arguments, and gave the orders necessary for
executing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanish and Italian foot marched toward the
river, and began an incessant fire upon the enemy. The long heavy muskets used
in that age, did execution on the opposite bank, and many of the soldiers,
hurried on by a martial ardour in order to get nearer the enemy, rushed into
the stream, and advancing breast high, fired with a more certain aim, and with
greater effect. Under cover of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun to be
laid for the infantry; and a peasant having undertaken to conduct the cavalry
through the river by a ford with which he was well acquainted, they also were
put in motion. The Saxons posted in Muhlberg endeavored to obstruct these
operations, by a brisk fire from a battery, which they had erected; but as a
thick fog covered all the low grounds upon the river, they could not take aim
with any certainty, and the Imperialists suffered very little; at the same time
the Saxons being much galled by the Spaniards and Italians, they set on fire
some boats which had been collected near the village, and prepared to retire.
The Imperialists perceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers instantly stripped
themselves, and holding their swords with their teeth, swam across the river,
put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to oppose them, saved from the
flames as many boats as were sufficient to complete their own bridge, and by
this spirited and successful action, encouraged their companions no less that
they intimidated the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper having a foot soldier behind him,
began to enter the river, the light horse marching in the front, followed by
the men at arms, whom the Emperor led in person, mounted on a Spanish horse,
dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his hand. Such a
numerous body struggling through a great river, in which, according to the
directions of their guide, they were obliged to make several turns, sometimes
treading on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming, presented to their companions,
whom they left behind, a spectacle equally magnificent and interesting Avila,
115. a.
. Their courage, at last, surmounted every obstacle, no man betraying any
symptom of fear, when the Emperor shared in the danger no less than the meanest
soldier. The moment that they reached the opposite side, Charles, without
waiting the arrival of the rest of the infantry, advanced toward the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with him, who, flushed with their good
fortune, and despising an enemy who had neglected to oppose them, when it might
have been done with such advantage, made no account of their superior numbers,
and marched on as to a certain victory.

DURING all these operations, which necessarily consumed much time, the Elector
remained inactive in his camp; and from an infatuation which appears to be so
amazing, that the best informed historians impute it to the treacherous arts of
his generals, who deceived him by false intelligence, he would not believe that
the Emperor had passed the river, or could be so near at hand Camerar. ap.
Freher. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. 1047, 1049.
. Being convinced, at last, of his fatal mistake, by the concurring testimony
of eye witnesses, he gave orders for retreating toward Wittemberg. But a
German army, encumbered, as usual, with baggage and artillery, could not be put
suddenly in motion. They had scarce begun, to march when the light troops of
the enemy came in view, and the Elector saw an engagement to be unavoidable. As
he was no less bold in action than irresolute in council, he made the
disposition for battle with the greatest presence of mind, and in the most
proper manner, taking advantage of a great forest to cover his wings, so as to
prevent his being surrounded by the enemy's cavalry, which were far more
numerous than his own. The Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in order as they
came up, and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with few, but efficacious
words, to do their duty. It was with a very different spirit that the two
armies advanced to the charge. As the day, which had hitherto been dark and
cloudy, happened to clear up at that moment, this accidental circumstance made
an impression on the different parties corresponding to the tone of their
minds; the Saxons, surprised and disheartened, felt pain at being exposed fully
to the view of the enemy; the Imperialists, being now secure that the
Protestant forces could not escape from them, rejoiced at the return of
sunshine, as a certain presage of victory. The shock of battle would not have
been long or doubtful, if the personal courage which the Elector displayed,
together with the activity which he exerted from the moment that the approach
of the enemy rendered an engagement certain, and cut off all possibility of
hesitation, had not revived in some degree the spirit of his troops. They
repulsed the Hungarian light horse, who began the attack, and received with
firmness the men at arms who next advanced to the charge; but as these were the
flower of the Imperial army, were commanded by experienced officers, and fought
under the Emperor's eye, the Saxons soon began to give way, and the light
troops rallying at the same time, and falling on their flanks, the flight
became general. A small body of chosen soldiers, among whom the Elector had
fought in person, still continued to defend themselves, and endeavored to save
their master by retiring into the forest; but being surrounded on every side,
the Elector, wounded in the face, exhausted with fatigue, and perceiving all
resistance to be vain, surrendered himself a prisoner. He was conducted
immediately toward the Emperor, whom he found just returned from the pursuit,
standing on the field of battle in the full exultation of success, and
receiving the congratulations of his officers, upon this complete victory
obtained by his valor and conduct. Even in such an unfortunate and humbling
situation, the Elector's behavior was equally magnanimous and decent. Sensible
of his condition, he approached his conqueror without any of the fullenness or
pride, which would have been improper in a captive; and conscious of his own
dignity, he descended to no mean submission, unbecoming the high station which
he held among the German Princes. "The fortune of war," said he, "has made me
your prisoner, most gracious Emperor, and I hope to be treated" -- Here,
Charles harshly interrupted him. "And am I then, at last, acknowledged to be
Emperor; Charles of Ghent was the only title you lately allowed me. You shall
be treated as you deserve." At these words, he turned from him abruptly, with
an haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King of the Romans added reproaches
in his own name, using expressions still more ungenerous and insulting. The
Elector made no reply; but, with an unaltered countenance, which discovered
neither astonishment nor dejection, accompanied the Spanish soldiers appointed
to guard him Sleid hist. 426. Thuan. 136. Hortensius de Bello German. ap.
Scard. vol. ii. 498. ^escript. pugnae Mulberg. ibid. p. 509. P. Heuter. Rer.
Austr. lib. xii. c. 13. p. 298.
.

THIS decisive victory cost the Imperialists only fifty men. Twelve hundred of
the Saxons were killed chiefly in the pursuit, and a great number taken
prisoners. About four hundred kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg,
together with the Electoral Prince, who had likewise been wounded in the
action. After resting two days on the field of battle, partly to refresh his
army, and partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent towns, which were
impatient to secure his protection by submitting to his will, the Emperor began
to move toward Wittemberg, that he might terminate the war at once, by the
reduction of that city. The unfortunate Elector was carried along in a sort of
triumph, and exposed every where as a captive, to his own subjects; a spectacle
extremely afflicting to them, who both honored and loved him; though the
insult was so far from subduing his firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle
the wonted tranquillity and composure of his mind.

AS Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, of the Electoral branch of the
Saxon family, was one of the strongest cities in Germany, and would no be
taken, if properly defended, without great difficulty, the Emperor marched
thither with the utmost dispatch, hoping that while the consternation
occasioned by his victory was still recent, the inhabitants might imitate the
example of their countrymen, and submit to his power, as soon as he appeared
before their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the Elector's wife, a woman no less
distinguished by her abilities than her virtue, instead of abandoning herself
to tears and lamentation upon her husband's misfortune, endeavored, by her
example as well as exhortation, to animate the citizens; and she inspired them
with such resolution, that, when summoned to surrender, they returned a
vigorous answer, warning the Emperor to behave toward their Sovereign with the
respect due to his rank, as they were determined to treat Albert of
Brandenburgh, who was still a prisoner, precisely in the same manner that he
treated him. The spirit of the inhabitants, no less than the strength of the
city, seemed now to render a siege in form necessary. After such a signal
victory it would have been disgraceful not to have undertaken it, though at the
same time the Emperor was destitute of every thing requisite for carrying it
on. But Maurice removed all difficulties, by engaging to furnish provisions,
artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever else should be needed. Trusting
to this, Charles gave orders to open the trenches before the town. It quickly
appeared, that Maurice's eagernes^ to ^^duce the capital of those dominions,
which he expected as his reward for taking arms against his kinsman, and
deserting the Protestant cause, had led him to promise what exceeded his power
to perform. A battering train was, indeed, carried safely down the Elbe from
Dresden to Wittemberg; but as Maurice had no sufficient force to preserve a
secure communication between his territories, and the camp of the besiegers,
Count Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of Electoral troops, destroyed a convoy
of provisions and military stores, and dispersed a band of pioneers destined
for the service of the Imperialists. This put a stop to the progress of the
siege, and convinced the Emperor that as he could not rely on Maurice's
promises, recourse ought to be had to some more expeditious as well as more
certain method of getting possession of the town.

THE unfortunate Elector was in his hands, and he was ungenerous and
hard-hearted enough to take advantage of this, in order to make an experiment,
whether he might not bring about his design, by working upon the tenderness of
a wife for her husband, or upon the piety of children toward their parent.
With this view he summoned Sybilla a second time to open the gates, letting her
know, that if she again refused to comply, the Elector should answer with his
head for her obstinacy. To convince her that this was not an empty threat, he
brought his prisoner to an immediate trial. The proceedings against him were as
irregular, as the stratagem was barbarous. Instead of consulting the states of
the empire, or remitting the cause to any court, which, according to the German
constitution might have legally taken cognizance of the Elector's crime, he
subjected the greatest Prince in the empire to the jurisdiction of a
court martial composed of Spanish and Italian officers, and in which the
unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit instrument for any act of violence, presided.
This strange tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of the empire which had
been issued against the prisoner, a sentence pronounced by the sole authority
of the Emperor, and destitute of every legal formality which could render it
valid; but presuming him to be thereby manifestly convicted of treason and
rebellion, the court martial condemned him to suffer death by being beheaded.
This decree was intimated to the Elector while amusing himself in playing at
chess with Ernest of Brunswick, his fellow prisoner. He paused for a moment,
though without any symptom either of surprise or terror; and after taking
notice of the irregularity as well as injustice of the Emperor's proceedings:
"It is easy," continued he, "to comprehend his scheme. I must die, because
Wittemberg will not surrender; and I shall lay down my life with pleasure, if,
by that sacrifice, I can preserve the dignity of my house, and transmit to my
posterity the inheritance which belongs to them. Would to God, that this
sentence may not effect my wife and children more than it intimidates me! and
that they, for the sake of adding a few days to a life already too long, may
not renounce honors and territories which they were born to possess Thuan. i.
142.
." He then turned to his antagonist, whom he challenged to continue the game.
He played with his usual attention and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest,
expressed all the satisfaction which is commonly felt on gaining such
victories. After this he withdrew to his own apartment, that he might employ
the rest of his time in such religious exercises as were proper in his
situation Struvii corpus 1050.
.

IT was not with the same indifference, or composure, that the account of the
Elector's danger was received at Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had supported with
such undaunted fortitude her husband's misfortunes, while she imagined that
they could reach no farther than to diminish his power or territories, felt all
her resolution fail the moment his life was threatened. Solicitous to save
that, she despised every other consideration; and was willing to make any
sacrifice in order to appease an incensed conqueror. At the same time, the Duke
of Cleves, the Elector of Brandenburgh, and Maurice, to none of whom Charles
had communicated the true motives of his violent proceedings against the
Elector, interceded warmly with him to spare his life. The first was prompted
to do so merely by compassion for his sister, and regard for his
brother-in-law. The two others dreaded the universal reproach that they would
incur, if, after having boasted so often of the ample security which the
Emperor had promised them with respect to their religion, the first effect of
their union with him should be the public execution of a Prince, who was justly
held in reverence as the most zealous protector of the Protestant cause.
Maurice, in particular, foresaw that he must become the object of detestation
to the Saxons, and could never hope to govern them with tranquillity, if he
were considered by them as accessory to the death of his nearest kinsman, in
order that he might obtain possession of his dominions.

WHILE they, from such various motives, solicited Charles with the most earnest
importunity, not to execute the sentence, Sybilla, and the rest of the
Elector's family, conjured him by letters as well as messengers to scruple at
no concessions that would extricate him out of the present danger, and deliver
them from their fears and anguish on his account. The Emperor, perceiving that
the expedient which he had tried began to produce the effect he intended, fell
by degrees from his former rigor, and allowed himself to soften into promises
of clemency and forgiveness, if the Elector would show himself worthy of his
favor by submitting to reasonable terms. The Elector, on whom the
consideration of what he might suffer himself had made no impression, was
melted by the tears of a wife whom he loved, and could not resist the
entreaties of his family. In compliance with their repeated solicitations, he
agreed to articles of accommodation, which he would otherwise have rejected
with disdain. The chief of them were, That he should resign the Electoral
dignity, as well for himself as for his posterity, into the Emperor's hands, to
be disposed of entirely at his pleasure; that he should instantly put the
Imperial troops in possession of the cities of Wittemberg and Gotha; that he
should set Albert of Brandenburgh at liberty without ransom; that he should
submit to the decrees of the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever
reformation the Emperor should make in the constitution of that court; that he
should renounce all leagues against the Emperor or King of the Romans, and
enter into no alliance, for the future, in which they were not comprehended. In
return for these important concessions, the Emperor promised not only to spare
his life, but to settle on him and his posterity the city of Gotha and its
territories, together with an annual pension of fifty thousand florins, payable
out of the revenues of the electorate; and likewise to grant him a sum in ready
money to be applied toward the discharge of his debts. Even these articles of
grace were clogged with the mortifying condition of his remaining the Emperor's
prisoner during the rest of his life Sleid. 427. Thuan. i. 142. Du Mont Corpse
Diplom. iv. p. 11, 332.
. To the whole, Charles had subjoined, that he should submit to the decrees of
the Pope and council with regard to the controverted points in religion; but
the Elector, though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the objects which
men commonly hold to be the dearest and most valuable, was inflexible with
regard to this point; and neither threats nor entreaties could prevail to make
him renounce what he deemed to be truth, or persuaded him to act in opposition
to the dictates of his conscience.

AS soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled
his engagements to Maurice; and in reward for his merit in having deserted the
Protestant cause, and having contributed with such success toward the
dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he gave him possession of that city,
together with all the other towns in the electorate. It was not without
reluctance, however, that he made such a sacrifice; the extraordinary success
of his arms had begun to operate, in its usual manner, upon his ambitious mind,
suggesting new and vast projects for the aggrandizement of his family, toward
the accomplishment of which the retaining of Saxony would have been of the
utmost consequence. But as this scheme was not then ripe for execution, he
durst not yet venture to disclose it; nor would it have been either safe or
prudent to have offended Maurice, at that juncture, by such a manifest
violation of all the promises, which had seduced him to abandon his natural
allies.

THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was still in arms; and though now left
alone to maintain the Protestant cause, was neither a feeble nor contemptible
enemy. His dominions were of considerable extent; his subjects animated with
zeal for the Reformation; and if he could have held the Imperialists at bay for
a short time, he had much to hope from a party whose strength was still
unbroken, whose union as well as vigor might return, and which had reason to
depend, with certainty, on being effectually supported by the King of France.
The Landgrave thought not of any thing so bold or adventurous; but being seized
with the same consternation which had taken possession of his associates, he
was intent, only, how to procure favorable terms from the Emperor, whom he
viewed as a conqueror, to whose will there was a necessity of submitting.
Maurice encouraged this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying, on the one
hand, the Emperor's power; by boasting, on the other, of his own interest with
his victorious ally; and by representing the advantageous conditions which he
could not fail of obtaining by his intercession for a friend, whom he was so
solicitous to save. Sometimes, the Landgrave was induced to place such
unbounded confidence in his promises, that he was impatient to bring matters to
a final accommodation. On other occasions, the Emperor^s exorbitant ambition,
restrained neither by the scruples of decency, nor the maxims of justice,
together with the recent and shocking proof which he had given of this in the
cruel and oppressive treatment of the Elector of Saxony, came so full into his
thoughts, and made such a lively impression on them, that he broke off abruptly
the negociations which he had begun; seeming to be convinced that it was more
prudent to depend for safety on his own arms, than to confide in Charles's
generosity. But this bold resolution, which despair had suggested to an
impatient spirit, fretted by disappointments, was not of long continuance. Upon
a more deliberate survey of the enemy's power, and his own weakness, his doubts
and fears returned upon him, and together with them the spirit of negociating,
and the desire of accommodation.

MAURICE (...) Elector of Brandenburgh, acted as mediators between him and the
Emperor; and after all that the former had vaunted of his influence, the
conditions prescribed to the Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The articles
with regard to his renouncing the league of Smalkalde, acknowledging the
Emperor's authority, and submitting to the decrees of the Imperial chamber,
were the same which had been imposed on the Elector of Saxony. Besides these,
he was required to surrender his person and territories to the Emperor; to
implore for pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred and fifty thousand crowns
toward defraying the expenses of the war; to demolish the fortifications of
all the towns in his dominions, except one; to oblige the garrison which he
placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the Emperor; to allow a free
passage through his territories to the Imperial troops as often as it shall be
demanded; to deliver up all his artillery and ammunition to the Emperor; to set
at liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunswick, together with the other
prisoners he had taken during the war; and neither to take arms himself, for
the future, nor to permit any of his subjects to serve against the Emperor or
his allies Sleid. 430. Thuan. l. iv. 146.
.

THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though with the utmost reluctance, as
they contained no stipulation with regard to the manner in which he was to be
treated, and left him entirely at the Emperor's mercy. Necessity, however,
compelled him to give his assent. Charles, who had assumed the haughty and
imperious tone of a conqueror, ever since the reduction of Saxony, insisted on
an unconditional submission, and would permit nothing to be added to the terms
which he had prescribed, that could in any degree limit the fullness of his
power, or restrain him from behaving as he saw meet, toward a Prince whom he
regarded as absolutely at his disposal. But though he would not vouchsafe to
negociate with the Landgrave, on such a footing of equality, as to suffer any
article to be inserted among those which he had dictated to him, that could be
considered as a formal stipulation for the security and freedom of his person;
he, or his ministers in his name, gave the Elector of Brandenburgh and Maurice
such full satisfaction with regard to this point, that they assured the
Landgrave, that Charles would behave to him in the same way that he had done to
the Duke of Wurtemberg, and would allow him, as soon as he had made his
submission, to return to his own territories. Upon finding the Landgrave to be
still possessed with his former suspicions of the Emperor's intentions, and
unwilling to trust verbal or ambiguous declarations, in a matter of such
essential concern as his own liberty, they sent him a bond signed by them both,
containing the most solemn obligations, that if any violence whatsoever were
offered to his person, during his interview with the Emperor, they would
instantly surrender themselves to his sons, and remain in their hands, to be
treated by them in the same manner as the Emperor should treat him Du Mont
Corpse Diplom. iv. p. 11, 336.
.

THIS, together with the indispensable obligation of performing what was
contained in the articles of which he had accepted, removed his doubts and
scruples, or made it necessary to get over them. He repaired, for that purpose,
to the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a circumstance occurred which
revived his suspicions and increased his fears. Just as he was about to enter
the chamber of presence, in order to make his public submission to the Emperor,
a copy of the articles which he had approved of was put into his hands, in
order that he might ratify them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived that the
Imperial ministers had added two new articles; one importing, that if an
dispute should arise concerning the meaning of the former conditions, the
Emperor should have the right of putting what interpretation upon them he
thought most reasonable; the other, that the Landgrave was bound to submit
implicitly to the decisions of the council of Trent. This unworthy artifice,
calculated to surprise him into an approbation of articles, to which he had not
the most distant idea ^^ assenting, by presenting them to him at a time when
his mind was engrossed and disquieted with the thoughts of that humbling
ceremony which he had to perform, filled the Landgrave with indignation, and
made him fly out into all those violent expressions of rage to which his temper
was prone. With some difficulty, the Elector of Brandenburgh and Maurice
prevailed at length on the Emperor's ministers to drop the former article as
unjust, and to explain the latter in such a manner, that he could agree to it,
without openly renouncing the Protestant religion.

THIS obstacle being su^mounted, the Landgrave was impatient to finish a
ceremony, which, how mortifying soever, had been declared necessary toward his
obtaining pardon. The Emperor was seated on a magnificent throne, with all the
ensigns of his dignity, surrounded by a numerous train of the Princes of the
empire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately the Landgrave's prisoner, and
now, by a sudden reverse of fortune, a spectator of his humiliation. The
Landgrave was introduced with great solemnity, and advancing toward the
throne, fell upon his knees. His chancellor, who walked behind him, immediately
read, by his master's command, a paper which contained an humble confession of
the crime whereof he had been guilty; an acknowledgment, that he had merited,
on that account, the most severe punishment; an absolute resignation of himself
and his dominions, to be disposed of at the Emperor's pleasure; a submissive
petition for pardon, his hopes of which were founded entirely on the Emperor's
clemency; and it concluded, with promises of behaving, for the future, like a
subject, whose principles of loyalty and obedience would be confirmed, and
would even derive new force from the sentiments of gratitude which must
hereafter fill and animate his heart. While the chancellor was reading this
abject declaration, the eyes of all the spectators were fixed on the
unfortunate Landgrave; few could behold a Prince, so powerful as well as
high-spirited, suing for mercy in the posture of a suppliant, without being
touched with commiseration, and perceiving serious reflections arise in their
minds upon the instability and emptiness of human grandeur. The Emperor viewed
the whole transaction with an haughty, unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profound silence himself, made a sign to one of his secretaries to read his
answer; the tenor of which was, That though he might have justly inflicted on
him the grievous punishment which his crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his own
generosity, moved by the solicitations of several Princes in behalf of the
Landgrave, and influenced by his penetential acknowledgments, he would not deal
with him according to the rigor of justice, and would subject him to no
penalty which was not specified in the articles that he had already subscribed.
The moment the secretary had finished, Charles turned away abruptly without
deigning to give the unhappy suppliant any sign of compassion or reconcilement.
He did not even desire him to rise from his knees; which the Landgrave having
ventured to do unbidden, advanced toward the Emperor with an intention to kiss
his hand, flattering himself, that his guilt being now fully expiated, he might
presume to take that liberty. B^ the Elector of Brandenburgh perceiving that
this familiarity would be offensive to the Emperor, interposed, and desired the
Landgrave to go along with him and Maurice to the Duke of Alva's apartments in
the castle.

HE was received and entertained by that nobleman with the respect and courtesy
due to such a guest. But, after supper, while he was engaged in play, the Duke
took the Elector and Maurice aside, and communicated to them the Emperor's
orders, that the Landgrave must remain a prisoner in that place under the
custody of a Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto entertained the most
distant suspicion of the Emperor's sincerity and rectitude of intention, their
surprise was excessive, and their indignation not inferior to it, on
discovering how greatly they had been deceived themselves, and how infamously
abused in having been made the instruments of deceiving and ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to arguments, and to entreaties, in
order to save themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate him out of the
wretched situation into which he had been betrayed by too great confidence in
them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded the necessity of
executing the Emperor's commands. By this time it grew late, and the Landgrave,
who knew nothing of what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in which he was
entangled, prepared for departing, when the fatal orders were intimated to him.
He was (...) dumb at first with astonishment, but after being silent a few
moments, he broke out into all the violent expressions which horror at
injustice, accompanied with fraud, naturally suggests. He complained, he
expostulated, he exclaimed; sometimes inveighing against the Emperor's
artifices as unworthy of a great and generous Prince; sometimes censuring the
credulity of his friends in trusting to Charles's insidious promises; sometimes
charging them with meanness in stooping to lend their assistance toward the
execution of such a perfidious and dishonorable scheme; and in the end, he
required them to remember their engagements to his children, and instantly to
fulfill them. They, after giving way for a little to the torrent of his passion,
solemnly asserted their own innocence and upright intention in the whole
transaction, and encouraged him to hope, that as soon as they saw the Emperor,
they would obtain redress of an injury which affected their own honor, no less
than it did his liberty. At the same time, in order to sooth his rage and
impatience, Maurice remained with him during the night, in the apartment where
he was confined Sleid. 433. Thuan. l. iv. 147. Struv. (...) p. hist. Germ. ii.
1032.
.

NEXT morning, the Elector and Maurice applied jointly to the Emperor,
representing the infamy to which they would be exposed throughout Germany, if
the Landgrave was detained in custody; that they would not have advised, nor
would he himself have consented to an interview, if they had suspected that the
loss of his liberty was to be the consequence of his submission; that they were
bound to procure his release, having plighted their faith to that effect, and
engaged their own persons as sureties for his. Charles listened to their
earnest remonstrances with the utmost coolness. He now stood no longer in need
of their services, and they had the mortification to find, that their former
obsequiousness was forgotten, and little regard paid to their intercession. He
was ignorant, he told them, of their particular or private transactions with
the Landgrave, nor was his conduct to be regulated by these; though he knew
well what he himself had promised, which was not that the Landgrave should be
exempt from all restraint, but that he should not be kept a prisoner during
life According to several historians of great name, the Emperor, in his treaty
with the Landgrave, stipulated that he would not detain him in any prison. But
in executing the deed, which was written in the German tongue, the Imperial
ministers fraudulently substituted the word ewiger instead of einiger, and thus
the treaty, in place of a promise, that he should not be detained in any
prison, contained only an engagement, that he should not be detained in
perpetual imprisonment. But authors, eminent for historical knowledge and
critical accuracy, have called in question the truth of this common story. The
silence of Sleidan with regard to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the
various memorials which he has published concerning the Landgrave's
imprisonment, greatly favor this opinion. But as several books which contain
the information necessary toward discussing this point, with accuracy, are
written in the German language, which I do not understand, I cannot pretend to
enquire into this matter with the same accuracy with which I have endeavored
to settle some other controverted facts that have occurred in the course of
this history. See Struv. Corp. 1052. Mosheim's Eccles. Hist. vol. ii. p. 161,
162. Engl. Edit.
. Having said this with a peremptory and decisive tone, he put an end to the
conference; and they seeing no probability, at that time, of making any
impression upon the Emperor, who seemed to have taken his resolution
deliberately, and to be obstinately bent on adhering to it, were obliged to
acquaint the unfortunate prisoner with the ill success of their endeavors in
his behalf. This disappointment threw him into a new and more violent transport
of rage, so that to prevent his proceeding to some desperate extremity, the
Elector and Maurice promised, that they would not quit the Emperor, until, by
the frequency and fervor of their importunity, they had extorted his consent
to set him free. They accordingly renewed their solicitations a few days
afterward, but found Charles more haughty and untractable than before, and
were warned, that if they touched again upon a subject so disagreeable, and
with regard to which he had determined to hear nothing farther, he would
instantly give orders to convey the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the
Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to serve him, they not only
desisted, but left the court, and as they did not choose to meet the first
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning the cause of their departure,
they informed him of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to fulfill all
that he had promised to the Emperor, as the most certain means of procuring a
speedy release.

WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning his cause in this manner
occasioned, his impatience to recover liberty made him follow their advice. He
paid the sum which had been imposed on him, ordered his fortresses to be razed,
and renounced all alliances that could give offense. This prompt compliance
with the will of the conqueror produced no effect. He was still guarded with
the same vigilant severity; and being carried about, with the degraded Elector
of Saxony, wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and his triumph was each
day renewed. The fortitude and equanimity with which the Elector bore these
repeated insults, were not more remarkable than the Landgrave's fretfulness and
impatience. His active impetuous mind could ill brook restraint; and reflection
upon the shameful artifices by which he had been decoyed into that situation,
as well as indignation at the injustice with which he was still detained in it,
drove him often to the wildest excesses of passion.

THE people of the different cities, to whom Charles thus wantonly exposed
these illustrious prisoners as a public spectacle, were sensibly touched with
such an insult offered to the Germanic body, and murmured loudly at this
indecent treatment of two of its greatest Princes. They had soon other causes
of complaint, and such as affected them more nearly. Charles proceeded to add
oppression to insult, and arrogating to himself all the rights of a conqueror,
exercised them with the utmost rigor. He ordered his troops to seize the
artillery and military stores belonging to such as had been members of the
Smalkaldic league, and having collected upwards of five hundred pieces of
cannon, a great number in that age, he sent part of them into the
Low Countries, part into Italy, and part into Spain, in order to spread, by
this means, the fame of his success, and that they might serve as monuments of
his having subdued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He then levied, by his
sole authority, large sums as well upon those who had served him with fidelity
during the war, as upon such as had been in arms against him; upon the former,
as their contingent toward a war, which having been undertaken, as he
pretended, for the common benefit, ought to be carried on at the common charge;
upon the latter, as a fine by way of punishment for their rebellion. By these
exactions he amassed above one million six hundred thousand crowns, a sum which
appeared prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so general was the
consternation which had seized the Germans upon his rapid success, and such
their dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly obeyed his commands;
though, at the same time, these extraordinary stretches of power greatly
alarmed a people, jealous of their privileges, and habituated during several
ages to consider the Imperial authority as neither extensive nor formidable.
This discontent and resentment, how industriously soever they concealed them,
became universal; and the more these passions were restrained and kept down for
the present, the more likely were they to burst out soon with additional
violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like a conquered people, Ferdinand
treated his subjects in Bohemia with still greater rigor. That kingdom
possessed privileges and immunities as extensive as those of any nation in
which the feudal institutions were established. The prerogative of their Kings
was extremely limited, and the crown itself elective. Ferdinand, when placed on
the throne, had confirmed their liberties with every solemnity prescribed by
their excessive solicitude for the security of a constitution of government to
which they were extremely attached. He soon began, however, to be weary of a
jurisdiction so much circumscribed, and to despise a scepter which he could not
transmit to his posterity; and notwithstanding all his former engagements, he
attempted to overturn the constitution from its foundations; that instead of an
elective kingdom he might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians seemed
resolved not to relinquish, tamely, privileges which they had long enjoyed. At
the same time, many of them having embraced the doctrines of the Reformers, the
seeds of which John Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in their country
about the beginning of the preceding century, the desire of acquiring religious
liberty mingled itself with their zeal for their civil rights; and these two
kindred passions heightening, as usual, each other's force, precipitated them
immediately into violent measures. They had not only refused to serve their
Sovereign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but having entered into a
close alliance with the Elector of Saxony, they bound themselves, by a solemn
association, to defend their ancient constitution; and to persist, until they
should obtain such additional grants as they thought necessary toward
perfecting the present model of their government, or rendering it more
permanent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of distinction, to be their
general; and levied an army of thirty thousand men to enforce their petitions.
But either from the weakness of their leader, or from the dissensions in a
great unwieldy body, which having united hastily, was not thoroughly compacted,
or from some other unknown cause, the subsequent operations of the Bohemians
bore no proportion to the zeal and ardour with which they took their first
resolutions. They suffered themselves to be amused so long with negociations
and overtures of different kinds, that before they could enter Saxony, the
battle of Muhlberg was fought, the Elector deprived of his dignity and
territories, the Landgrave confined to close custody, and the league of
Smalkalde entirely dissipated. The same dread of the Emperor's power which had
seized the rest of the Germans, reached them. As soon as their Sovereign
approached with a body of Imperial troops, they instantly dispersed, thinking
of nothing but how to atone for their past guilt, and to acquire some hope of
forgiveness, by a prompt submission. But Ferdinand, who entered his dominions
full of that implacable resentment which inflames Monarchs whose authority has
been despised, was not to be molified by the late repentance and involuntary
return of rebellious subjects to their duty. He even heard, unmoved, the
entreaties and tears of the citizens of Prague, who appeared before him in the
posture of suppliants, and implored for mercy. The sentence which he pronounced
against them was rigorous to extremity; he abolished many of their privileges,
he abridged others, and new-modelled the constitution according to his
pleasure. He punished many of those who had been most active in forming the
late association against him with death, and still a greater number with
confiscation of their goods, or perpetual banishment. He obliged all his
subjects, of every condition, to give up their arms to be deposited in forts
where he planted garrisons; and after disarming his people, he loaded them with
new and exorbitant taxes. Thus, by an ill conducted and unsuccessful effort to
extend their privileges, the Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative which they intended to have circumscribed, but they almost
annihilated those liberties which they aimed at establishing on a broader and
more secure foundation Sleid. 408, 419, 434. Thuan. l. iv. 129, 150. Struv.
Corp. ii.
.

THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as he imagined, subdued the independent
and stubborn spirit of the Germans, by the terror of arms and the rigor of
punishment, held a Diet at Ausburg, in order to compose finally the
controversies with regard to religion, which had so long disturbed the empire.
He durst not, however, trust the determination of a matter so interesting to
the free suffrage of the Germans, broken as their minds now were to subjection.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanish troops, and assigned them
quarters there. The rest of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent villages;
so that the members of the Diet, while they carried on their deliberations,
were surrounded by the same army which had overcome their countrymen.
Immediately after his public entry, Charles gave a proof of the violence with
which he intended to proceed. He took possession by force of the cathedral,
together with one of the principal churches; and his priests having, by various
ceremonies, purified them from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to have defiled them, they
re-established with great pomp the rites of the Romish worship Sleid. 435, 437.
.

THE concourse of members to this Diet was extraordinary; the importance of the
affairs concerning which it was to deliberate, and the fear of giving offense
to the Emperor by an absence which lay open to misconstruction, brought
together almost all the Princes, nobles and representatives of cities who had
right to sit in that assembly. The Emperor, in the speech with which he opened
the meeting, called their attention immediately to the point, which seemed
chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned the fatal effects of the religious
dissensions which had arisen in Germany, and taken notice of his own unwearied
endeavors to procure a general council, which alone could provide a remedy
adequate to these evils, he exhorted them to recognize its authority, and to
stand to the award of an assembly, to which they had originally appealed, as
having the sole right of judgment in the case.

BUT the council, to which Charles wished them to refer all their
controversies, had, by this time, undergone a violent change. The fear and
jealousy, with which the Emperor's first success against the confederates of
Smalkalde had inspired the Pope, continued to increase. Not satisfied with
attempting to retard the progress of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recall of
his troops, Paul began to consider the Emper^^ as an enemy, the weight of whose
power he must soon ^^el, and against whom he could not be too hasty in taking
precautions. He foresaw that the immediate effect of the Emperor's acquiring
absolute power in Germany, would be to render him entirely master of all the
decisions of the council, if it should continue to meet in Trent. It was
dangerous to allow a Monarch, so ambitious, to get the command of this
formidable engine, which he might employ at pleasure to limit or overturn the
papal authority. As the only method of preventing this, he determined to
translate the council to some city more immediately under his own jurisdiction,
and at a greater distance from the terror of the Emperor's arms, or the reach
of his influence. An incident fortunately occurred which gave this measure the
appearance of being necessary. One or two of the fathers of the council,
together with some of their domestics, happening to die suddenly, the
physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or suborned by the Pope's legates,
pronounced the distemper to be infectious and pestilential. Some of the
prelates, struck with a panic, retired; others were impatient to be gone; and
after a short consultation, the council was translated to Bologna, a city
subject to the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial interest, warmly opposed
this resolution, as taken without necessity, and founded on false or frivolous
pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and most of the Neapolitan, by the
Emperor's express command, remained at Trent; the rest, to the number of
thirty-four, accompanying the legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced, in
that very assembly, which had been called to heal the divisions of Christendom;
the fathers of Bologna inveighing against those who staid at Trent, as
contumacious and regardless of the Pope's authority; while the others accused
them of being so far intimidated by the fears of imaginary danger, as to remove
to a place where their consultations could prove of no service toward
re-establishing peace and order in Germany F. Paul, 248, etc.
.

THE Emperor, at the same time, employed all his interest to procure the return
of the council to Trent, But Paul, who highly applauded his own sagacity in
having taken a step which put it out of Charles's power to acquire the
direction of that assembly, paid no regard to a request* the object of which
was so extremely obvious. The summer was consumed in fruitless negociations
with respect to this point, the importunity of the one, and the obstinacy of
the other daily increasing. At last, an event happened which widened the breach
irreparably, and rendered the Pope utterly averse from listening to any
proposal that came from the Emperor. Charles, as has been already observed, had
so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's son, by refusing to
grant him the investiture of Parma and Placentia, that he had watched ever
since that time with all the vigilance of resentment for an opportunity of
revenging that injury. He had endeavored to precipitate his father into open
hostilities against the Emperor, and had earnestly solicited the King of France
to invade Italy. His hatred and resentment extended to all those whom he knew
that the Emperor favored; he persecuted Gonzaga, governor of Milan, with ill
offices, and had encouraged Fiesco in his attempt upon the life of Andrew
Doria, because both Gonzaga and Doria possessed a great degree of the Emperor's
esteem and confidence. His malevolence and secret intrigues were not unknown to
the Emperor, who could not be more desirous to take vengeance on him, than
Gonzaga and Doria were to be employed as his instruments in inflicting it.
Fa^nese, by the profligacy of his life, and by enormities of every kind, equal
to those committed by the worst tyrants who have disgraced human nature, had
rendered himself so odious, that they thought any violence whatever* might be
attempted against him. They soon found among his own subjects, persons who were
eager, and even deemed it meritorious to lend their hands in such a service. As
he, animated with the jealousy which usually possesses petty Sovereigns, had
employed all the cruelty and fraud, whereby they endeavor to supply their
defect of power, in order to humble and extirpate the nobility subject to his
government, five noblemen of the greatest distinction in Placentia, combined to
avenge the injuries, which they themselves had suffered, as well as those which
he had offered to their order. They formed their plan in conjunction with
Gonzaga; but it remains uncertain whether he originally suggested the scheme to
them, or only approved of what they proposed, and co-operated in carrying it
on. They concerted all the previous steps with such foresight, conducted their
intrigues with such secrecy, and displayed such courage in the execution of
their design, that it may be ranked among the most audacious deeds of that
nature mentioned in history. One body of the conspirators surprised, at
midday, the gates of the citadel of Placentia where Farnese resided,
overpowered his guards, and murdered him. Another party of them made themselves
masters of the town, and called upon their fellow-citizens to take arms, in
order to reassume their liberty. The multitude ran toward the citadel, from
which three great guns, a signal concerted with Gonzaga, had been fired; and
before they could guess the cause or the authors of the tumult, they saw the
lifeless body of the tyrant hanging by the heels from one of the windows of the
citadel. But so universally detestable had he become, that not one expressed
any sentiment of concern at such a sad reverse of fortune, or of indignation at
this ignominious treatment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation at the success
of the conspiracy was general, and all applauded the actors in it, as the
deliverers of their country. The body was tumbled into the ditch that
surrounded the citadel, and exposed to the insults of the rabble; the rest of
the citizens returned to their usual occupations, as if nothing extraordinary
had happened.

BEFORE next morning, a body of troops arriving from the frontiers of the
Milanese, where they had been posted in expectation of the event, took
possession of the city in the Emperor's name, and reinstated the inhabitants in
the possession of their ancient privileges. Parma, which the Imperialists
attempted likewise to surprise, was saved by the vigilance and fidelity of the
officers whom Farnese had entrusted with the command of the garrison. The death
of a son whom, notwithstanding his infamous vices, Paul loved with an excess of
parental tenderness, overwhelmed him with the deepest affliction; and the loss
of a city, of such consequence as Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow. He
accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having committed a cruel murder in
order to prepare the way for an unjust usurpation, and immediately demanded of
the Emperor satisfaction for both; for the former, by the punishment of
Gonzaga; for the latter by the restitution of Placentia to his grandson
Octavio, its rightful owner. But Charles, who, rather than quit a prize of such
value, was willing to expose himself to the imputation of being accessory to
the crime which had given an opportunity of seizing it, and to bear the infamy
of defrauding his own son-in-law of the inheritance which belonged to him,
eluded all his solicitations, and determined to keep possession of the city
together with its territories F. Paul. 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. 156.
Mem. de Ribier. 59, 67. Natalis Comitis Histor. lib. iii. p. 64.
.

THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so rapacious, as to be restrained by
no consideration either of decency or justice, transported the Pope so far
beyond his usual moderation and caution, that he was eager to take arms against
the Emperor in order to be avenged on the murderers of his son, and to recover
the inheritance wrested from his family. Conscious, however, of his own
inability to contend with such an enemy, he warmly solicited the French King
and the republic of Venice to join in an offensive league against Charles. But
Henry was intent, at that time, on other objects. His ancient allies the Scots,
having been defeated by the English in one of the greatest battles ever fought
between these two rival nations, he was about to send a numerous body of
veteran troops into that country, as well to preserve it from being conquered,
as to gain the acquisition of a new kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying
his son the Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland. An undertaking accompanied
with such manifest advantages, the success of which appeared to be so certain,
was not to be relinquished for the remote prospect of benefit from an alliance
depending upon the precarious life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing at
heart but the gratification of his own private resentment. Instead, therefore,
of rushing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry amused the Pope with such
general professions and promises, as might keep him from any thoughts of
endeavoring to accommodate his differences with the Emperor, but at the same
time avoided any such engagement as might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a war for which he was not
prepared. The Venetians, though much alarmed at seeing Placentia in the hands
of the Imperialists, imitated the wary conduct of the French King, which
resembled so nearly the spirit with which they themselves usually carried on
their negociations Mem. de Ribier. ii. 63, 71, 78, 85, 95. Paruta Istor. di
Venez. 199, 203. Thuan. iv. 160.
.

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not in his power to light up
immediately the flames of war, he did not forget the injuries, which he was
obliged for the present to endure; resentment settled deeper in his mind, and
became more rancorous in proportion as he felt the difficulty of gratifying it.
It was, while these sentiments of enmity were in full force, and the desire of
vengeance at its height, that the Diet of Augsburg, by the Emperor's command,
petitioned the Pope, in name of the whole Germanic body, to enjoin the prelates
who had retired to Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew their
deliberations in that place. Charles had been at great pains in bringing the
members to join in this request. Having observed a considerable variety of
sentiments among the Protestants with respect to the submission which he had
required to the decrees of the council, some of them being altogether
intractable, while others were ready to acknowledge its right of jurisdiction
upon certain conditions, he employed all his address in order to gain or to
divide them. He threatened and overawed the Elector Palatine, a weak Prince,
and obnoxious to vengeance on account of the assistance which he had given to
the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring liberty for the Landgrave,
together with the formal confirmation of his own electoral dignity, overcame
Maurice's scruples, or prevented him from opposing what he knew would be
agreeable to the Emperor. The Elector of Brandenburgh, less influenced by
religious zeal than any Prince of that age, was easily induced to imitate their
example in assenting to all that the Emperor required. The deputies of the
cities remained still to be brought over; they were more tenacious of their
principles, and though every thing that could operate either on their hopes or
fears was tried, the utmost that they would promise was to acknowledge the
jurisdiction of the council, if effectual provision were made for securing the
divines of all parties free access to that assembly, with entire liberty of
debate; and if all points in controversy were decided according to scripture
and the usage of the primitive church. But when the memorial, containing this
declaration, was presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put in practice a
very extraordinary artifice. Without reading the paper, or taking any notice of
the conditions on which they had insisted, he seemed to take it for granted
that they had complied with his demand, and gave thanks to the deputies for
their full and unreserved submission to the decrees of the council. The
deputies, though astonished at what they had heard, did not attempt to set him
right, both parties being better pleased that the matter should remain under
this state of ambiguity, than to push for an explanation, which must have
occasioned a dispute, and would have led, perhaps, to a rupture F. Paul, 259.
Sleid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. 155.
.

HAVING obtained this seeming submission of the Diet to the authority of the
council, Charles employed that as an argument to enforce their petition for its
return to Trent. But the Pope, from the satisfaction of mortifying the Emperor,
as well as from his own aversion to what was demanded, resolved, without
hesitation, that this petition should be rejected; though, in order to avoid
the imputation of being influenced wholly by resentment, he had the address to
throw it upon the fathers at Bologna, to put a direct negative upon the
request. He referred to their consideration the petition of the Diet, and they,
ready to confirm by their assent whatever the legates were pleased to dictate
declared, that the council could not, in consistence with its dignity, return
to Trent, unless the prelates, who, by remaining there, had discovered a
schismatic spirit, would first repair to Bologna, and join their brethren; and
that, even after their junction, the council could not renew its consultations
with any prospect of benefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove their
intention of obeying its future decrees to be sincere, by yielding immediate
obedience to those which it had already passed F. Paul, 250. Pallav. ii. 49.
.

THIS answer was communicated to the Emperor by the Pope, who, at the same
time, exhorted him to comply with demands that appeared to be so reasonable.
But Charles was better acquainted with the duplicity of the Pope's character
than to be deceived by such a gross artifice; he knew that the prelates of
Bologna durst utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and, therefore,
overlooking them as mere instruments in the hand of another, he considered
their reply as a full discovery of the Pope's intentions. As he could no longer
hope to acquire such an ascendant in the council as to render it subservient to
his own plan, he saw it to be necessary that Paul should not have it in his
power to turn against him the authority of so venerable an assembly. In order
to prevent this, he sent two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the presence
of the legates, protested, That the translation of the council to that place
had been unnecessary, and founded on false or frivolous pretexts; that while it
continued to meet there, it ought to be deemed an unlawful and schismatical
conventicle; that all its decisions ought of course to be held as null and
invalid; and that as the Pope, together with the corrupt ecclesiastics who
depended on him, had abandoned the care of the church, the Emperor, as its
protector, would employ all the power which God had committed to him, in order
to preserve it from those calamities with which it was threatened. A few days
after, the Imperial ambassador at Rome demanded an audience of the Pope, and in
presence of all the cardinals as well as foreign ministers, protested against
the proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh and
disrespectful F. Paul, 264. Pallav. 51. Sleid. 4, 6. Goldasti Constit.
Imperial. i. 561.
.

IT was not long before Charles proceeded to carry these threats, which greatly
alarmed both the Pope and council at Bologna, into execution. He let the Diet
know the ill success of his endeavors to procure a favorable answer to their
petitions, and that the Pope, equally regardless of their entreaties, and of
his services to the church, had refused to gratify them, by allowing the
council to meet again at Trent; that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place where they might look for freedom of debate and judgment, was not to
be given up, the prospect of it was, at present, distant and uncertain; that,
in the mean time, Germany was torn in pieces by religious dissensions, the
purity of the faith corrupted, and the minds of the people disquieted with a
multiplicity of new opinions and controversies, formerly unknown among
Christians; that, moved by the duty which he owed to them as their Sovereign,
and to the church as its protector, he had employed some divines, of known
abilities and learning, to prepare a system of doctrine, to which all should
conform until a council, such as they wished for, could be convocated. This
system was compiled by Pflug, Helding and Agricola, of whom the two former were
dignitaries in the Romish church, but remarkable for their pacific and healing
spirit; the last was a Protestant divine, suspected, not without reason, of
having been gained by bribes and promises, to betray or mislead his party on
this occasion. The articles presented to the Diet of Ratisbon, in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contending
parties, served as a model for the present work. But as the Emperor's situation
was much changed since that time, and he found it no longer necessary to manage
the Protestants with the same delicacy as at that juncture, the concessions in
their favor were not now so numerous, nor did they extend to points of so much
consequence. The treatise contained a complete system of theology, conformable
in almost every article to the tenets of the Romish church, though expressed,
for the most part, in the softest words, or in scriptural phrases, or in terms
of studied ambiguity. Every doctrine, however, peculiar to Popery, was
retained; and all the rites, which the Protestants condemned as inventions of
men, introduced into the worship of God, were enjoined. With regard to two
points only, some relaxation of their rigor was granted, and some latitude in
practice admitted. Such ecclesiastics as had married, and would not put away
their wives, were allowed nevertheless, to perform all the functions of their
sacred office; and those provinces which had been accustomed to partake of the
cup, as well as of the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, were still
indulged the privilege of receiving both. Even these were declared to be
concessions for the sake of peace, and granted only for a season, in compliance
with the weakness or prejudices of their countrymen F. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii.
60. Sleid. 453, 457. Struv. Corp. 1054. Goldast. Constit. Imper. i. 5 8.
.

THIS system of doctrine, known afterward by the name of the Interim, because
it contained temporary regulations which were to continue no longer in force
than until a free general council could be held, the Emperor presented to the
Diet, with a pompous declaration of his sincere intention to re-establish
tranquillity and order in the church, as well as of his hopes that their
adopting these regulations would contribute greatly to bring about that
desirable event. It was read, in presence, according to form. As soon as it was
finished the archbishop of Mentz, president of the electoral college, rose up
hastily, and having thanked the Emperor for his unwearied and pious endeavors
in order to restore peace to the church, he, in name of the Diet, signified
their approbation of the system of doctrine which he had prepared, together
with their resolution of conforming to it in every particular. The whole
assembly was amazed at a declaration so unprecedented and unconstitutional, as
well as at the Elector's presumption, in pretending to deliver the sense of the
Diet, upon a point, which had not hitherto been the subject of consultation or
debate. But not one member had the courage to contradict what the Elector had
said; some being overawed by fears, others remaining silent through
complaisance. The Emperor held the archbishop's declaration to be a full
constitutional ratification of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the
observance of it, as a decree of the empire Sleid. 460. F. Paul, 273. Pallav.
63.
.

DURING this Diet, the wife and children of the Landgrave, warmly seconded by
Maurice of Saxony, endeavored to interest the members in behalf of that
unhappy Prince, who still languished in confinement. But Charles, who did not
choose to be brought under the necessity of rejecting any request that came
from such a respectable body, in order to prevent their representatives, laid
before the Diet an account of his transactions with the Landgrave, together
with the motives which had at first induced him to detain that Prince in
custody, and which rendered it prudent, as he alleged, to keep him still under
restraint. It was no easy matter to give any good reason for an action,
incapable of being justified. But he thought the most frivolous pretexts might
be produced in an assembly willing to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so
much as to discover that it saw his conduct in its true colors. His account of
his own conduct was accordingly admitted to be fully satisfactory, and after
some feeble entreaties that he would extend his clemency to his unfortunate
prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns were no more mentioned Sleid. 441.
.

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable impression which this inflexible
rigor might leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that his gratitude was
no less permanent and unchangeable than his resentment, invested Maurice, in
the electoral dignity, with all the legal formalities. The ceremony was
performed with extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so near the apartment in
which the degraded Elector was kept a prisoner, that he could view it from his
windows. Even this insult did not ruffle his usual tranquillity; and turning
his eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival receiving those ensigns of
dignity of which he had been stripped, without uttering one sentiment
unbecoming the fortitude which he had preserved amidst all his calamities
Thuan. Hist. lib. v. ^76. Struv. Corp. 1054. Investitura Mauritii a Mammerano
Lucemburgo descripta ap. Scardium ii. 508.
.

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the Diet, the Emperor ordered the Interim
to be published in the German as well as Latin language. It met with the usual
reception of conciliating schemes when proposed to men heated with disputation;
both parties declaimed against it with equal violence. The Protestants
condemned it as a system containing the grossest errors of Popery, disguised
with so little art, that it could impose only on the most ignorant, or on those
who by wilfully shutting their eyes favored the deception. The Papists
inveighed against it, as a work, in which some doctrines of the church were
impiously given up, others meanly concealed, and all of them delivered in terms
calculated rather to deceive the unwary, than to instruct the ignorant, or to
reclaim those who were enemies to the truth. While the Lutheran divines
fiercely attacked it, on one hand, the general of the Dominicans with no less
vehemence impugned it, on the other. But at Rome, as soon as the contents of
the Interim came to be known, the indignation of the courtiers and
ecclesiastics rose to the greatest height. They exclaimed against the Emperor's
profane encroachment on the sacerdotal function, in presuming, with the
concurrence of an assembly of laymen, to define articles of faith, and to
regulate modes of worship. They compared this rash deed to that of Uzzah, who,
with an unhallowed hand, had touched the ark of God; or to the bold attempts of
those Emperors, who had rendered their memory detestable, by endeavoring to
model the Christian church according to their pleasure. They even affected to
find out a resemblance between the Emperor's conduct and that of Henry VIII.
and expressed their fear of his imitating the example of that Monarch, by
usurping the title as well as jurisdiction belonging to the head of the church.
All therefore, contended, with one voice, that as the foundations of
ecclesiastical authority were now shaken, and the whole fabric ready to be
overturned by a new enemy; some powerful method of defense must be provided,
and a vigorous resistance must be made, at the beginning, before he grew too
formidable to be opposed.

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved by longer experience in great
transactions, as well as by a more extensive observation of human affairs,
viewed the matter with more acute discernment, and derived comfort from the
very circumstance which filled them with apprehension. He was astonished, that
a Prince of such superior sagacity, as the Emperor, should be so intoxicated
with a single victory, as to imagine that he might give law to mankind, and
decide even in those matters, with regard to which they are most impatient of
dominion. He saw that, by joining any one of the contending parties in Germany,
Charles might have had it in his power to have oppressed the other, but that
the presumption of success had now inspired him with the vain thought of his
being able to domineer over both; he foretold that a system, which all
attacked, and none defended, could not be of long duration; and that, for this
reason, there was no need of his interposing in order to hasten its fall; for
as soon as the powerful hand which now upheld it was withdrawn, it would sink
of its own accord, and be forgotten forever Sleid. 468. F. Paul, 271, 277.
Pallav. ii. 64.
.

THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered to his resolution of carrying it
into full execution. But though the Elector Palatine, the Elector of
Brandenburgh, and Maurice, influenced by the same considerations as formerly,
seemed ready to yield implicit obedience to whatever he should enjoin, he met
not every where with a like obsequious submission. John Marquis of Brandenburgh
Anspach, although he had taken part with great zeal in the war against the
confederates of Smalkalde, refused to renounce doctrines which he held to be
sacred, and reminding the Emperor of the repeated promises which he had given
his Protestant allies, of allowing them the free exercise of their religion, he
claimed, in consequence of these, to be exempted from receiving the Interim.
Some other Princes, also, ventured to mention the same scruples, and to plead
the same indulgence. But on this, as on other trying occasions, the firmness of
the Elector of Saxony was most distinguished, and merited the highest praise.
Charles, well knowing the authority of his example with all the Protestant
party, labored, with the utmost earnestness, to gain his approbation of the
Interim, and by employing sometimes promises of setting him at liberty,
sometimes threats of treating him with greater harshness, attempted alternately
to work upon his hopes and fears. But he was, alike, regardless of both. After
having declared his fixed belief in the doctrines of the Reformation, "I cannot
now," said he, "in my old age, abandon the principles, for which I early
contended; nor, in order to procure freedom during a few declining years, will
I betray that good cause, on account of which I have suffered so much, and am
still willing to suffer. Better for me to enjoy, in this solitude, the esteem
of virtuous men, together with the approbation of my own conscience, than to
return into the world, with the imputation and guilt of apostasy, to disgrace
and embitter the remainder of my days." By this magnanimous resolution, he set
his countrymen a pattern of conduct, so very different from that which the
Emperor wished to have exhibited to them, that it drew upon him fresh marks of
his indignation. The rigor of his confinement was increased; the number of his
servants abridged; the Lutheran clergymen who had hitherto been permitted to
attend him, were dismissed; and even the books of devotion, which had been his
chief consolation during a tedious imprisonment, were taken from him Sleid. 462.
. The Landgrave of Hesse, his companion in misfortune, did not maintain the
same constancy. His patience and fortitude were both so much exhausted by the
length of his confinement, that willing to purchase freedom at any price, he
wrote to the Emperor, offering not only to approve of the Interim, but to yield
an unreserved submission to his will in every other particular. But Charles,
who knew, that what course soever the Landgrave might hold, neither his example
nor authority would prevail on his children or subjects to receive the Interim,
paid no regard to his offers. He was kept confined as strictly as ever; and
while he suffered the cruel mortification of having his conduct set in contrast
to that of the Elector, he derived not the smallest benefit from the mean step
which exposed him to such deserved censure Sleid. 462.
.

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles met with the most violent
opposition to the Interim. These small commonwealths, the citizens of which
were accustomed to liberty and independence, had embraced the doctrines of the
Reformation, when first published, with remarkable eagerness; the bold spirit
of innovation being peculiarly suited to the genius of free government. Among
them, the Protestant teachers had made the greatest number of proselytes. The
most eminent divines of the party were settled there as pastors. By having the
direction of the schools and other seminaries of learning, they had trained up
disciples as well instructed in the articles of their faith, as zealous to
defend them. Such persons were not to be guided by example, or swayed by
authority, but having been taught to examine, and to decide in matters of
controversy, thought that they were both qualified and entitled to judge for
themselves. As soon as the contents of the Interim were known, they, with one
voice, joined in refusing to admit it. Strasburgh, Constance, Bremen,
Magdeburgh, together with many other towns of less note, presented
remonstrances to the Emperor, setting forth the irregular and unconstitutional
manner in which the Interim had been enacted, and beseeching him not to offer
such violence to their consciences, as to require their assent to a form of
doctrine and worship, which appeared to them repugnant to the express precepts
of the divine law. But Charles, having prevailed on so many Princes of the
empire to approve of his new model, was not much moved by the representations
of these cities, which, how formidable soever they might have proved, it they
could have been formed into one body, lay so remote from each other, that it
was easy to oppress them separately, before it was possible for them to unite.

IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor saw it to be requisite that his
measures should be vigorous, and executed with such rapidity as to allow no
time for concerting any common plan of opposition. Having laid down this maxim
as the rule of his proceedings, his first attempt was upon the city of
Augsburgh, which, though overawed by the presence of the Spanish troops, he
knew to be as much dissatisfied with the Interim as any in the empire. He
ordered one body of these troops to seize the gates; he posted the rest in
different quarters of the city; and assembling all the burgesses in the town,
he, by his sole absolute authority, published a decree, abolishing their
present form of government, dissolving all their corporations and fraternities,
and nominating a small number of persons, in whom he vested, for the future,
the right of administration. Each of the persons, thus chosen, took an oath to
observe the Interim. An act of power, so unprecedented as well as arbitrary,
which excluded the body of the inhabitants from any share in the government of
their own community, and subjected them to men who had no other merit than
their servile devotion to the Emperor's will, gave general disgust; but as they
durst not venture upon resistance, they were obliged to submit in silence
Sleid. 469.
. From Augsburgh, in which he left a garrison, he proceeded to Ulm, and
new-modelling its government with the same violent hand, he seized such of
their pastors as refused to subscribe the Interim, committed them to prison,
and at his departure carried them along with him in chains Sleid. 472.
. By this severity, he not only secured the reception of the Interim in two of
the most powerful cities, but gave warning to the rest what such as continued
refractory had to expect. The effect of the example was as great as he could
have wished, and many towns, in order to save themselves from the like
vengeance, found it necessary to comply with what he enjoined. This obedience,
extorted by the rigor of authority, produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to make them conform so far to the
letter of the law, as was barely sufficient to screen them from punishment.
Their preachers accompanied those ceremonies, the observation of which the
Interim prescribed, with such an explication of their tendency, as served
rather to confirm than to remove the scruples of their hearers with regard to
them. The people, many of whom had grown up to mature years since the
establishment of the Reformed religion, and had been accustomed to no other
form of public worship, beheld the pompous pageantry of the popish service with
contempt or horror; and in most places the Romish ecclesiastics who returned to
take possession of their churches could scarce be protected from insult, or
their ministrations from interruption. Thus, notwithstanding the apparent
compliance of so many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed to freedom,
submitted with reluctance to the power which now oppressed them. Their
understanding as well as inclination revolted against the doctrines and rites
imposed on them; and though, for the present, they concealed their indignation
and resentment, it was evident that these passions could not always be kept
under restraint, but would break out at (...) in effects proportional to their
violence Mem. de Ribier. ii. 218. Sleid. 491.
.

CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with having bended the stubborn spirit of
the Germans to such general submission, departed for the Low Countries, fully
determined to compel the cites, which still stood out, to receive the Interim.
He carried his two prisoners the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse along
with him, either because he durst not leave them behind him in Germany, or
because he wished to give his countrymen, the Flemings, this illustrious proof
of the success of his arms, and the extent of his power. Before Charles arrived
at Brussels he was informed that the Pope's legates at Bologna had dismissed
the council by an indefinite prorogation, and that the prelates assembled there
had returned to their respective countries. Necessity had driven the Pope into
this measure. By the secession of those who had voted against the translation,
together with the departure of others, who grew weary of continuing in a place
where they were not suffered to proceed to business, so few and such
inconsiderable members remained, that the pompous appellation of a general
council could not, with decency, be bestowed any longer upon them. Paul had no
choice but to dissolve an assembly which was become the object of contempt, and
exhibited to all Christendom a most glaring proof of the impotence of the
Romish see. But, unavoidable as the measure was, it lay open to be unfavourably
interpreted, and had the appearance of withdrawing the remedy at the very time
when those for whose recovery it was provided, were prevailed on to acknowledge
its virtue, and to make trial of its effect. Charles did not fail to put this
construction on his conduct; and by an artful comparison of his own efforts to
suppress heresy, with Paul's scandalous inattention to a point so essential, he
endeavored to render the Pontiff odious to all zealous Catholics. At the same
time, he commanded the prelates of his faction to remain at Trent, that the
council might still appear to have a being, and might be ready, whenever it was
thought expedient, to resume its deliberations for the good of the church
Pallav. p. 11. 72.
.

THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low Countries, besides gratifying his
favorite passion of traveling from one part of his dominions to another, was
to receive Philip his only son, who was now in the twenty-first year of his
age, and whom he had called thither, not only that he might be recognized by
the states of the Netherlands as heir apparent, but in order to facilitate the
execution of a vast scheme, the object of which, and the reception it met with,
shall be hereafter explained. Philip, having left the government of Spain to
Maximilian, Ferdinand's eldest son, to whom the Emperor had given the Princess
Mary, his daughter, in marriage, embarked for Italy attended by a numerous
retinue of Spanish nobles Ochoa, Carolea, 362.
. The squadron which escorted him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithstanding his advanced age, insisted on the honor of performing, in
person, the same duty to the son, which he had often discharged toward the
father. He landed safely at Genoa; from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in Brussels. The states of
Brabant, in the first place, and those of the other provinces in their order,
acknowledged his right of succession in common form, and he took the customary
oath to preserve all their privileges inviolate Haraei annal. Brabant. 652.
. In all the towns of the Low Countries through which Philip passed he was
received with extraordinary pomp. Nothing that could express the respect of the
people, or contribute to his amusement was neglected; pageants, tournaments,
and public spectacles of every kind were exhibited with that expensive
magnificence which commercial nations display, when, on any occasion, they
depart from their usual maxims of frugality. But amidst these scenes of
festivity and pleasure, Philip's natural severity of temper was discernible.
Youth itself could not render him agreeable, nor his being a candidate for
power form him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty reserve in his behavior,
and discovered such manifest partiality toward his Spanish attendants,
together with such an avowed preference to the manners of their country, as
highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave rise to that antipathy, which
afterward occasioned a revolution so fatal to him in that part of his
dominions Mem. de Ribier. ii. 29. L'Evesque Mem. de Card. Granvelle, i. 21.
.

CHARLES was long detained in the Netherlands by a violent attack of the gout,
which returned upon him so frequently, and with such increasing violence, that
it had broken, to a great degree, the vigor of his constitution. He,
nevertheless, did not intermit his endeavors to enforce the Interim. The
inhabitants of Strasburgh, after a long struggle, found it necessary to give
obedience; those of Constance, who had taken arms in their own defense, were
compelled by force not only to conform to the Interim, but to renounce their
privileges as a free city, to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of Austria,
and as his vassals to admit an Austrian governor and garrison Sleid. 474, 491.
. Magdeburgh, Bremen, Hamburgh, and Lubeck were the only Imperial cities of
note that still continued refractory.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK X.
WHILE Charles labored, with such unwearied industry, to overcome the
obstinacy of the Protestants, the effects of his steadiness in the execution of
his plan were rendered less considerable by his rupture with the Pope, which
daily increased. The firm resolution which the Emperor seemed to have taken
against restoring Placentia, together with his repeated encroachments on the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, both by the regulations contained in the Interim,
and by his attempt to re-assemble a council at Trent, exasperated Paul to the
utmost, who, with the weakness incident to old age grew more attached to his
family, and more jealous or his authority, as he advanced in years. Pushed on
by these passions, he made new efforts to draw the French King into an alliance
against the Emperor Mem. de Ribier. ii. 230.
. But finding that Monarch, notwithstanding his hereditary enmity to Charles,
and dread of his growing power, as unwilling as formerly to involve himself in
immediate hostilities, he was obliged to contract his views, and to think of
preventing future encroachments, since it was not in his power to inflict
vengeance on account of those which were past. For this purpose, he determined
to recall his grant of Parma and Placentia, and after declaring them to be
re-annexed to the holy see, to indemnify Octavio by a new establishment in the
ecclesiastical state. By this expedient, he hoped to gain two points of no
small consequence; the security of Parma, first of all, as the Emperor would be
cautious of invading the patrimony of the church, though he might seize without
scruple a town belonging to the house of Farnese; and in the next place, some
chance of recovering Placentia, as his solicitations to that effect might
decently be urged with greater importunity, and would infallibly be attended
with more weight, when he was considered not as pleading the cause of his
family, but as an advocate for the interest of the church. But while Paul was
priding himself in this device, as a happy refinement in policy, Octavio, an
ambitious and high-spirited young man, who could not bear with patience to be
spoiled of one half of his territories by the rapaciousness of his
father-in-law, and to be deprived of the other by the artifices of his
grandfather, took measures in order to prevent the execution of a plan so fatal
to his interest. He set out secretly from Rome, and having first endeavored to
surprise Parma, which attempt was frustrated by the fidelity of the governor to
whom the Pope had entrusted the defense of the town, he made overtures to the
Emperor of renouncing all connection with the Pope, and depending entirely on
him for his future fortune. This unexpected defection of one of the Pope's own
family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated, almost to madness, a mind peevish
with old age; and there was no degree of severity to which Paul might not have
proceeded against a grandson whom he reproached as an unnatural apostate. But
happily for Octavio, death prevented his carrying into execution the harsh
resolutions which he had taken with respect to him, and put an end to his
pontificate in the sixteenth year of his administration, and the eighty-second
of his age Among many instances of the credulity or weakness of historians in
attributing the death of illustrious personages to extraordinary causes, this
is one. Almost all the historians of the sixteenth century affirm, that the
death of Paul III. was occasioned by the violent passions which the behavior
of his grandson excited; that being informed, while he was airing himself, in
one of his gardens near Rome, of Octavio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his
negociations with the Emperor, by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued
some hours in a swoon, then fevered, and died within three days. This is the
account given of it by Thuanus, lib. vi. 211. Adriani Istor. di suoi tempi,
lib. vii. 480. and by Father Paul, 280. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better
informed than any writer with regard to the events which happened in the papal
court, and when not warped by prejudice or system, more accurate in relating
them, agrees with their narrative in its chief circumstances. Pallav. b. ii.
74. Paruta, who wrote his history by command of the senate of Venice, relates
it in the same manner. Histories Venez. vol. iv. 212. But there was no occasion
to search for any extraordinary cause, to account for the death of an old man
of eighty-two. There remains an authentic account of this event, in which we
find none of these mavelous circumstances of which the historians are so
fond. The cardinal of Ferrara, who was entrusted with the affairs of France at
the court of Rome, and M. L'Urfe, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote
an account to that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's death. By
these it appears, that Octavio's attempt to surprise Parma was made on the
twentieth of October; that the next day in the evening, and not while he was
airing himself in the gardens of Monte-Cavallo, the Pope received intelligence
of what he had done; that he was seized with such a transport of passion, and
cried so bitterly that his voice was heard in several apartments of the palace;
that next day, however, he was so well as to give an audience to the cardinal
of Ferrara, and go through business of different kinds; that Octavio wrote a
letter to the Pope, not to cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his
resolution of throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor; that the Pope
received this on the twenty-first without any new symptoms of emotion, and
returned an answer to it; that on the twenty-second of October, the day on
which the cardinal of Ferrara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his usual
state of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 247. By a letter of M. D'Urfe, Nov. 5. it
appears, that the Pope was in such good health, that on the third of that month
he had celebrated the anniversary of his coronation with the usual solemnities.
Ibidem, 251. By another letter from the same person, we learn, that on the
sixth of November, a catarrh, or defluxion fell down on the Pope's lungs, with
such dangerous symptoms, that his life was immediately despaired of, Ibid. 252.
And by a third letter, we are informed, that he died November the tenth. In
none of these letters is his death imputed to any extraordinary cause. It
appears, that more than twenty days elapsed between Octavio's attempt on Parma
and the death of his grandfather, and that the disease was the natural effect
of old age, not one of those occasioned by violence of passion.
.

As this event had been long expected, there was an extraordinary concourse of
cardinals at Rome; and the various competitors having had time to form their
parties, and to concert their measures, their ambition and intrigues protracted
the conclave to a great length. The Imperial and French factions strove, with
emulation, to promote one of their own number, and had, by turns, the prospect
of success. But as Paul, during a long pontificate had raised many to the
purple, and those chiefly persons of eminent abilities as well as zealously
devoted to his family. Cardinal Farnese had the command of a powerful and
united squadron, by whose address and firmness he exalted to the papal throne
the Cardinal de Monte, whom Paul had employed as his principal legate in the
council of Trent, and trusted with his most secret intentions. He assumed the
name of Julius III. and in order to express his gratitude toward his
benefactor, the first act of his administration was to put Octavio Farnese in
possession of Parma. When he was told of the injury which he did the holy see
by alienating a territory of such value, he briskly replied, "That he would
rather be a poor Pope, with the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich one,
with the infamy of having forgotten the obligations conferred upon him, and the
promises which he had made Mem. de Ribier.
." But all the luster of this candor or generosity he quickly effaced by an
action most shockingly indecent. According to an ancient and established
practice, every Pope, upon his election, claims the privilege of bestowing, on
whom he pleases, the cardinal's hat, which falls to be disposed of by his being
vested with the triple crown. Julius, to the astonishment of the sacred
college, conferred this mark of distinction, together with ample ecclesiastical
revenues, and the right of bearing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a
youth of sixteen, born of obscure parents, and known by the name of the Ape,
from his having been entrusted with the care of an animal of that species, in
the Cardinal di Monte's family. Such a prostitution of the highest dignity in
the church would have given offense, even in those dark periods, when the
credulous superstition of the people emboldened ecclesiastics to venture on the
most flagrant violations of decorum. But in an enlightened age, when, by the
progress of knowledge and philosophy the obligations of duty and decency were
better understood, when a blind veneration for the pontifical character was
every where abated, and one half of Christendom in open rebellion against the
papal see, this action was viewed with horror. Rome was immediately filled with
libels and pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's extravagant regard for such an
unworthy object to the most criminal passions. The Protestants exclaimed
against the absurdities of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine truth
could dwell in a breast so impure, and called mere loudly than ever, and with
greater appearance of justice, for the immediate and thorough reformation of a
church, the head of which was a disgrace to the Christian name Sleid. 492. F.
Paul, 281. Pallav. ii. 76. Thuan. lib. vi. 215.
. The rest of the Pope's conduct was of a piece with this first specimen of his
dispositions. Having now reached the summit of ecclesiastical ambition, he
seemed eager to indemnify himself, by an unrestrained indulgence of his
desires, for the self-denial or dissimulation which he had thought it prudent
to practice while in a subordinate station. He became careless, to so great a
degree, of all serious business, that he could seldom be brought to attend to
it, but in cases of extreme necessity; and giving up himself to amusements and
dissipation of every kind, he imitated the luxurious elegance of Leo, rather
than the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of which it was necessary to
display, in contending with a sect which derived great credit from the rigid
and austere manners of its teachers F. Paul, ibid.
.

THE Pope, how ready soever to fulfill his engagements to the family of Farnese,
discovered no inclination to observe the oath, which each cardinal had taken
when he entered the conclave, that if the choice should fall on him, he would
immediately call the council to reassume its deliberations. Julius knew, by
experience, how difficult it was to confine such a body of men within the
narrow limits which it was the interest of the church of Rome to prescribe; and
how easily the zeal of some members, the rashness of others, or the suggestions
of the Princes, on whom they depended, might precipitate a popular and
ungovernable assembly into forbidden inquiries, as well as dangerous decisions.
He wished, for these reasons, to have eluded the obligation of his oath, and
gave an ambiguous answer to the first proposals, which were made to him by the
Emperor, with regard to that matter. But as Charles, either from his natural
obstinacy in adhering to the measures which he had once adopted, or from the
mere pride of accomplishing what was held to be almost impossible, persisted in
his resolution of forcing the Protestants to return into the bosom of the
church. As he had persuaded himself that the authoritative decisions of the
council might be employed with efficacy in combating their prejudices; and in
consequence of that persuasion, solicited earnestly that a new bull of
convocation might be issued, the Pope could not, with decency, reject that
request. When Julius found that he could not prevent the calling of a council,
he endeavored to take the merit of having procured the meeting of an assembly,
which was the object of such general desire and expectation. A congregation of
cardinals, to whom he referred the consideration of what was necessary for
restoring peace to the church, recommended, by his direction, the speedy
convocation of a council, as the most effectual expedient for that purpose; and
as the new heresies raged with the greatest violence in Germany, they proposed
Trent as the place of its meeting, that by a near inspection of the evil, the
remedy might be applied with greater discernment and certainty of success. The
Pope warmly approved this advice, which he himself had dictated, and sent
nuncios to the Imperial and French courts, in order to make known his
intentions F. Paul, 281. Pallav. ii. 77.
.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor had summoned a new Diet to meet at Augsburgh, in order
to enforce the observation of the Interim, and to procure a more authentic act
of the empire, acknowledging the jurisdiction of the council, as well as an
explicit promise of conforming to its decrees. He appeared there in person,
together with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the electors were present,
but all sent deputies in their name. Charles, notwithstanding the despotic
authority with which he had given law in the empire during two years, knew that
the spirit of independence among the Germans was not entirely subdued, and for
that reason took care to overawe the Diet by a considerable body of Spanish
troops which escorted him thither. The first point, submitted to the
consideration of the Diet, was the necessity of holding a council. All the
popish members agreed, without difficulty, that the meeting of that assembly
should be renewed at Trent, and promised an implicit acquiescence in its
decrees. The Protestants, intimidated and disunited, must have followed their
example, and the resolution of the Diet have proved unanimous, if Maurice of
Saxony had not begun, at this time, to disclose new intentions, and to act a
part very different from that which he had so long assumed.

BY an artful dissimulation of his own sentiments; by address in paying court
to the Emperor; and by the seeming zeal with which he forwarded all his
ambitious schemes, Maurice had raised himself to the Electoral dignity; and
having added the dominions of the elder branch of the Saxon family to his own,
was become the most powerful Prince in Germany. But his long and intimate union
with the Emperor had afforded him many opportunities of observing narrowly the
dangerous tendency of his schemes. He saw the yoke that was preparing for his
country; and from the rapid as well as formidable progress of the Imperial
power, was convinced that but a few steps more remained to be taken, in order
to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in Germany, as he had become in Spain.
The more eminent the condition was to which he himself had been exalted, the
more solicitous did he naturally become to maintain all its rights and
privileges, and the more did he dread the thoughts of descending from the rank
of a Prince almost independent, to that of a vassal subject to the will of a
master. At the same time, he perceived that Charles, instead of allowing
liberty of conscience, the promise of which had allured several Protestant
Princes to assist him in the war against the confederates of Smalkalde, was
bent on exacting a rigid conformity to the doctrines and rites of the Romish
church. As he, notwithstanding all the compliances which he had made from
motives of interest, or an excess of confidence in the Emperor, was sincerely
attached to the Lutheran tenets, he determined not to be a tame spectator of
the overthrow of a system which he believed to be founded in truth.

THIS resolution, flowing from the love of liberty, or zeal for religion, was
strengthened by political and interested considerations. In that elevated
station, in which Maurice was now placed, new and more extensive prospects
opened to his view. His rank and power entitled him to be the head of the
Protestants in the empire. His predecessor, the degraded Elector, with inferior
abilities, and territories less considerable, had acquired such an ascendant
over the councils of the party; and Maurice neither wanted discernment to see
the advantage of this pre-eminence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But he
found himself in a situation which rendered the attempt no less difficult, than
the object of it was important. On the one hand, the connection which he had
formed with the Emperor was so intimate, that he could scarce hope to take any
step which tended to dissolve it, without alarming his jealousy, and drawing on
himself the whole weight of that power, which had crushed the greatest
confederacy ever formed in Germany. On the other hand, the calamities which he
had brought on the Protestant party were so recent and so great, that it seemed
almost impossible to regain their confidence, or to rally and re-animate a body
of men, after himself had been the chief instrument in breaking their union and
vigor. These considerations were sufficient to have discouraged any person of
a spirit less adventurous than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and vastness
of the enterprises were allurements; and he boldly resolved on measures, of
which a genius of an inferior order could have conceived no idea, or would have
trembled at the thoughts of the danger which attended the execution of them.

HIS passions concurred with his interest in confirming this resolution; and
the resentment excited by an injury, which he suddenly felt, added new force to
the motives for opposing the Emperor, which sound policy suggested. Maurice, by
his authority, had prevailed on the Landgrave of Hesse to put his person in the
Emperor's power, and had obtained a promise from the Imperial ministers that he
should not be detained a prisoner. This had been violated in the manner already
related. The unhappy Landgrave exclaimed as loudly against his son-in-law as
against Charles. The Princes of Hesse required him incessantly to fulfill his
engagements to their father, who had lost his liberty by trusting to him; and
all Germany suspected him of having betrayed, to an implacable enemy, the
friend whom he was most bound to protect. Rouzed by these solicitations and
reproaches, as well as prompted by duty and affection to his father-in-law,
Maurice had employed not only entreaties but remonstrances in order to procure
his release. All these Charles had disregarded; and the shame of having been
first deceived and then slighted by a Prince whom he had served with zeal and
success, which merited a very different return, made such a deep impression on
Maurice, that he waited with impatience for an opportunity of being revenged.

THE utmost caution as well as delicacy were requisite in taking every step
toward this end; as he had to guard, on the one hand, against giving a
premature alarm to the Emperor; while, on the other, something considerable and
explicit was necessary to be done, in order to regain the confidence of the
Protestant party. Maurice had accordingly applied all his powers of address and
dissimulation to attain both these points. As he knew Charles to be inflexible
with regard to the submission which he required to the Interim, he did not
hesitate one moment whether he should establish that form of doctrine and
worship in his dominions. But being sensible how odious it was to his subjects,
instead of violently imposing it on them by the mere terror of authority, as
had been done in other parts of Germany, he endeavored to render their
obedience a voluntary deed of their own. For this purpose, he had assembled the
clergy of his country at Leipsic, and had laid the Interim before them,
together with the reasons which made it necessary to conform to it. He had
gained some of them by promises, others he had wrought upon by threats, and all
were intimidated by the rigor with which obedience to the Interim was extorted
in the neighboring provinces. Even Melancthon, whose merit of every kind
entitled him to the first place among the Protestant divines, being now
deprived of the manly counsels of Luther, which were wont to inspire him with
fortitude, and to preserve him steady amidst the storms and dangers that
threatened the church, was seduced into unwarrantable concessions, by the
timidity of his temper, his fond desire of peace, and his excessive
complaisance toward persons of high rank. By his arguments and authority, no
less than by Maurice's arts, the assembly was prevailed on to declare, that in
points which were purely indifferent, obedience was due to the commands of a
lawful superior. Founding upon this maxim, no less uncontrovertible in theory,
than dangerous when carried into practice, especially in religious matters,
they proceeded to class, among the number of things indifferent, several
doctrines, which Luther had pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in the
Romish creed, as well as many of those rites which distinguished the Reformed
from the Popish worship, and by consequence, they exhorted their people to
comply with the Emperor's injunctions concerning these particulars Sleid 481,
485. J. Laur. Moshemii Institutionum Hist. Ecclesiasticae, lib. iv. Helmst.
1755. 4to. p. 748.
.

BY this dextrous conduct, the introduction of the Interim excited none of
those violent convulsions in Saxony, which it occasioned in other provinces.
But though the Saxons submitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed against
Melancthon and his associates, as false brethren, who were either so wicked as
to apostatize from the truth altogether; or so artful as to betray it by subtle
distinctions; or so feeble spirited, as to give it up from pusillanimity and
criminal complaisance to a Prince, capable of sacrificing to his political
interest, that which he himself regarded as most sacred. Maurice being
conscious what a color of probability his past conduct gave to these
accusations, as well as afraid of losing entirely the confidence of the
Protestants, issued a declaration containing professions of his zealous
attachment to the Reformed religion, and of his resolution to guard against all
the errors or encroachments of the papal see Sleid. 485.
.

HAVING gone so far in order to remove the fears and jealousies of the
Protestants, he found it necessary to efface the impression which such a
declaration might make on the Emperor. For that purpose, he not only renewed
his professions of an unviolable adherence to his alliance with him, but as the
city of Magdeburgh still persisted in rejecting the Interim, he undertook to
reduce it to obedience, and instantly set about levying the troops to be
employed in that service. This damped all the hopes which the Protestants begun
to conceive of Maurice, in consequence of his declaration, and left them more
than ever at a loss to guess at his real intentions. Their former suspicion and
distrust of him revived, and the divines of Magdeburgh filled Germany with
writings, in which they represented him as the most formidable enemy of the
Protestant religion, who treacherously assumed an appearance of zeal for its
interest, that he might more effectually execute his schemes for its
destruction.

THIS charge, supported by the evidence of recent facts, as well as by his
present dubious conduct, gained such universal credit, that Maurice was obliged
to take take a vigorous step in his own vindication. As soon as the
re-assembling of the council at Trent was proposed in the Diet, his ambassadors
protested, that their master would not acknowledge its authority, unless all
the points which had been already decided there were reviewed, and considered
as entire; unless the Protestant divines had a full hearing granted them, and
were allowed a decisive voice in the council; and unless the Pope renounced his
pretensions to preside in the council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and
absolved the bishops from their oath of obedience, that they might deliver
their sentiments with greater freedom. These demands, which were higher than
any that the Reformers had ventured to make, even when the zeal of their party
was warmest, or their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced, in some degree,
the effect of Maurice's preparations against Magdeburgh, and kept the
Protestants in suspense with regard to his designs. At the same time, he had
address enough to represent this part of his conduct in such a light to the
Emperor, that it gave him no offense, and occasioned no interruption of the
strict confidence which subsisted between them. What the pretexts were which he
employed in order to give such a bold declaration an innocent appearance, the
contemporary historians have not explained; that they imposed upon Charles is
certain, for he still continued to prosecute his plan as well concerning the
Interim as the council, with the same ardour; and to place the same confidence
in Maurice, with regard to the execution of both.

THE Pope's resolution concerning the council not being yet known at Augsburgh,
the chief business of the Diet was to enforce the observation of the Interim.
As the senate of Magdeburgh, notwithstanding various endeavors to frighten or
to sooth them into compliance, not only persevered obstinately in their
opposition to the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortifications of their
city, and to levy troops in their own defense, Charles required of the Diet,
that they would assist him in quelling this audacious rebellion against a
decree of the empire. Had the members of the Diet been left to act agreeably to
their own inclination, this demand would have been rejected without hesitation.
All the Germans who favored, in any degree, the new opinions in religion, and
many who were influenced by no other consideration than jealousy of the
Emperor's growing power, regarded this effort of the citizens of Magdeburgh, as
a noble stand for the liberties of their country. Even such as had not
resolution to exert the same spirit, admired the gallantry of their enterprise,
and wished it success. But the presence of the Spanish troops, together with
the dread of the Emperor's displeasure, overawed those who were present in the
Diet to such a degree, that without venturing to utter their own sentiments,
they tamely ratified, by their votes, whatever the Emperor was pleased to
prescribe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued by his own authority
against the Magdeburghers, were confirmed; a resolution was taken to raise
troops in order to besiege the city in form; and persons were named to fix the
contingent in men or money to be furnished by each state. At the same time, the
Diet petitioned that Maurice might be entrusted with the command of that army,
to which Charles gave his consent with great alacrity, and with high encomiums
upon the wisdom of the choice which they had made Sleid. 503, 5^2.
. As Maurice conducted all his schemes with profound and impenetrable secrecy;
it is probable that he took no step avowedly in order to obtain this charge.
The recommendation of his countrymen was either purely accidental, or flowed
from the opinion generally entertained of his great abilities; and neither the
Diet had any foresight, nor the Emperor any dread of the consequences which
followed upon this nomination. Maurice accepted without hesitation the trust
committed to him, instantly discerning the important advantages which he might
derive from it.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull for the convocation of the council,
observed all those tedious forms which the court of Rome can employ, with so
much dexterity, to retard any disagreeable measure. At last it was published,
and the council summoned to meet at Trent on the first day of the ensuing month
of May. As he knew that many of the Germans rejected or disputed the authority
and jurisdiction which the papal see claims with respect to general councils,
he took care, in the preamble of the bull, to assert, in the strongest terms,
his own right, not only to call and preside in that assembly, but to direct its
proceedings; nor would he soften these expressions, in any degree,
notwithstanding the repeated solicitations of the Emperor, who foresaw what
offense they would give, and what construction might be put on them. They were
censured accordingly, with great severity, by several members of the Diet, but
whatever disgust or suspicion they excited, such absolute direction of all
their deliberations had the Emperor acquired, that he procured a recess in
which the authority of the council was recognized, and declared to be the
proper remedy for the evils which at that time afflicted the church; all the
Princes and states of the empire, such as had made innovations in religion, as
well as those who adhered to the system of their forefathers, were required to
send their representatives to the council; the Emperor engaged to grant a safe
conduct to such as demanded it, and to secure them an impartial hearing in the
council; he promised to fix his residence in some city of the empire, in the
neighborhood of Trent, that he might protect the members of the council by his
presence, and take care that, by conducting their deliberations agreeable to
scripture and the doctrine of the fathers, they might bring them to a desirable
issue. In this recess, the observation of the Interim was more strictly
enjoined than ever, and the Emperor threatened all who had hitherto neglected
or refused to conform to it, with the severest effects of his vengeance, if
they persisted in their disobedience Sleid. 512. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldasti
Constit. Imperiales, vol. ii. 340.
.

DURING the meeting of this Diet, a new attempt was made in order to procure
liberty to the Landgrave. That Prince, nowise reconciled by time to his
situation, grew every day more impatient of restraint. Having often applied to
Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburgh, who took every occasion of soliciting
the Emperor in his behalf, though without any effect, he now commanded his sons
to summon them, with legal formality, to perform what was contained in the bond
they had granted him, by surrendering themselves to be treated with the same
rigor as the Emperor had used him. This furnished them with a fresh pretext
for renewing their application to the Emperor, together with an additional
argument to enforce it. Charles firmly resolved not to grant their request;
though, at the same time, being extremely desirous to get rid of their
incessant importunity, he endeavored to prevail on the Landgrave to give up
the obligation which he had received from the two Electors. But that Prince
refusing to part with a security which he deemed essential to his safety, the
Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could not untie; and by a public deed
annulled the bond which Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburgh had granted,
absolving them from all their engagements to the Landgrave. No pretension to a
power so pernicious to society as that of abrogating at pleasure the most
sacred laws of honor, and most formal obligations of public faith, had
hitherto been formed by any but the Roman Pontiffs, who, in consequence of
their claim of infallibility, arrogate the right of dispensing with precepts
and duties of every kind. All Germany was filled with astonishment, when
Charles assumed the same prerogative. The state of subjection, to which the
empire was reduced, appeared to be more rigorous as well as intolerable than
that of the most wretched and enslaved nations, if the Emperor, by an arbitrary
decree, might cancel those solemn contracts, which are the foundation of that
mutual confidence whereby men are held together in social union. The Landgrave
himself now gave up all hopes of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's
consent, and endeavored to procure it by his own address. But the plan which
he had formed to deceive his guards being discovered, such of his attendants as
he had gained to favor his escape were put to death, and he was confined in
the citadel of Mechlin more closely than ever Sleid. 504. Thuan. l. vi. 234,
235.
.

ANOTHER transaction was carried on during this Diet, with respect to an affair
more nearly interesting to the Emperor, and which occasioned likewise a general
alarm among the Princes of the empire. Charles, though formed with talents
which fitted him for conceiving and conducting great designs, was not capable,
as has been observed, of bearing extraordinary success. Its operation on his
mind was so violent and intoxicating, that it elevated him beyond what was
moderate or attainable, and turned his whole attention to the pursuit of vast
but chimerical objects. Such had been the effect of his victory over the
confederates of Smalkalde. He did not long rest satisfied with the substantial
and certain advantages which were the result of that event, but despising
these, as poor or inconsiderable fruits of such great success, he had aimed at
bringing all Germany to an uniformity in religion, and at rendering the
Imperial power despotic. These were objects extremely splendid, it must be
acknowledged, and alluring to an ambitious mind; the pursuit at them, however,
was attended with manifest danger, and the attainment of them very precarious.
But the steps which he had already taken toward them, being accompanied with
such success, his imagination, warmed with contemplating this vast design,
overlooked or despised all difficulties. As he conceived the execution of his
plan to be certain, he began to be solicitous how he might render the
possession of such an important acquisition perpetual in his family, by
transmitting the German empire, as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and his
dominions in Italy and the Low Countries, to his son. Having long revolved this
flattering idea in his mind, without communicating it, even to those ministers
whom he most trusted, he had called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that his
presence would facilitate the carrying forward the scheme.

GREAT obstacles, however, and such as would have deterred any ambition less
accustomed to overcome difficulties, were to be surmounted. He had, in the year
one thousand five hundred and thirty, imprudently assisted in procuring his
brother Ferdinand the dignity of King of the Romans, and there was no
probability that this Prince, who was still in the prime of life, and h^d a son
grown up to the years of manhood, would relinquish, in favor of his nephew,
the near prospect of the Imperial throne, which Charles's infirmities and
declining state of health opened to him. This did not deter the Emperor from
venturing to make the proposition; and when Ferdinand, notwithstanding his
profound reverence for his brother, and obsequious submission to his will in
other instances, rejected it in a peremptory tone, he was not discouraged by
one repulse. He renewed his applications to him by his sister, Mary Queen of
Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her great abilities, tempered with extreme
gentleness of disposition, had acquired an extraordinary influence over both
the brothers. She entered warmly into a measure, which tended so manifestly to
aggrandize the house of Austria; and flattering herself that she could tempt
Ferdinand to renounce the reversionary possession of the Imperial dignity for
an immediate establishment, she assured him that the Emperor, by way of
compensation for his giving up his chance of succession, would instantly bestow
upon him territories of very considerable value, and pointed out in particular
those of the Duke of Wurtemberg, which might be confiscated upon different
pretexts. But Ferdinand was more ambitious than to be persuaded, by her address
or entreaties, to approve of a plan, which would have degraded him from the
highest rank among the Monarchs of Europe to that of a subordinate and
dependent Prince. He was at the same time, more attached to his children than
to frustrate, by a rash concession, all the high hopes in prospect of which
they had been educated.

NOTWITHSTANDING the immovable firmness which Ferdinand discovered, the
Emperor did not abandon his scheme. He flattered himself that he might attain
the object in view by another channel, and that it was not impossible to
prevail on the electors to cancel their former choice of Ferdinand, or at least
to elect Philip a second King of the Romans, substituting him as next in
succession to his uncle. With this view he took Philip along with him to the
Diet, that the Germans might have an opportunity to observe and become
acquainted with the Prince, in behalf of whom he courted their interest; and he
himself employed all the arts of address or insinuation to gain the electors,
and to prepare them for lending a favorable ear to the proposal. But no sooner
did he venture upon mentioning it to them, than they, at once, saw and trembled
at the consequences with which it would be attended. They had long felt all the
inconveniences of having placed at the head of the empire, a Prince whose power
and dominions were so extensive; if they should now repeat the folly, and
continue the Imperial crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the same family,
they foresaw, that they would give the son an opportunity of carrying on that
system of oppression which the father had begun; and would put it in his power
to overturn whatever was yet left entire in the ancient and venerable fabric of
the German constitution.

THE character of the Prince, in whose favor this extraordinary proposition
was made, rendered it still less agreeable. Philip, though possessed with an
insatiable desire of power, was a stranger to all the arts of conciliating
good will. Haughty, reserved and severe, he, instead of gaining new friends,
disgusted the ancient and most devoted partisans of the Austrian interest. He
scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the language of the country, to the
government of which he aspired; nor would he condescend to pay the Germans the
compliment of accommodating himself, during his residence among them, to their
manners and customs. He allowed the Electors and most illustrious Princes in
Germany to remain in his presence uncovered, affecting a stately and distant
demeanor, which the greatest of the German Emperors, and even Charles himself,
amidst the pride of power and victory, had never assumed Frediman Andreae
Zulich Dissertatio politico -- Historica de Naevis politicis Caroli V. Lips.
1706. 4to. p. 21.
. On the other hand, Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Germany, had
studied to render himself acceptable to the people, by a conformity to their
manners, which seemed to flow from choice; and his son Maximilian, who was born
in Germany, possessed in an eminent degree, such amiable qualities, as rendered
him the darling of his countrymen, and induced them to look forward to his
election as a most desirable event. Their esteem and affection for him
fortified the resolution which sound policy had suggested; and determined the
Germans to prefer the popular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to the stubborn
austerity of Philip, which interest could not soften, nor ambition teach him to
disguise. All the electors, the ecclesiastical as well as secular, concurred in
expressing such strong disapprobation of the measure, that Charles,
notwithstanding the reluctance with which he gave up any point, was obliged to
drop the scheme as impracticable. By his unseasonable perseverance in pushing
it, he not only filled the Germans with new jealousy of his ambitious designs,
but laid the foundation of rivalship and discord in the Austrian family, and
forced his brother Ferdinand, in self-defence, to court the electors,
particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to form such connections with them, as cut
off all prospect of renewing the proposal with success. Philip, soured by his
disappointment, was sent back to Spain, to be called thence when any new scheme
of ambition should render his presence necessary Sleid. 505. Thuan. 180, 238.
Memoir. de Ribier, ii. 219. 281, 314. Adriani Istor. lib. viii. 507, 520.
.

HAVING relinquished this plan of domestic ambition which had long occupied and
engrossed him, Charles imagined that he would now have leisure to turn all his
attention toward his grand scheme of establishing uniformity of religion in
the empire, by forcing all the contending parties to acquiesce in the decisions
of the council of Trent. But such was the extent of his dominions, the variety
of connections in which this entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to
which these gave rise, as seldom allowed him to apply his whole force to any
one object. The machine which he had to conduct was so great and complicated,
that an unforeseen irregularity, or obstruction in one of the inferior wheels,
often disconcerted the motion of the whole, and disappointed him of the most
considerable effects which he expected. Such an unlooked-for occurrence
happened at this juncture, and created new obstacles to the execution of his
schemes with regard to religion. Julius III. though he had confirmed Octavio
Farnese in the possession of the duchy of Parma, during the first effusions of
joy and gratitude on his promotion to the papal throne, soon began to repent of
his own generosity, and to be apprehensive of consequences which either he did
not foresee, or had disregarded while the sense of his obligations to the
family of Farnese was recent. The Emperor still retained Placentia in his
hands, and had not relinquished his pretensions to Parma, as a fief of the
empire. Gonzaga, the governor of Milan, having, by the part which he took in
the murder of the late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the family of
Farnese, which he knew could never be forgiven, had for that reason vowed its
destruction, and employed all the influence, which his great abilities as well
as long services gave him with the Emperor, in persuading him to seize Parma by
force of arms. Charles, in compliance with his solicitations, and that he might
gratify his own desire of annexing Parma to the Milanese, listened to the
proposal; and Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement from the slightest
appearance of approbation, began to assemble troops, and to make other
preparations for the execution of his scheme.

OCTAVIO, who saw t^^ impending danger, found it necessary for his own safety
to increase the garrison of his capital, and to levy soldiers for defending the
rest of the country. But as the expense of such an effort far exceeded his
scanty revenues, he represented his situation to the Pope, and implored that
protection and assistance which was due to him as a vassal of the church. The
Imperial minister, however, had already pre-occupied the Pope's ear; and by
discoursing continually concerning the danger of giving offense to the Emperor,
as well as the imprudence of supporting Octavio in an usurpation so detrimental
to the holy see, had totally alienated him from the family of Farnese.
Octavio's remonstrance and petition met, of consequence, with a cold reception;
and he, despairing of any assistance from Julius, began to look round for
protection from some other quarter. Henry II. of France was the only Prince
powerful enough to afford him this protection, and fortunately he was now in a
situation which allowed him to undertake it. He had brought his transactions
with the two British kingdoms, which had hitherto diverted his attention from
the affairs of the continent, to such an issue as he desired. This he had
effected partly by the vigor of his arms, partly by his dexterity in taking
advantage of the political factions which raged in both kingdoms, and rendered
the counsels of the Scots violent and precipitate, and the operations of the
English feeble and unsteady. He had procured from the English favorable
conditions of peace for his allies the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of
Scotland not (...) to affiance their young Queen to his son the Dauphin, but
even to send her into France, that she (...) be educated under his eye; and had
recovered Bologne, together with its dependencies, which had been conquered by
Henry VIII.

HAVING gained points of so much consequence to his crown, and disengaged
himself with such honor from the burden of supporting the Scots, and
maintaining a war against England. Henry was now at full leisure to pursue the
measures which his hereditary jealousy of the Emperor's power naturally
suggested. He listened, accordingly, to the first overtures which Octavio
Farnese made him; and embracing eagerly an opportunity of recovering footing in
Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty, in which he promised to espouse his
cause, and to furnish him with all the assistance which he desired. This
transaction could not be long kept secret from the Pope, who foreseeing the
calamities which must follow if war was rekindled so near the ecclesiastical
state, immediately issued monitory letters, requiring Octavio, to relinquish
his new alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with the requisition, he soon
after pronounced his fief to be forfeited, and declared war against him as a
disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as he could not hope, with his own
forces alone, to subdue Octavio, while supported by such a powerful ally as the
King of France, he had recourse to the Emperor, who being extremely solicitous
to prevent the establishment of the French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga to second
Julius with all his troops. Thus the French took the field as the allies of
Octavio; the Imperialists as the protectors of the holy see; and hostilities
commenced between them, while Charles and Henry themselves still affected to
give out that they would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crespy. The war of
Parma was not distinguished by any memorable event. Many small rencounters
happened with alternate success; the French ravaged part of the ecclesiastical
territories; the Imperialists laid waste the Parmesan; and the latter, after
having begun to besiege Parma in form, were obliged to abandon the enterprise
with disgrace Adriani Istor. lib. viii. 505, 514, 524. Sleid. 513. Paruta, p.
220. Lettere del Caro s^ritte al nome del Card. Farnese, tom. ii. p. 11, etc.
.

BUT the motions and alarm which this war, or the preparation for it,
occasioned in Italy, prevented most of the Italian prelates from repairing to
Trent on the first of May, the day appointed for re-assembling the council; and
though the papal legate and nuncios resorted thither, they were obliged to
adjourn to the first of September, hoping such a number might then assemble,
that they might with decency begin their deliberations. At that time, about
sixty prelates, mostly from the ecclesiastical state, or from Spain, together
with a few Germans convened F. aul. 268.
. The session was opened with the accustomed formalities, and the fathers were
about to proceed to business, when the abbot of Bellozane appeared, and
presenting letters of credence as ambassador from the French King, demanded
audience. Having obtained it, he protested in Henry's name against an assembly
called at such an improper juncture, when a war, wantonly kindled by the Pope,
made it impossible for the deputies, from the Gallican church to resort to
Trent in safety, or to deliberate concerning articles of faith and discipline
with the requisite tranquillity; he declared, that his master did not
acknowledge this to be a general oecumenic council, but must consider, and
would treat it as a particular and partial convention Sleid. 518. Thuan. 282.
F. Paul. 301.
. The legate affected to despise this protest; and the prelates proceeded,
notwithstanding, to examine and decide the great points in controversy
concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme unction.
This measure of the French Monarch, however, gave a deep wound to the credit of
the council, at the very commencement of its deliberations. The Germans could
not pay much regard to an assembly, whose authority the second Prince in
Christendom had formally disclaimed, or feel any great reverence for the
decisions of a few men, who arrogated to themselves all the rights belonging to
the representatives of the church unive^ a title to which they had such poor
pretensions.

THE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining his authority to the utmost, in order
to establish the reputation and jurisdiction of the council. He had prevailed
on the three ecclesiastical Electors, the prelates of greatest power and
dignity in the church, next to the Pope, to repair thither in person. He had
obliged several German bishops of inferior rank to go to Trent themselves, or
to send their proxies. He granted an Imperial safe conduct to the ambassadors
nominated by the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Duke of Wurtemberg, and other
Protestant states, to attend the council; and exhorted them to send their
divines thither, in order to propound, explain and defend their doctrine. At
the same time, his zeal anticipated the decrees of the council; and, as if the
Protestant doctrines had already been condemned, he took large steps toward
exterminating them. With this intention, he called together the ministers of
Augsburgh; and after interrogating them concerning several controverted points,
enjoined them to teach nothing with respect to these, contrary to the tenets of
the Romish church. Upon their declining to comply with a requisition so
contrary to the dictates of their consciences, he commanded them to leave the
town in three days, without revealing to any person the cause of their
banishment; he prohibited them to preach for the future in any of the countries
subject to the Imperial jurisdiction; and obliged them to take an oath that
they would punctually obey these injunctions. They were not the only victims to
his zeal. The Protestant clergy, in most of the cities in the circle of Suabia,
were ejected with the same violence; and in many places, such magistrates as
had distinguished themselves by their attachment to the new opinions, were
dismissed with the most abrupt irregularity, and their offices filled, in
consequence of the Emperor's arbitrary appointment, with the most bigoted of
their adversaries. The Reformed worship was almost entirely suppressed
throughout that extensive province. The ancient and fundamental privileges of
the free cities were violated. The people were compelled to attend the
ministration of priests, whom they regarded with horror as idolaters; and to
submit to the jurisdiction of magistrates, whom they detested as usurpers
Sleid. 516, 528. Thuan. 276.
.

THE ^mperor, after this discovery, which was more explicit than any that he
had hitherto made, of his intention to subvert the German constitution, as well
as to extirpate the Protestant religion, set out for Inspruck in the Tyrol. He
fixed his residence in that city, as by its situation in the neighborhood of
Trent, and on the confines of Italy, it appeared a commodious station, whence
he might inspect the operations of the council, and observe the progress of the
war in the Parmesan, without losing sight of the occurrences that might happen
in Germany Sleid. 329.
.

DURING these transactions, the siege of Magdeburgh was carried on with various
success. At the time when Charles proscribed the citizens of Magdeburgh, and
put them under the ban of the empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all the
neighboring states to take arms against them, as rebels and common enemies.
Encouraged by his exhortations as well as promises George of Mecklenburgh, a
younger brother of the reigning Duke, an active and ambitious Prince, collected
a considerable number of those soldiers of fortune who had accompanied Henry of
Brunswick in all his wild enterprises; and though a zealous Lutheran himself,
invaded the territories of the Magdeburghers, hoping, that by the merit of this
service, he might procure some part of their domains to be allotted to him as
an establishment. The citizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure patiently the
calamities of war, could not be restrained from sallying out in order to save
their lands from being laid waste. They attacked the Duke of Mecklenburgh with
more courage than conduct, and were repulsed with great slaughter. But as they
were animated with that unconquerable spirit, which flows from zeal for
religion, cooperating with the love of civil liberty, far from being
disheartened by their misfortune, they prepared to defend themselves with
vigor. Many of the veteran soldiers who had served in the long wars between
the Emperor and King of France, crowding to their standards under able and
experienced officers, they acquired military skill by degrees, and added all
the advantages of that to the efforts of undaunted courage. The Duke of
Mecklenburgh, notwithstanding the severe blow which he had given the
Magdeburghers, not daring to invest a town strongly fortified, and defended by
such a garrison, continued to ravage the open country.

AS the hopes of booty drew many adventurers to his camp, Maurice of Saxony
began to be jealous of the power which he possessed by being at the head of
such a numerous body, and marching toward Magdeburgh with his own troops,
assumed the supreme command of the whole army, an honor to which his high rank
and great abilities, as well as the nomination of the Diet, gave him an
indisputable title. With this united force he invested the town, and began the
siege in form; claiming great merit with the Emperor on that account, as, from
his zeal to execute the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself once more to
the censures and maledictions of the party with which he agreed in religious
sentiments. But the approaches to the town went on slowly; the garrison
interrupted the besiegers by frequent sallies, in one of which the Duke of
Mecklenburgh was taken prisoner, levelled part of their works, and cut off the
soldiers in their advanced posts. While the citizens of Magdeburgh, animated by
the discourses of their pastors, and the soldiers encouraged by the example of
their officers, endured all the hardships of a siege without murmuring, and
defended themselves with the same ardour which they had at first discovered;
the troops of the besiegers acted with extreme remissness, repining at every
thing they suffered in a service which they disliked. They broke out more than
once, into open mutiny, demanding the arrears of their pay, which, as the
Germans contributed with great reluctance toward defraying the expenses of
this war, amounted to a considerable sum Thuan. 277. Sleid. 514.
. Maurice, too, had particular motives, though such as he durst not avow at
that juncture, which induced him not to push the siege with vigor, and made
him choose rather to continue at the head of an army exposed to all the
imputations which his dilatory proceedings drew upon him, than to precipitate a
conquest which might have brought him some accession of reputation, but would
have rendered it necessary to disband his forces.

AT last, the inhabitants of the town beginning to suffer distress from want of
provisions, and Maurice, finding it impossible to protract matters any longer
without filling the Emperor with such suspicions as might have disconcerted all
his measures, he concluded a treaty of capitulation with the city upon the
following conditions; That the Magdeburghers should humbly implore pardon of
the Emperor; that they should not for the future take arms, or enter into any
alliance against the house of Austria; that they should submit to the authority
of the Imperial chamber; that they should conform to the decree of the Diet at
Augsburgh with respect to religion; that the new fortifications added to the
town should be demolished; that they should pay a fine of fifty thousand
crowns, deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to the Emperor, and set the Duke
of Mecklenburgh, together with their other prisoners at liberty without ransom.
Next day their garrison marched out, and Maurice took possession of the town
with great military pomp.

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were settled, Maurice had held many
conferences with Albert Count Mansfeldt, who had the chief command in
Magdeburgh, and with Count Heideck, an officer who had served with great
reputation in the army of the league of Smalkalde, whom the Emperor had
proscribed on account of his zeal for that cause, and whom Maurice had,
notwithstanding, secretly engaged in his service, and admitted into the most
intimate confidence. To them he communicated a scheme, which he had long
revolved in his mind, for procuring liberty to his father-in-law the Landgrave,
for vindicating the privileges of the Germanic body, and setting bounds to the
dangerous encroachments of the Imperial power. Having consulted with them about
the measures which might be necessary for securing the success of such an
arduous enterprise, he gave Mansfeldt secret assurances that the fortifications
of Magdeburgh should not be destroyed, and that the inhabitants should neither
be disturbed in the exercise of their religion, nor be deprived of any of their
ancient immunities. In order to engage Maurice more thoroughly from
considerations of interest to fulfill these engagements, the senate of
Magdeburgh elected him their Burgrave, a dignity which had formerly belonged to
the Electoral house of Saxony, and which entitled him to a very ample
jurisdiction not only in the city, but in its dependencies Sleid. 528. Thuan.
276. Obsidionis Magdeburgici descriptio per Sebast. Besselmeierum. ap. Scard.
ii. 518.
.

THUS the citizens of Magdeburgh, after enduring a siege of twelve months, and
struggling for their liberties, religious and civil, with an invincible
fortitude, worthy of the cause in which it was exerted, had at last the good
fortune to conclude a treaty which left them in a better condition than the
rest of their countrymen, whom their timidity, or want of public spirit, had
betrayed into such mean submissions to the Emperor. But while a great part of
Germany applauded the gallant conduct of the Magdeburghers, and rejoiced in
their having escaped the destruction with which they had been threatened, all
admired Maurice's address in the conduct of his negotiation with them, as well
as the dexterity with which he converted every event to his own advantage. They
saw, with amazement, that after having afflicted the Magdeburghers during many
months with all the calamities of war, he was at last, by their voluntary
election, vested with supreme authority in that city which he had so lately
besieged; that after having been so long the object of their invectives and
satire as an apostate, and an enemy to the religion which he professed; they
seemed now to place unbounded confidence in his zeal and good will Arnoldi vita
Maurit. apud Menken, ii. 1227.
. At the same time, the public articles in the treaty of capitulation were so
perfectly conformable to those which the Emperor had granted to the other
Protestant cities, and Maurice took such care to magnify his merit in having
reduced a place which had defended itself with so much obstinacy, that Charles,
far from suspecting any thing fraudulent, or collusive in the terms of
accommodation, ratified them without hesitation, and absolved the Magdeburghers
from the sentence of ban which had been denounced against them.

THE only point that now remained to embarrass Maurice was how to keep together
the veteran troops which had served under him, as well as those which had been
employed in the defense of the town. For this, too, he found an expedient with
singular art and felicity. His schemes against the Emperor were not yet so
fully ripened, that he durst venture to disclose them, and proceed openly to
carry them into execution. The winter was approaching, which made it impossible
to take the field immediately. He was afraid that it would give a premature
alarm to the Emperor, if he should retain such a considerable body in his pay
until the season of action returned in the spring. As soon then as Magdeburgh
opened its gates, he sent home his Saxon subjects, whom he could command to
take arms and re-assemble on the shortest warning, to their own habitations;
and at the same time, paying part of the arrears due to the mercenary troops,
who had followed his standard, as well as to the soldiers who had served in the
garrison, he absolved them from their respective oaths of fidelity, and
disbanded them. But the moment he gave them their discharge, George Duke of
Mecklenburgh, who was now set at liberty, offered to take them into his
service, and to become surety for the payment of what was still owing to them.
As such adventurers were accustomed often to change masters, they instantly
accepted the offer. Thus, these troops were kept united, and ready to march
wherever Maurice should call them, while the Emperor, deceived by this
artifice, and imagining that the Duke of Mecklenburgh had hired them with an
intention to assert, by force of arms, his claim to a part of his brother's
territories, suffered it to pass without observation, as if it had been a
matter of no consequence Thuan. 278. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. 1064. Arnoldi
vita Mauritii apud Menken, ii. 1227.
.

HAVING ventured to take these steps which were of so much consequence toward
the execution of his schemes, Maurice, that he might divert the Emperor from
observing their tendency too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions which that
must have excited, saw the necessity of employing some new artifice in order to
engage his attention, and to confirm him in his present security. As he knew
that the chief object of the Emperor's solicitude at this juncture, was how he
might prevail with the Protestant states of Germany to recognize the authority
of the council of Trent, and to send thither ambassadors in their own name, as
well as deputies from their respective churches, he took hold of this
predominating passion, in order to amuse and to deceive him. He affected a
wonderful zeal to gratify Charles in what he desired with regard to this
matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom he empowered to attend the council; he
made choice of Melancthon, and some of the most eminent among his brethren, to
prepare a confession of faith, and to lay it before that assembly. After his
example, and probably in consequence of his solicitations, the Duke of
Wurtemberg, the city of Strasburgh, and other Protestant states appointed
ambassadors and divines to attend the council. They all applied to the Emperor
for his safe conduct, which they obtained in the most ample form. This was
deemed sufficient for the security of the ambassadors, and they proceeded
accordingly on their journey; but a separate safe conduct from the council
itself, was demanded for the Protestant divines. The fate of John Huss and
Jerome of Prague, whom the council of Constance, in the preceding century, had
condemned to the flames without regarding the Imperial safe conduct, which had
been granted them, rendered this precaution prudent and necessary. But as the
Pope was no less unwilling that the Protestants should be admitted to an
hearing in the council, than the Emperor had been eager in bringing them to
demand it, the legate by promises and threats prevailed on the fathers of the
council to decline issuing a safe conduct in the same form with that which the
council of Basil had granted to the followers of Huss. The Protestants, on
their part, insisted upon the council's copying the precise words of that
instrument. The Imperial ambassadors interposed in order to obtain what would
satisfy them. Alterations in the form of the writ were proposed; expedients
were suggested; protests and counter-protests were taken; the legate, together
with his associates labored to gain their point by artifice and chicane; the
Protestants adhered to theirs with firmness and obstinacy. An account of every
thing that passed in Trent was transmitted to the Emperor at Inspruck, who,
attempting from an excess of zeal, or of confidence in his own address, to
reconcile the contending parties, was involved in a labyrinth of inextricable
negociations. By means of this, however, Maurice gained all that he had in
view; the Emperor's time was wholely engrossed, and his attention diverted;
while he had leisure to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues, and to
finish his preparations before he threw off the mask, and struck the blow which
he had so long meditated Sleid. 526, 529. F. Paul. 323, 338. Thuan. 286.
.

BUT previous to the history of Maurice's operations, some account must be
given of a new revolution in Hungary, which contributed not a little toward
their producing such extraordinary effects. When Solomon, in the year 1541, by
a stratagem, which suited the base and insidious policy of a petty usurper,
rather than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived the young King of
Hungary of the dominions which his father had left him, he had granted that
unfortunate Prince the country of Transylvania, a province of his paternal
kingdom. The government of this, together with the care of educating the young
King, for he still allowed him to retain that title, though he had rendered it
only an empty name, he committed to the Queen and Martinuzzi, bishop of
Waradin, whom the late King had appointed his son's guardians, and regents of
his dominions, at a time when those offices were of greater importance. This
coordinate jurisdiction occasioned the same dissensions in a small
principality, as it would have excited in a great kingdom; an ambitious young
Queen, conscious of her capacity for governing, and an high spirited prelate,
contending who should engross the greatest share in the administration. Each
had their partisans among the nobles, but as Martinuzzi, by his great talents,
began to acquire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own arts against him, and
courted the protection of the Turks.

THE neighboring Bashas, jealous of the bishop's power, as well as abilities,
readily promised her the aid which she demanded, and would soon have obliged
Martinuzzi to have given up to her the sole direction of affairs, if his
ambition, fertile in expedients, had not suggested to him a new measure, and
one that tended not only to preserve but to enlarge his authority. Having
concluded an agreement with the Queen, by the mediation of some of the nobles
who were solicitous to save their country from the calamities of a civil war,
he secretly dispatched one of his confidents to Vienna, and entered into a
negotiation with Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to persuade
Ferdinand, that the same man whose enmity and intrigues had driven him out of a
great part of his Hungarian dominions, might, upon a reconciliation, become
equally instrumental in recovering them, he listened eagerly to the first
overtures of an union with that prelate. Martinuzzi allured him by such
prospects of advantage, and engaged, with so much confidence, that he would
prevail on the most powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms in his
favor, that Ferdinand, notwithstanding his truce with Solomon, agreed to
invade Transylvania. The command of the troops destined for that service,
consisting of veteran Spanish and German soldiers, was given to Castaldo
Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed by the famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he
strongly resembled both in his enterprizing genius for civil business, and in
his great knowledge in the art of war. This army, more formidable by the
discipline of the soldiers, and the abilities of the general, than by its
number, was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and his faction among the
Hungarians. As the Turkish Bashas, the Sultan himself being at the head of his
army, on the frontiers of Persia, could not afford the Queen such immediate or
effectual assistance as the exigency of her affairs required, she quickly lost
all hopes of being able to retain any longer the authority which she possessed
as regent, and even began to despair of her son's safety.

MARTINUZZI did not suffer this favorable opportunity of accomplishing his own
designs to pass unimproved, and ventured, while she was in this state of
dejection, to lay before her a proposal, which, at any other time, she would
have rejected with disdain. He represented how impossible it was for her to
resist Ferdinand's victorious arms; that even if the Turks should enable her to
make head against them, she would be far from changing her condition to the
better, and could not consider them as deliverers, but as masters to whose
commands she must submit; he conjured her, therefore, as she regarded her own
dignity, the safety of her son, or the security of Christendom, rather to give
up Transylvania to Ferdinand, and to make over to him her son's title to the
crown of Hungary, than to allow both to be usurped by the inveterate enemy of
the Christian faith. At the same time, he promised her, in Ferdinand's name, a
compensation for herself, as well as for her son, suitable to their rank, and
proportional to the value of what they were to sacrifice. Isabella, deserted by
some of her adherents, distrusting others, destitute of friends, and surrounded
by Castaldo's and Martinuzzi's troops, subscribed, though with a reluctant
hand, these hard conditions. Upon this, she surrendered such places of strength
as were still in her possession, she gave up all the ensigns of royalty,
particularly a crown of gold, which, as the Hungarians believed, had descended
from heaven, and conferred on him who wore it, an undoubted right to the
throne. As she could not bear to remain a private person, in a country where
she once enjoyed sovereign power, she instantly set out with her son for
Silesia, in order to take possession of the principalities of Oppelen and
Ratibor, the investiture of which Ferdinand had engaged to grant her son, and
likewise to bestow one of his daughters upon him in marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Martinuzzi, and after his example the
rest of the Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Ferdinand; who, in
order to testify his grateful sense of the zeal as well as success with which
that prelate had served him, affected to distinguish him by every possible mark
of favor and confidence. He appointed him governor of Transylvania, with
almost unlimited authority; he ordered Castaldo to pay the greatest deference
to his opinion and commands; he increased his revenues, which were already very
great, by new appointments; he nominated him archbishop of Gran, and prevailed
on the Pope to raise him to the dignity of a Cardinal. All this ostentation of
good will, however, was void of sincerity, and calculated to conceal sentiments
the most perfectly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's abilities;
distrusted his fidelity; and foresaw, that as his extensive authority enabled
him to check any attempt toward circumscribing or abolishing the extensive
privileges which the Hungarian nobles possessed, he would stand forth, on every
occasion, the guardian of the liberties of his country, rather than act the
part of a viceroy devoted to the will of his Sovereign.

FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge to Castaldo, to watch his
motions, to guard against his designs, and to thwart his measures. But
Martinuzzi, either because he did not perceive that Castaldo was placed as a
spy on his actions, or because he despised Ferdinand's insidious arts, assumed
the direction of the war against the Turks with his usual tone of authority,
and conducted it with great magnanimity, and no less success. He recovered some
places of which the Infidels had taken possession; he rendered their attempts
to reduce others abortive; and established Ferdinand's authority not only in
Transylvania, but in the Bannat of Temeswar, and several of the countries
adjacent. In carrying on these operations, he often differed in sentiments from
Castaldo and his officers, and treated the Turkish prisoners with a degree of
humanity, and even of generosity, which Castaldo loudly condemned. This was
represented at Vienna as an artful method of courting the friendship of the
Infidels, that, by securing their protection, he might shake off all dependence
upon the Sovereign whom he now acknowledged. Though Martinuzzi, in
justification of his own conduct, contended that it was impolitic to
exasperate, by unnecessary severities, an enemy prone to revenge, Castaldo's
accusations gained credit with Ferdinand, prepossessed already against
Martinuzzi, and jealous of every thing that could endanger his authority in
Hungary, in proportion as he knew it to be precarious and ill established.
These suspicions, Castaldo confirmed and strengthened, by the intelligence
which he transmitted continually to his confidents at Vienna. By
misrepresenting what was innocent, and putting the worst construction on what
seemed dubious in Martinuzzi's conduct; by imputing to him designs which he
never formed, and charging him with actions of which he was not guilty; he at
last convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to preserve his Hungarian crown, he
must cut off that ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would be
dangerous to proceed in the regular course of law against a subject of such
exorbitant power, as enabled him to set his Sovereign at defiance, determined
to employ violence in order to obtain that satisfaction, which the laws were
too feeble to afford him.

HE issued his orders accordingly to Castaldo, who willingly undertook that
infamous service. Having communicated the design to some Italian and Spanish
officers whom he could trust, and concerted with them the plan of executing it;
they entered Martinuzzi's apartment* early one morning, under pretense of
presenting to him some dispatches which were to be sent off immediately to
Vienna; and while he perused a paper with attention, one of their number struck
him with his poniard in the throat. The blow was not mortal; Martinuzzi started
up with the intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the assassin, threw him
to the ground; but the other conspirators rushing in, an old man, unarmed, and
alone, could not long sustain such an unequal conflict, but sunk under the
wounds which he received from so many hands. The dread of the foreign troops
restrained the Transylvanians from rising in arms, in order to take vengeance
on the murderers of a prelate, who had long been the object of their love as
well as veneration. They spoke of the deed, however, with horror and
execration; and exclaimed against Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for recent
and important services, nor reverence for a character considered as sacred and
inviolable among Christians, could restrain from shedding the blood of a man,
whose only crime was attachment to his native country. The nobles, detesting
the jealous as well as cruel policy of a court, which, upon uncertain and
improbable surmises, had given up a person no less conspicuous for his merit
than his rank, to be butchered by assassins, either retired to their own
estates, or, if they continued with the Austrian army, grew cold to the
service. The Turks, encouraged by the death of an enemy whose abilities they
knew and dreaded, prepared to renew hostilities early in the spring; and,
instead of the security which Ferdinand had expected from the removal of
Martinuzzi, it was evident that his territories in Hungary were about to be
attacked with greater vigor, and defended with less zeal than ever Sleid. 535.
Thuan. lib. ix. 309, etc. Istuanhaffi Hist. Reg. Hungarici lib. xvi. 189, etc.
Mem. de Ribier. ii. 871. Natalis Comitis Historia, lib. iv. 84, etc.
.

MEANWHILE, Maurice having almost finished his intrigues and preparations, was
on the point of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking the field
against the Emperor. His first care, after he came to this resolution, was to
disclaim that narrow and bigoted maxim of the confederates of Smalkalde, which
had led them to shun all connection with foreigners. He had observed how fatal
this had been to their cause; and instructed by their error, he was as eager to
^^urt the pr^^^tion of Henry II. as they had been solicitous to prevent the
interposition of Francis I. Happily for him he found Henry in a disposition to
listen to the first overture on his part, and in a situation which enabled him
to bring the whole force of the French monarchy into action. Henry had long
observed the progress of the Emperor's arms with jealousy, and wished to
distinguish himself by trying his strength against the same enemy, whom it had
been the glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had laid hold on the first
opportunity in his power of thwarting the Emperor's designs, by taking the Duke
of Parma under his protection; and hostilities were already begun, not only in
that duchy, but in Piedmont. Having terminated the war with England by a
peace, no less advantageous to himself, than honorable for his allies the
Scots, the restless and enterprizing courage of his nobles was impatient to
display itself on some theater of action more conspicuous than the petty
operations in Parma or Piedmont afforded them.

JOHN DE FIESSE, bishop of Bayonne, whom Henry bad sent into Germany, under
pretense of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was empowered to conclude a
treaty in form with Maurice and his associates. As it would have been very
indecent in a King of France to have undertaken the defense of the Protestant
church, the interests of religion, how much soever they might be affected by
the treaty, were not once mentioned in any of the articles. Religious concerns
they pretended to commit entirely to the disposition of Divine Providence; the
only motives assigned for their present confederacy against Charles were to
procure the Landgrave liberty, and to prevent the subversion of the ancient
constitution and laws of the German empire. In order to accomplish these ends,
it was agreed, that all the contracting parties should, at the same time,
declare war against the Emperor; that neither peace nor truce should be made
but by common consent, nor without including each of the confederates; that, in
order to guard against the inconveniences of anarchy, or of pretensions to
joint command, Maurice should be acknowledged as head of the German
confederates, with absolute authority in all military affairs; that Maurice and
his associates should bring into the field seven thousand horse, with a
proportionable number of infantry; that toward the subsistence of this army,
during the three first months of the war, Henry should contribute two hundred
and forty thousand crowns, and afterward sixty thousand crowns a month, as
long as they continued in arms; that Henry should attack the Emperor on the
side of Lorrain with a powerful army; that if it were found requisite to elect
a new Emperor, such a person should be nominated as shall be agreeable to the
King of France Recueil des Traites, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.
. This treaty was concluded on the fifth of October, some time before
Magdeburgh surrendered, and the preparatory negociations were conducted with
such profound secrecy, that of all the Princes who afterward acceded to it,
Maurice communicated what he was carrying on to two only, John Albert, the
reigning Duke of Mecklenburgh, and William of Hesse, the Landgrave's eldest
son. The league itself was no less anxiously concealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumor concerning it reached the ears of the Emperor or his
ministers, nor do they seem to have conceived the most distant suspicion of
such a transaction.

AT the same time Maurice, with a solicitude which was careful to draw some
accession of strength from every quarter, applied to Edward VI. of England, and
requested a subsidy of four hundred thousand crowns for the support of a
confederacy formed in defense of the Protestant religion. But the factions
which prevailed in the English court during the minority of that Prince, and
which deprived both the councils and arms of the nation of their wonted vigor,
left the English ministers neither time or inclination to attend to foreign
affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that aid, which their zeal for the
Reformation would have prompted them to grant him Burnet's Hist. of the Reform.
vol. ii. Append. 37.
.

MAURICE, however, having secured the protection of such a powerful Monarch as
Henry II. proceeded with great confidence, but with equal caution, to execute
his plan. As he judged it necessary to make one effort more, in order to obtain
the Emperor's consent that the Landgrave should be set at liberty, he sent a
solemn embassy, in his own name, and in that of the Elector of Brandenburgh, to
Inspruck. After resuming, at great length, all the facts and arguments upon
which they founded their claim, and representing in the strongest terms, the
peculiar engagements which bound them to be so assiduous in their
solicitations, they renewed the request in behalf of the unfortunate prisoner,
which they had so often preferred in vain. The Elector Palatine, the Duke of
Wurtemberg, the Dukes of Mecklenburgh, the Duke of Deuxponts, the Marquis of
Brandenburgh Bareith, and the Marquis of Baden, by their ambassadors, concurred
with them in their suit. Letters were likewise delivered to the same effect
from the King of Denmark, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburgh.
Even the King of the Romans, moved with compassion toward the Landgrave in his
wretched situation, or influenced, perhaps, by a secret jealousy of his
brother's power and designs, which, since his attempt to alter the order of
succession in the empire, he had come to view with other eyes, and dreaded to a
great degree, joined in this application.

BUT Charles, constant to his own system, with regard to the Landgrave, eluded
a demand urged by such powerful intercessors; and having declared, That he
would communicate his resolution concerning the matter to Maurice, as soon as
he arrived at Inspruck, where he was every day expected, he did not deign to
descend into any more particular explication of his intentions Sleid. 531.
Thuan. lib. viii. 280.
. This application, though of no benefit to the Landgrave, was of great
advantage to Maurice. It served to justify his subsequent proceedings, and to
demonstrate the necessity of employing arms in order to extort that equitable
concession, which his mediation or entreaty could not obtain. It was of use,
too, to confirm the Emperor in his security, as both the solemnity of the
application, and the solicitude with which so many Princes were drawn in to
enforce it, led him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his hopes of restoring
the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining his consent to dismiss him.

MAURICE employed artifices still more refined to conceal his machinations, to
amuse the Emperor, and to gain time. He affected to be more solicitous than
ever to find out some expedient for removing the difficulties with regard to
the safe conduct for the Protestant divines appointed to attend the council, so
that they might repair thither with safety. His ambassadors at Trent had
frequent conferences concerning this matter, with the Imperial ambassadors in
that city, and laid open their sentiments to them with the appearance of the
most unreserved confidence. He was willing, at last, to have it believed, that
he thought all differences with respect to this preliminary article were on the
point of being adjusted; and, in order to give credit to this opinion, he
commanded Melancthon, together with his brethren, to set out on their journey
to Trent. At the same time, he held a close correspondence with the Imperial
court at Inspruck, and renewed on every occasion his professions of fidelity
and attachment to the Emperor. He talked continually of his intention of going
to Inspruck in person; he ordered a house to be hired for him in that city, and
to be fitted up with the greatest dispatch for his reception Arnoldi vita
Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 1229.
.

BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was in the arts of deceit, and impenetrable
as he thought the veil to be under which he concealed his designs, there were
several things in his conduct which alarmed the Emperor amidst his security,
and tempted him frequently to suspect that he was meditating something
extraordinary. As these suspicions took their rise from circumstances
inconsiderable in themselves, or of an ambiguous as well as uncertain nature,
they were more than counterbalanced by Maurice's address; and the Emperor would
not, lightly, give up his confidence in a man, whom he had once trusted and
loaded with favors. One particular alone seemed to be of such consequence,
that he thought it necessary to demand an explanation with regard to it. The
troops, which George of Mecklenburgh had taken into pay after the capitulation
of Magdeburgh, having fixed their quarters in Thuringia, lived at discretion on
the lands of the rich ecclesiastics in their neighborhood. Their license and
rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as felt or dreaded their exactions,
complained loudly to the Emperor, and represented them as a body of men kept in
readiness for some desperate enterprise. But Maurice, partly by extenuating the
enormities of which they had been guilty, partly by representing the
impossibility of disbanding these troops, or of keeping them to regular
discipline, unless the arrears still due to them, by the Emperor, were paid,
either removed the apprehensions which this had occasioned, or as Charles was
not in a condition to satisfy the demands of these soldiers, obliged him to be
silent with regard to the matter Sleid. 549. Thuan. 339.
.

THE time of action was now approaching. Maurice had privately dispatched
Albert of Brandenburgh to Paris, in order to confirm his league with Henry, and
to hasten the march of the French army. He had taken measures to bring his own
subjects together on the first summons; he had provided for the security of
Saxony, while he should be absent with the army; and he held the troops in
Thuringia, on which he chiefly depended, ready to advance on a moment's
warning. All these complicated operations were carried on without being
discovered by the court at Inspruck, and the Emperor remained there in perfect
tranquillity, busied entirely in counteracting the intrigues of the Pope's
lega^e at Trent, and in settling the conditions on which the Protestant divines
should be admitted into the council, as if there had not been any transaction
of greater moment in agitation.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, whose sagacity in observing the conduct
of all around him, commonly led him to an excess of distrust, may seem
unaccountable, and has been imputed to infatuation. But besides, the exquisite
address with which Maurice concealed his intentions, two circumstances
contributed to the delusion. The gout returned upon Charles soon after his
arrival at Inspruck, with an increase of violence; and his constitution being
broken by such frequent attacks, he was seldom able to exert his natural vigor
of mind, or to consider affairs with his usual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bishop of Arras, his prime minister, though one of the most subtle
statesmen of that, or perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the dupe of his
own craft. He entertained such an high opinion of his own abilities, and held
the political talents of the Germans in such contempt, that he despised all the
intimations given him concerning Maurice's secret machinations, or the
dangerous designs which he was carrying on. When the Duke of Alva, whose dark
suspicious mind harbored many doubts concerning the Elector's sincerity,
proposed calling him immediately to court, to answer for his conduct, he
replied with great scorn, That these apprehensions were groundless, and that a
drunken German head was too gross to form any scheme which he could not easily
penetrate and baffle. Nor did he assume this peremptory tone merely from
confidence in his own discernment; he had bribed two of Maurice's ministers,
and received from them frequent and minute information concerning all their
master's motions. But through this very channel, by which he expected to gain
access to all Maurice's counsels, and even to his thoughts, such intelligence
was conveyed to him as completed his deception. Maurice fortunately discovered
the correspondence of the two traitors with Granvelle, and instead of punishing
them for their crime, he dexterously availed himself of their fraud, and turned
his own arts against the bishop. He affected to treat these ministers with
greater confidence than ever; he admitted them to his consultations, and seemed
to lay open his heart to them; and taking care all the while to let them be
acquainted with nothing but what it was his interest should be known, they
transmitted to Inspruck such accounts as possessed Granvelle with a firm belief
of his sincerity and good intentions Melvil. Memoirs, fol. edit. p. 12.
. The Emperor himself, in the fullness of security, was so little moved by a
memorial, in name of the ecclesiastical electors, admonishing him to be on his
guard against Maurice, that he made light of this intelligence; and his answer
to them abounds with declarations of his entire and confident reliance on the
fidelity as well as attachment of that Prince Sleid 535.
.

AT last Maurice's preparations were completed, and he had the satisfaction to
find that his intrigues and designs were still unknown. But, though now ready
to take the field, he did not lay aside the arts which he had hitherto
employed; and by one piece of craft more, he deceived his enemies a few days
longer. He gave out, that he was about to begin that journey to Inspruck of
which he had so often talked, and he took one of the ministers whom Granvelle
had bribed to attend him thither. After traveling post a few stages, he
pretended to be indisposed by the fatigue of the journey, and dispatching the
suspected minister to make his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and to
assure him that he would be at Inspruck within a few days; as soon as this spy
on his actions was gone, he mounted on horseback, rode full speed toward
Thuringia, joined his army, which amounted to twenty thousand foot, and five
thousand horse, and put it immediately in motion Melv. Mem. p. 13. These
circumstances, concerning the Saxon ministers, whom Granvelle had bribed, are
not mentioned by the German historians; but, as Sir James Melvil received his
information from the Elector Palatine, and as they are perfectly agreeable to
the rest of Maurice's conduct, they may be considered as authentic.
.

AT the same time he published a manifesto containing his reasons for taking
arms. These were three in number; That he might secure the Protestant religion,
which was threatened with immediate destruction; That he might maintain the
constitution and laws of the empire, and save Germany from being subjected to
the domination of an absolute Monarch; That he might deliver the Landgrave of
Hesse from the miseries of a long and unjust imprisonment. By the first, he
rouzed all the favorers of the Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal
as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by oppression. By the second, he
interested all the friends of liberty, Catholics as well as Protestants, and
made it their interest to unite with him in asserting the rights and privileges
common to both. The third, besides the glory which he acquired by his zeal to
fulfill his engagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become a cause of general
concern, not only from the compassion which the Landgrave's sufferings excited,
but from indignation at the injustice and rigor of the Emperor's proceedings
against him. Together with Maurice's manifesto, another appeared in the name of
Albert, Marquis of Brandenburgh Culmbach, who had joined him with a body of
adventurers, whom he had drawn together. The same grievances which Maurice had
pointed out are mentioned in it, but with an excess of virulence and animosity,
suitable to the character of the Prince in whose name it was published.

THE King of France added to these a manifesto in his own name; in which, after
taking notice of the ancient alliance between the French and German nations,
both descended from the same ancestors; and after mentioning the applications,
which, in consequence of this, some of the most illustrious among the German
Princes had made to him for his protection; he declared, That he now took arms
to re-establish the ancient constitution of the empire, to deliver some of its
Princes from captivity, and to secure the privileges and independence of all
the members of the Germanic body. In this manifesto, Henry assumed the
extraordinary title of Protector of the Liberties of Germany, and of its
captive Princes; and there was engraved on it a cap, the ancient symbol of
freedom, placed between two daggers, in order to intimate to the Germans, that
this blessing was to be acquired and secured by force of arms Sleid. 549.
Thuan. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 371.
.

MAURICE had now a very different part to act, but his flexible genius was
capable of accommodating itself to every situation. The moment he took arms, he
was as bold and enterprizing in the field, as he had been cautious and crafty
in the cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches toward the Upper Germany. All the
towns in his way opened their gates to him. He reinstated the magistrates whom
the Emperor had deposed, and gave possession of the churches to the Protestant
ministers whom he had ejected. He directed his march to Augsburgh, and as the
Imperial garrison which was too inconsiderable to think of defending it,
retired immediately, he took possession of that great city, and made the same
changes there, as in the towns through which he had passed.

NO words can express the Emperor's astonishment and consternation at events so
unexpected. He saw a great number of the German Princes in arms against him,
and the rest either ready to join them, or wishing success to their enterprise.
He beheld a powerful Monarch united with them in close league, seconding their
operations in person at the head of a formidable army, while he, through
negligence and credulity, which exposed him no less to scorn than to danger,
had neither made, nor was in condition to make, any effectual provision either
for crushing his rebellious subjects, or resisting the invasion of the foreign
enemy. Part of his Spanish troops had been ordered into Hungary against the
Turks; the rest had marched back to Italy upon occasion of the war in the
duchy of Parma. The bands of veteran Germans had been dismissed, because he
was not able to pay them; or had entered into Maurice's service after the siege
of Magdeburgh; and he remained at Inspruck with a body of soldiers, scarce
strong enough to guard his own person. His treasury was as much exhausted, as
his army was reduced. He had received no remittances for some time from the new
world. He had forfeited all credit with the merchants of Genoa and Venice, who
refused to lend him money, though tempted by the offer of exorbitant interest.
Thus, Charles, though undoubtedly the most considerable potentate in
Christendom, and capable of exerting the greatest strength, (as his power,
though violently attacked, was still unimpaired) found himself in a situation
which rendered him unable to make such a sudden and vigorous effort as the
juncture required, and was necessary to have saved him from the present danger
Sleid. 555. Thuan. 342.
.

IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on negociating: the only resource
of those who are conscious of their own weakness. But thinking it inconsistent
with his dignity to make the first advances to subjects who were in arms
against him, he avoided that indecorum by employing the mediation of his
brother Ferdinand. Maurice, confiding in his own talents to conduct any
negotiation in such a manner as to derive advantage from it, and hoping that by
the appearance of facility in hearkening to the first overtures of
accommodation, he might amuse the Emperor, and tempt him to slacken the
activity with which he was now preparing to defend himself, readily agreed to
an interview with Ferdinand, in the town of Lintz, in Austria: and having left
his army to proceed on its march, under the command of the Duke of
Mecklenburgh, he repaired thither.

THE King of France punctually fulfilled his engagement to his allies. He took
the field early with a numerous and well appointed army, and marching directly
into Lorain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at his approach. His forces
appeared next before Metz, and that city, by a fradulent stratagem of the
constable Montmorency, who having obtained permission to pass through it with a
small guard, introduced as many troops as were sufficient to overpower the
garrison, was likewise seized without bloodshed. Henry made his entry into all
these towns with great pomp; he obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance to
him, and annexed these important conquests to the French monarchy. He left a
strong garrison in Metz, From thence he advanced toward Alsace, in order to
attempt new conquests, to which the success that had hitherto attended his arms
invited him Thuan. 349.
.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce any accommodation. Maurice, when he
consented to it, seems to have had nothing in view but to amuse the Emperor;
for he made such demands both in behalf of his confederates, and their ally the
French King, as he knew would not be accepted by a Prince, too haughty to
submit, at once, to conditions dictated by an enemy. But, how firmly soever
Maurice adhered, during the negotiation, to the interests of his associates, or
how steadily soever he kept in view the objects which had induced him to take
arms, he often professed a strong inclination to terminate the differences with
the Emperor in an amicable manner. Encouraged by this appearance of a pacific
disposition, Ferdinand proposed a second interview at Passau, on the
twenty-sixth of May, and that a truce should commence on that day, and continue
to the tenth of June, in order to give them leisure for adjusting all the
points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the ninth of May, which had now
advanced to Gundelfingen. He put his troops in motion next morning; and as
sixteen days yet remained for action before the commencement of the truce, he
resolved, during that period, to venture upon an enterprise, the success of
which would be so decisive, as would render the negociations at Passau
extremely short, and entitle him to treat upon his own terms. He foresaw that
the prospect of a cessation of arms, which was to take place so soon, together
with the opinion of his earnestness to re-establish peace, with which he had
artfully amused Ferdinand, could not fail of inspiring the Emperor with such
false hopes, that he would naturally become remiss, and relapse, into some
degree of that security, which had already been so fatal to him. Relying on
this conjecture, he marched directly toward Inspruck, and advanced with the
most rapid motion that could be given to so great a body of troops. On the
eighteenth he arrived at Fiessen, a post of great consequence, at the entrance
into the Tyrolese. There he found a body of eight hundred men, whom the Emperor
had assembled, strongly entrenched, in order to oppose his progress. He
attacked them instantly with such violence and impetuosity, that they abandoned
their lines precipitately, and falling back on a second body posted near Ruten,
communicated to those troops, the panic terror with which they themselves had
been seized, so that they likewise took to flight after a feeble resistance.

ELATED with this success, which exceeded his most sanguine hopes, Maurice
passed on to Ehrenberg, a castle situated on a high and steep precipice, which
commanded the only pass through the mountains. As this fort had been
surrendered to the Protestants, at the beginning of the Smalkaldic war, because
the garrison was then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, sensible of its
importance, had taken care, at this juncture, to throw into it a body of troops
sufficient to maintain it against the greatest army. But a shepherd, in
pursuing a goat which had strayed from his flock, having discovered an unknown
path, by which it was possible to ascend to the top of the rock, came with his
seasonable piece of intelligence to Maurice. A small band of chosen soldiers,
under the command of George of Mecklenburgh, was instantly ordered to follow
this guide. They set out in the evening, and clambering up the rugged track
with infinite fatigue, as well as danger, they reached the summit unperceived;
and at an hour which had been concerted, when Maurice began the assault on the
one side of the castle, they appeared on the other, ready to scale the walls,
which were feeble in that place, because it had been hitherto deemed
inaccessible. The garrison, struck with terror at the sight of an enemy on a
quarter where they had thought themselves perfectly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without bloodshed, and, which was of greater
consequence to him, without loss of time, took possession of a place, the
reduction of which might have retarded him long, and have required the utmost
efforts of his valor and skill Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123.
.

MAURICE was now only two days march from Inspruck, and without losing a moment
he ordered his infantry to advance thither, having left his cavalry, which was
unserviceable in that mountainous country, at Fiessen, to guard the mouth of
the pass. He proposed to advance with such rapidity as to anticipate any
accounts of the loss of Ehrenberg, and to surprise the Emperor, together with
his attendants, in an open town, incapable of defense. But just as his troops
began to move, a battallion of mercenaries mutinied, declaring that they would
not stir until they had received the gratuity, which, according to the custom
of that age, they claimed as the recompense due to them for having taken a
place by assault. It was with great difficulty, as well as danger, and not
without some considerable loss of time, that Maurice quieted this insurrection,
and prevailed on the soldiers to follow him to a place where he promised them
such rich booty as would be an ample reward for all their services.

TO the delay occasioned by this unforeseen accident, the Emperor owed his
safety. He was informed of the approaching danger, late in the evening, and
knowing that nothing could save him but a speedy flight, he instantly left
Inspruck, without regarding the darkness of the night, or the violence of the
rain which happened to fall at that time; and, notwithstanding his being so
much debilitated by the gout, that he could bear no motion but that of a
litter, he traveled by the light of torches, taking his way over the Alps, by
roads almost impassible. His courtiers and attendants followed him with equal
precipitation, some of them on such horses as they could hastily procure, many
of them on foot, and all in the utmost confusion. In this miserable plight,
very unlike the pomp with which Charles had appeared during the five preceding
years, as the conqueror of Germany, he arrived at length with his dejected
train at Villach, in Carinthia, and scarce thought himself secure even in that
remote inaccessible corner.

MAURICE entered Inspruck a few hours after the Emperor and his attendants had
left it; and, enraged that the prey should escape out of his hands when he was
just ready to seize it, he pursued them some miles; but finding it impossible
to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave speed, he returned to the town,
and abandoned all the Emperor's baggage, and that of his ministers to be
plundered by the soldiers; while he preserved untouched every thing belonging
to the King or the Romans, either because he had formed some friendly
connection with that Prince, or because he wished to have it believed that such
a connection subsisted between them. As there now remained only three days to
the commencement of the truce, (with such nicety had Maurice calculated his
operations) he set out for Passau, that he might meet Ferdinand on the day
appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Inspruck, he withdrew the guards placed on the degraded
Elector of Saxony, whom, during five years, he had carried about with him as a
prisoner; and set him entirely at liberty, either with an intention to embarass
Maurice by letting loose a rival, who might dispute his title to his dominions
and dignity, or from a sense of the indecency of detaining him a prisoner,
while he himself run the risque of being deprived of his own liberty. But that
Prince, seeing no way of escaping, but that which the Emperor took, and
abhorring the thoughts of falling into the hands of a kinsman, whom he justly
considered as the author of all his misfortunes, chose rather to accompany
Charles in his flight, and to expect the final decision of his fate from the
treaty which was now approaching.

THIS was not the only effect which Maurice's operations produced. It was no
sooner known at Trent that he had taken arms, than a general consternation had
seized the fathers of the council. The German prelates immediately returned
home, that they might provide for the safety of their territories. The rest
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the legate, who had hitherto
disappointed all the endeavors of the Imperial ambassadors to procure for the
Protestant divines an audience in the council, laid hold with joy on such a
plausible pretext for dismissing an assembly, which he had found it so
difficult to govern. In a congregation held on the twenty eighth of April, a
decree was issued for proroguing the council during two years, and appointing
it to meet at the expiration of that time, if peace were then re-established in
Europe F. Paul, 353.
. This prorogation, however, continued no less than ten years; and its
proceedings, when re-assembled in the year one thousand five hundred and
sixty-two, fall not within the period prescribed to this history.

THE convocation of this assembly had been so passionately desired by all the
states and Princes in Christendom, who, from the wisdom and piety of prelates
representing the whole body of the faithful, expected some charitable and
efficacious endeavors toward composing the dissensions which unhappily had
arisen in the church. But the several Popes, by whose authority it was called,
had other objects in view; and, exerting all their power or policy to attain
these, acquired, by the abilities as well as address of their legates, by the
ignorance of many of the prelates, and by the servility of the indigent Italian
bishops, such influence in the council, that they dictated all its decrees, and
framed them, not with an intention to restore unity and concord to the church,
but to establish their own dominion, or to confirm these tenets, upon which
they imagined that dominion to be founded. Doctrines, which had hitherto been
admitted upon the credit of tradition alone, and received with some latitude of
interpretation, were defined with a scrupulous nicety, and confirmed by the
sanction of authority. Rites, which had formerly been observed only in
deference to custom, supposed to be ancient, were established by the decrees of
the church, and declared to be essential parts of its worship. The breach,
instead of being closed, was widened, and made irreparable. In place of any
attempt to reconcile the contending parties, a line was drawn with such studied
accuracy, as ascertained and marked out the distinction between them. This
still serves to keep them at a distance; and must, without some signal
interposition of Divine Providence, render the separation perpetual.

OUR knowledge of the proceedings of this assembly is derived from three
different authors. Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of the council of
Trent, while the memory of what had passed there was recent, and some, who had
been members of it, were still alive. He has exposed the intrigues and
artifices by which it was conducted, with a freedom and severity which have
given a deep wound to the credit and reputation of the council. He has
described its deliberations, and explained its decrees, with such perspicuity
and depth of thought, with such various erudition, and such force of reason, as
have justly entitled his work to be placed among the most admired historical
compositions. About half a century thereafter, the Jesuit Pallavicini published
his history of the council, in opposition to that of Father Paul, and by
employing all the force of an acute and refining genius to invalidate the
credit, or to confute the reasonings of his antagonist, he labors to prove, by
artful apologies for the proceedings of the council, and subtle
interpretations of its decrees, that it deliberated with impartiality, and
decided with judgment as well as candor. Vargas, a Spanish doctor of laws, who
was appointed to attend the Imperial ambassadors at Trent, sent the bishop of
Arras a regular account of the transactions there, explaining all the arts
which the legate employed to influence, or overawe the council. His letters
have been published, in which he inveighs against the papal court with that
asperity of censure, which was natural to a man whose situation enabled him to
observe its arts thoroughly, and who was obliged to exert all his attention and
talents in order to disappoint them. But, which soever of these authors an
intelligent person takes for his guide, in forming a judgment concerning the
spirit of the council, he must discover so much ambition, as well as artifice,
among some of the members, so much ignorance and corruption among others; he
must observe such a large infusion of human policy and passions, but such a
scanty portion of that simplicity of heart, sanctity of manners, and love of
truth, which alone qualify men to determine what doctrines are worthy of God,
and what worship is acceptable to him; that he will find it no easy matter to
believe, that any extraordinary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over this
assembly, and dictated its decrees.

WHILE Maurice was employed in negociating with the King of the Romans at
Lintz, or in making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol, the French King had
advanced into Alsace as far as Strasburgh; and having demanded leave of the
senate to march through the city, he hoped that by repeating the same fraud
which he had practiced at Metz, he might render himself master of the place,
and by that means secure a passage over the Rhine, into the heart of Germany.
But the Strasburghers, instructed and put on their guard by the credulity and
misfortune of their neighbors, shut their gates; and having assembled a
garrison of five thousand soldiers, prepared their fortifications, razed the
houses in their suburbs, and determined to defend themselves to the utmost. At
the same time they sent a deputation of their most respectable citizens to the
King, in order to divert him from making any hostile attempt upon them. The
Electors of Treves and Cologne, the Duke of Cleves, and other Princes in the
neighborhood, interposed in their behalf; beseeching Henry that he would not
forget so soon the title which he had generously assumed; and, instead of being
the deliverer of Germany, become its oppressor. The Swiss cantons seconded them
with zeal, soliciting Henry to spare a city which had long been connected with
their community in friendship and alliance.

POWERFUL as this united intercession was, it would not have prevailed on Henry
to forego a prize of so much value, if he had been in a condition to have
seized it. But, in that age, the method of subsisting numerous armies at a
distance from the frontiers of their own country, was imperfectly understood,
and neither the revenues of Princes, nor their experience in the art of war,
were equal to the great and complicated efforts which such an undertaking
required. The French, though not far removed from their own country, began
already to suffer for want of provisions, and had no sufficient magazines
collected to support them during a siege, which must necessarily have been of
great length Thuan. 351, 352.
. At the same time, the Queen of Hungary, governess of the Low Countries, had
assembled a considerable body of troops, which, under the command of Martin de
Rossem, laid waste Champagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces of France.
These concurring circumstances obliged the King, though with reluctance, to
abandon the enterprise. But being willing to acquire some merit with his
allies, by this retreat, which he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss
that he had taken the resolution merely in compliance with their request Slied.
557. Brantome, tom. vii. 39.
; and then, after giving orders that all the horses in his army should be led
to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his having pushed his conquests so far, he
marched back toward Champagne.

WHILE the French King and the main army of the confederates were thus
employed; Albert of Brandenburgh was entrusted with the command of a separate
body of eight thousand men, consisting chiefly of mercenaries who had resorted
to his standard, rather from the hope of plunder, than the expectation of
regular pay. That Prince, seeing himself at the head of such a number of
desperate adventurers, ready to follow wherever he should lead them, soon began
to disdain a state of subordination, and to form such vast schemes of
aggrandizing himself, as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war, or violent factions, rouse them to bold exertions, by alluring them
with immediate hopes of success. Full of these aspiring thoughts, Albert made
war in a manner very different from the other confederates. He endeavored to
spread the terror of his arms by the rapidity of his motions, as well as the
extent and rigor of his devastations; he exacted contributions wherever he
came, in order to amass such a sum of money, as would put it in his power to
keep his army together; he labored to get possession of Nuremberg, Ulme, or
some other of the free cities in Upper Germany, in which, as a capital, he
might fix the seat of his power. But, finding these cities on their guard, and
in a condition to resist his attacks, he turned all his rage against the Popish
ecclesiastics, whose territories he plundered with such wanton and merciless
barbarity, as gave them a very unfavourable impression of the spirit of that
reformation in religion, with zeal for which he pretended to be animated. The
bishops of Bamberg and Wurzburgh, by their situation, lay particularly exposed
to his ravages; he obliged the former to transfer to him, in property, almost
one half of his extensive diocese, and compelled the latter to advance an
immense sum, in order to save his country from ruin and desolation. During all
these wild sallies, Albert paid no regard either to Maurice's orders, whose
commands, as Generalissimo of the league, he had engaged to obey, or to the
remonstrances of the other confederates; and manifestly discovered that he
attended only to his own private emolument, without any solicitude about the
common cause, or the general objects which had induced them to take arms Sleid.
561. Thuan. 357.
.

MEANWHILE, Maurice having ordered his army to march back into Bavaria, and
having published a proclamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and instructors
of youth, to resume the exercise of their functions in all the cities, schools,
and universities, from which they had been ejected, met Ferdinand at Passau on
the twenty-sixth day of May. As matters of the greatest consequence to the
future peace and independence of the empire were to be settled in this
congress, the eyes of all Germany were fixed upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the
Imperial ambassadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the bishops of Saltzburgh, and
Aichstadt, the ministers of all the Electors, together with deputies from most
of the considerable Princes and free cities, resorted to Passau. Maurice, in
name of his associates, and the King of the Romans, as the Emperor's
representative, opened the negotiation. The Princes who were present, together
with the deputies of such as were absent, acted as intercessors or mediators
between them.

MAURICE, in a long discourse, explained the motives of his own conduct. After
having enumerated all the unconstitutional and oppressive acts of the Emperor's
administration, he, agreeably to the manifesto, which he had published when he
took arms against him, limited his demands to three articles. That the
Landgrave of Hesse should be immediately set at liberty; That the grievances in
the civil government of the empire should be redressed; and that the
Protestants should be allowed the public exercise of their religion without
molestation. Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering their
unwillingness to gratify him with regard to all all these points, the mediators
wrote a joint letter to the Emperor, beseeching him to deliver Germany from the
calamities of a civil war, by giving such satisfaction to Maurice, and his
party, as might induce them to lay down their arms; and at the same time they
prevailed upon Maurice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a short time,
during which they undertook to procure the Emperor's final answer to his
demands.

THIS request was presented to the Emperor in the name of all the Princes of
the empire, Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of such as had lent a
hand to forward his ambitious schemes, as well as of those who had viewed the
progress of his power with jealousy and dread. The uncommon and cordial
unanimity with which they concurred at this juncture, in enforcing Maurice's
demands, and in recommending peace, flowed from different causes. Such as were
most attached to the Roman Catholic church could not help observing that the
Protestant confederates were at the head of a numerous army, while the Emperor
was but just beginning to provide for his own defense. They foresaw that great
efforts would be required of them, and would be necessary on their part, in
order to cope with enemies who had been allowed to get the start so far, and to
attain such formidable power. Experience had taught them, that the fruit of all
these efforts would be reaped by the Emperor alone, and the more complete any
victory proved which they should gain, the faster would they bind their own
fetters, and render them the more intolerable. These considerations made them
cautious how they contributed a second time, by their indiscreet zeal, to put
the Emperor in possession of power which would be fatal to the liberties of
their country. Notwithstanding the implacable fierceness of the spirit of
bigotry in that age, they chose rather that the Protestants should acquire that
security for their religion which they demanded, than, by assisting Charles to
oppress them, to give such additional force to the Imperial prerogative, as
would overturn the constitution of the empire. To all these considerations, the
dread of seeing Germany laid waste by a civil war added new force. Many states
of the empire already felt the destructive rage of Albert's arms, others
dreaded it, and all wished for an accommodation between the Emperor and
Maurice, which they hoped would save them from that cruel scourge.

SUCH were the reasons that induced so many Princes, notwithstanding the
variety of their political interests, and the opposition in their religious
sentiments, to unite in recommending to the Emperor an accommodation with
Maurice, not only as a salutary, but as a necessary measure. The motives which
prompted Charles to desire it were not fewer or of less weight. He was
perfectly sensible of the advantage which the confederates had acquired through
his own negligence; and he now felt the insufficiency of his own resources to
oppose them. His Spanish subjects, disgusted at his long absence, and weary of
endless wars, which were of no benefit to their country, refused to furnish him
any considerable supply either of men or money; and although he might hope by
his address, or importunity, to draw from them at last more effectual aid;
that, he knew, was too distant to be of any service in the present exigency of
his affairs. His treasury was drained; his veteran forces were dispersed, or
disbanded, and he could not depend much either on the fidelity or courage of
the new levied soldiers whom he was collecting. There was no hope of repeating
with success the same artifices which had weakened and ruined the Smalkaldic
league. As the end at which he aimed was now known, he could no longer employ
the specious pretexts, which had formerly concealed his ambitious designs.
Every Prince in Germany was alarmed and on his guard; and it was vain to think
of blinding them a second time to such a degree, as to make one part of them
instruments to enslave the other. The spirit of a confederacy, whereof Maurice
was the head, experience had taught him to be very different from that of the
league of Smalkalde; and from what he had already felt, he had no reason to
flatter himself that its counsels would be as irresolute, or its efforts as
timid and feeble. If he should resolve on continuing the war, he might lay his
account that the most considerable states in Germany would take part in it
against him; and a dubious neutrality was the utmost he could expect from the
rest. While the confederates found full employment for his arms in one quarter,
the King of France would seize the favorable opportunity, and push on his
operations in another, with almost certain success. That Monarch had already
made conquests in the empire, which he was no less eager to recover, than
impatient to be revenged on him for aiding his malecontent subjects. Though
Henry had now retired from the banks of the Rhine, he had only varied the scene
of hostilities, having invaded the Low Countries with all his forces. The
Turks, rouzed by the solicitations of the French King, as well as stimulated by
resentment against Ferdinand, for having violated the truce in Hungary, had
prepared a powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of Naples and Sicily, which he
had left almost defenseless, by calling thence the greatest part of the regular
troops, to join the army which he was now assembling.

FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, in order to lay before the Emperor
the result of the conferences at Passau, had likewise reasons peculiar to
himself for desiring an accommodation. These prompted him to second, with the
greatest earnestness, the arguments which the Princes, assembled there, had
employed in recommending it. He had observed, not without secret satisfaction,
the fatal blow which had been given to the despotic power, which his brother
had usurped in the empire. He was extremely solicitous to prevent Charles from
recovering what he had lost, as he foresaw that he would immediately resume
with fresh eagerness, and a better chance of success, his favorite scheme of
transmitting that power to his son, by excluding him from the right of
succession to the Imperial throne. On this account, he was willing to
contribute toward circumscribing the Imperial authority, in order to render
his own possession of it certain. Besides, Solomon, exasperated at the loss of
Transylvania, and still more at the fradulent arts by which it had been seized,
had ordered into the field an army of an hundred thousand men, which having
defeated a great body of Ferdinand's troops, and taken several places of
importance, threatened not only to complete the conquest of the province, but
to drive him out of that part of Hungary which was still subject to his
jurisdiction. He was unable to resist such a mighty enemy; his brother, while
engaged in a domestic war, could afford him no aid; and he could not even hope
to draw from Germany the contingent either of troops or money, usually
furnished to repel the invasions of the Infidels. Maurice, having observed
Ferdinand's perplexity, with regard to this last point, had offered, if peace
were re-established on a secure foundation, that he would march in person with
his troops into Hungary, to his assistance. Such was the effect of this
well-timed proposal, that Ferdinand, destitute of every other prospect of
relief, became the most zealous advocate the confederates could have chosen to
urge their claims, and there was scarce any thing that they could have demanded
which he would not have chosen to grant, rather than to have retarded a
pacification, to which he trusted as the only means of saving his Hungarian
crown.

WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering an accommodation elegible, it might
have been expected that it would have immediately taken place. But the
inflexibility of the Emperor's temper, together with his unwillingness to
relinquish, at once, objects which he had long pursued with such earnestness
and assiduity, counterbalanced for some time, the force of all the motives
which disposed him to peace, and not only put that event at a distance, but
seemed to render it uncertain. When Maurice's demands, together with the letter
of the mediators at Passau, were presented to him, he peremptorily refused to
redress the grievances which were pointed out, nor would he agree to any
stipulation for the immediate security of the Protestant religion, but proposed
referring both these to the determination of a future Diet. On his part, he
required that instant reparation should be made to all who, during the present
war, had suffered either by the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or
the actions of their leaders.

MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the Emperor's arts, immediately
concluded that he had nothing in view in these overtures but to amuse and
deceive; and therefore, without listening to Ferdinand's entreaties, he left
Passau abruptly, and joining his troops, which were encamped at Mergentheim, a
city in Franconia, belonging to the knights of the Teutonic order, he put them
in motion, and renewed hostilities. As three thousand men in the Emperor's pay
had thrown themselves into Franckfort on the Maine, and might from thence
infest the neighboring country of Hesse, he marched toward that city, and
laid siege to it in form. The briskness of this enterprise, and the vigor with
which Maurice carried on his approaches against the town, gave such an alarm to
the Emperor, as disposed him to lend a more favorable ear to Ferdinand's
arguments in behalf of an accommodation. Firm and haughty as his nature was, he
found it necessary to bend, and signified his willingness to make concessions
on his part, if Maurice, in return, would abate somewhat of the rigor of his
demands. Ferdinand, as soon as he perceived that he began to yield, did not
desist from his importunities, until he prevailed on him to declare what was
the utmost that he would grant for the security of the confederates. Having
gained this difficult point, he instantly dispatched a messenger to Maurice's
camp, and importing to him the Emperor's final resolution, and conjured him not
to frustrate his endeavors for the re-establishment of peace; or, by an
unseasonable obstinacy on his side, to disappoint the wishes of all Germany for
that salutary event.

MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous situation of his affairs, was strongly
inclined to listen to his advice. The Emperor, though overreached and
surprised, had now begun to assemble troops, and how slow soever his motions
might be, while the first effects of his consternation remained, he was
sensible that Charles must at last act with vigor proportional to the extent
of his power and territories, and lead into Germany an army formidable by its
numbers, and still more by the terror of his name, as well as the remembrance
of his past victories. He could scarce hope that a confederacy, composed of so
many members, would continue to operate with sufficient union and perseverance
to resist the consistent and well directed efforts of an army, at the absolute
disposal of a leader accustomed to command and to conquer. He felt already,
although he had not hitherto experienced the shock of any adverse event, that
he was the head of a disjointed body. He saw from the example of Albert of
Brandenburgh, how difficult it would be, with all his address and credit, to
prevent any particular member from detaching himself from the whole, and how
impossible to recall him to his proper rank and subordination. This filled him
with apprehensions for the common cause. Another consideration gave him no less
disquiet with regard to his own particular interests. By setting at liberty the
degraded Elector, and by repealing the act depriving him of his hereditary
honors and dominions, the Emperor had it in his power to wound him in the most
sensible part. The efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient subjects, and
revered by all the Protestant party, in order to recover what had been unjustly
taken from him, could scarce have failed of exciting commotions in Saxony,
which would endanger all that he had acquired at the expense of so much
dissimulation and artifice. It was no less in the Emperor's power to render
vain all the solicitations of the confederates in behalf of the Landgrave. He
had only to add one act of violence more to the injustice and rigor with which
he had already treated him; and he had accordingly threatened the sons of that
unfortunate Prince, that if they persisted in their present enterprise, instead
of seeing their father restored to liberty, they should hear of his having
suffered the punishment which his rebellion had merited Sleid. 571.
.

HAVING deliberated upon all these points with his associates, Maurice thought
it more prudent to accept of the conditions offered, though less advantageous
than those he had proposed, than again to commit all to the doubtful issue of
war Sleid. Hist. 563, etc. Thuan. lib. x. 359, etc.
. He repaired forthwith to Passau, and signed the treaty of peace; of which the
chief articles were, That before the twelfth day of August, the confederates
shall lay down their arms, and disband their forces; That on or before that day
the Landgrave shall be set at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his castle of
Rheinfels; That a Diet shall be held within six months, in order to deliberate
concerning the most proper and effectual method of preventing for the future
all disputes and dissensions about religion; That, in the mean time, neither
the Emperor nor any other Prince, shall, upon any pretext whatever, offer (...)
injury or violence to such as adhered to the confession of Augsburgh, but allow
them to enjoy the free and undisturbed exercise of their religion; That the
Protestants, in return, shall not molest the Catholics either in the exercise
of their ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or in performing their religious
ceremonies; That the Imperial chamber shall administer justice impartially to
persons of both parties, and Protestants be admitted indiscriminately with the
Catholics to sit judges in that court; That if the next Diet should not be able
to terminate the disputes with regard to religion, the stipulations in the
present treaty in behalf of the Protestants, shall continue for ever in full
force and vigor; That none of the confederates shall be liable to any action
on account of what had happened during the course of the war; That the
consideration of those encroachments which had been made, as Maurice pretended,
upon the constitution and liberties of the empire, shall be remitted to the
approaching Diet; That Albert of Brandenburgh shall be comprehended in the
treaty, provided he shall accede to it, and disband his forces before the
twelfth of August Recueil des Traitez, ii. 261.
.

SUCH was the memorable treaty of Passau, that overturned the vast fabric, in
erecting which Charles had employed so many years, and had exerted the utmost
of his power and policy; which annulled all his regulations with regard to
religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the Imperial authority absolute
and hereditary in his family; and established the Protestant church, which had
hitherto subsisted precariously in Germany, through connivance, or by
expedients, upon a firm and secure basis. Maurice reaped all the glory of
having concerted and completed this unexpected revolution. It is a singular
circumstance, that the Reformation should be indebted for its security and full
establishment in Germany, to the same hand which had formerly brought it to the
brink of destruction, and that both events should have been accomplished by the
same arts of dissimulation. The ends, however, which Maurice had in view, at
these different junctures, seem to have been more attended to than the means by
which he attained them; and he was now as universally extolled for his zeal and
public spirit, as he had lately been condemned for his indifference and
interested policy. It is no less worthy of observation, that the French King, a
Monarch zealous for the Catholic faith, should, at the very time he was
persecuting his own Protestant subjects with all the fierceness of bigotry,
employ his power in order to protect and maintain the Reformation in the
empire; and that the league for this purpose, which proved so fatal to the
Romish church, should be negociated and signed by a Roman Catholic bishop. So
wonderfully does the wisdom of God superintend and regulate the caprice of
human passions, and render them subservient toward the accomplishment of his
own purposes!

LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of the French King during the
negociations at Passau. Maurice and his associates, having gained what they had
in view, discovered no great solicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps, they
reckoned to be over-paid, by his acquisitions in Lorain, for the assistance
which he had given them. A short clause, which they procured to be inserted in
the treaty, importing, that the King of France might communicate to these
confederates his particular pretensions or causes of hostility, which they
would lay before the Emperor, was the only sign that they gave of their
remembering how much they had been indebted to him for their success. Henry
experienced the same treatment, which every prince who lends his aid to the
authors of a civil war may expect. As soon as the rage of faction began to
subside, and any prospect of accommodation began to open, his services were
forgotten, and his associates made a merit with their Sovereign, of the
ingratitude with which they abandoned their protector. But how much soever
Henry might be enraged at the perfidy of his allies, or at the impatience with
which they hastened to make their peace with the Emperor at his expense, he was
perfectly sensible that it was more his interest to keep well with the Germanic
body, than to resent the indignities offered him by any particular members of
it. For that reason he dismissed the hostages which he had received from
Maurice and his associates, and affected to talk in the same strain, as
formerly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient constitution and
liberties of the empire.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XI.
AS soon as the treaty of Passau was signed, Maurice, in consequence of his
engagements with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary at the head of twenty thousand
men. But the vast superiority of the Turkish armies, the frequent mutinies,
both of the Spanish and German soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay,
together with the dissentions between Maurice and Castaldo, who was piqued at
being obliged to resign the chief command to him, prevented his performing any
thing in that country worthy of his former fame, or of great benefit to the
King of the Romans Isluanhaffi Hist. Hungar. 228. Thuan. lib. x. 371.
.

WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the Prince of Hesse parted from him with the
forces under his command, and marched back into his own country, that he might
be ready to receive his father upon his return, and give up to him the reins of
government which he had held during his absence. But fortune was not yet weary
of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of mercenary troops, which had been
in the pay of Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg their colonel, a soldier of
fortune, and ready to engage in any enterprise, secretly withdrew from the
young Prince as he was marching homewards, and joined Albert of Brandenburgh,
who still continued in arms against the Emperor, refusing to be included in the
treaty of Passau. Unhappily for the Landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was dismissed from the citadel of Mechlin where he had
been confined, but before he had got beyond the frontiers of that country. The
Queen of Hungary, who governed there in her brother's name, incensed at such an
open violation of the treaty to which he owed his liberty, commanded him to be
arrested, and committed him again to the custody of the same Spanish captain
who had guarded him for five years with such severe vigilence. Philip beheld
all the horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and his spirits subsiding in the
same proportion as they had risen during the short interval in which he had
enjoyed liberty, he sunk into despair, and believed himself to be doomed to
perpetual captivity. But the matter being explained to the Emperor's full
satisfaction, that the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries could be imputed
neither to the Landgrave nor to his son, he gave orders for his release; and
Philip at last obtained the liberty for which he so long languished Sleid. 573.
Belcarii Comment. 834.
. But though he recovered his freedom, and was reinstated in his dominions, his
sufferings seem to have broken the vigor, and to have extinguished the
activity of his mind: From being the boldest as well as most enterprizing
Prince in the Empire, he became the most timid and cautious, and passed the
remainder of his days in a pacific indolence.

THE degraded Elector of Saxony likewise procured his liberty in consequence of
the treaty of Passau. The Emperor having been obliged to relinquish all his
schemes for extirpating the Protestant religion, had no longer any motive for
detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely sollicitous, a^ that juncture, to
recover the confidence and good will of the Germans, whose assistance was
essential to the success of the enterprise which he meditated against the King
of France, he, among other expedients for that purpose, thought of releasing
from imprisonment a Prince whose merit entitled him no less to esteem, than his
sufferings rendered him the object of compassion. John Frederick took
possession accordingly of that part of his territories which had been reserved
for him, when Maurice was invested with the Electoral dignity. As he continued
to display in this situation, the same virtuous magnanimity, for which he had
been conspicuous in a more prosperous and splendid state, and which he had
retained amidst all his sufferings, he lived several years in that high
reputation to which he had so just a title.

THE loss of Metz, Toul and Verdun, had made a deep impression on the Emperor.
Accustomed to terminate all his operations against France with advantage to
himself, he thought that it nearly concerned his honor not to allow Henry the
superiority in this war, or to suffer his own administration to be stained with
the infamy of having permitted territories of such consequence to be
dismembered from the Empire. This was no less a point of interest than of
honor. As the frontier of Champagne was more naked, and lay more exposed than
that of any province in France, he had frequently, during his wars with that
kingdom, made inroads upon it with great success and effect; but if Henry were
allowed to retain his late conquests, France would gain such a formidable
barrier on that side, as to be altogether secure, where formerly she had been
the weakest. On the other hand, the Emperor had now lost as much, in point of
security, as France had acquired, and being stripped of the defense which those
cities afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter, where all the towns
having been hitherto considered as interior, and remote from any enemy, were
but slightly fortified. These considerations determined Charles to attempt
recovering the three towns of which Henry had made himself master; and the
preparations which he made against Maurice and his associates enabled him to
carry his resolution into immediate execution.

AS soon, then, as the peace was concluded at Passau, he left his inglorious
retreat at Villach, and advanced to Augsburg at the head of a considerable body
of Germans which he had levied, together with all the troops which he had drawn
out of Italy and Spain. To these he added several battalions, which having been
in the pay of the Confederates, entered into his service when dismissed by
them; and he prevailed likewise on some of the Princes of the Empire to join
him with their vassals. In order to conceal the destination of this formidable
army, and to guard against alarming the French so as to put them on preparing
for their defense, he gave out that he was to march forthwith into Hungary, in
order to second Maurice in his operations against the Infidels. When he began
to advance toward the Rhine, and could no longer employ that pretext, he tried
a new artifice, and spread a report that he was marching in order to chastise
Albert of Brandenburg, whose cruel exactions in that part of the Empire called
loudly for his interposition to check them.

BUT the French having grown acquainted, at last, with arts by which they had
been so often deceived, viewed all Charles's motions with distrust. Henry
immediately guessed the true object of his vast preparations, and resolved to
defend the important conquests which he had gained with vigor equal to that
with which they were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that he whole weight
of the war would be turned against Metz, the fate of which would decide that of
Toul and Verdun, he nominated Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take the
command in that city during the siege, the issue of which would equally affect
the honor and interest of his country. His choice could not have fallen upon
any person more worthy of that trust. The Duke of Guise possessed, in a high
degree, all the qualities of courage, sagacity and presence of mind, which
render men eminent in military command. He was largely endowed with that
magnanimity of soul which delights in bold enterprises, and aspires to fame by
splendid and extraordinary actions. He repaired with joy to the dangerous
station assigned him, as to a theater on which he he might display his great
qualities under the immediate eye of his countrymen all ready to applaud him.
The martial genius of the French nobility in that age, which considered it as
the greatest reproach to remain inactive, when there was any opportunity of
signalizing their courage, prompted great numbers to follow a leader who was
the darling as well as the pattern of all that courted military fame. Several
Princes of the blood, many noblemen of the highest rank, and all the young
officers who could obtain the King's permission, entered Metz as volunteers. By
their presence they added spirit to the garrison, and enabled the Duke of Guise
to employ on every emergency persons eager to distinguish themselves, and fit
to conduct any service.

BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise undertook the defense of Metz, he
found every thing, upon his arrival there, in such a situation, as might have
induced any person of less intrepid courage to despair of defending it with
success. The city was of great extent, with large suburbs; the walls were in
many places feeble and without ramparts; the ditch narrow; and the old towers,
which projected instead of bastions, were at too great distance from each other
to defend the space between them. For all these defects he endeavored to
provide the best remedy, which the time would permit. He ordered the suburbs,
without sparing the monasteries or churches, not even that of St. Arnulph, in
which several Kings of France had been buried, to be levelled with the ground;
but in order to guard against the imputation of impiety, to which such a
violation of so many sacred edifices, as well as of the ashes of the dead might
expose him, he executed this with much religious ceremony. Having ordered all
the holy vestments and utensils, together with the bones of the Kings, and
other persons deposited in these churches to be removed, they were carried in
solemn procession to a church within the walls, he himself walking before them
uncovered, with a torch in his hand. He then pulled down such houses as stood
near the walls, cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired the ruinous
fortifications, and erected new ones. As it was necessary that all these works
should be finished with the utmost expedition, he labored at them with his own
hands; the officers and volunteers imitated his example, and the soldiers
submitted with cheerfulness to the most severe fatigues, when they saw that
their superiors did not decline to bear a part in these together with them. At
the same time he compelled all useless persons to leave the place; he filled
the magazines with provisions and military stores; burnt the mills and
destroyed the corn and forage for several miles round the town. Such were his
popular talents, as well as his arts of acquiring an ascendant over the minds
of men, that the citizens seconded him with no less ardour than the soldiers;
and every other passion being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse the enemy,
with which he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their estates, together,
with the havoc, which he made among their public and private buildings,
without any emotion of resentment Thuan. xi. 387.
.

MEANTIME the Emperor, having collected all his forces, continued his march
toward Metz. As he passed through the cities on the Rhine, he saw the dismal
effects of that licentious and wasteful war which Albert had carried on in
these parts. Upon his approach, that Prince, though at the head of twenty
thousand men, withdrew into Lorrain, as if he intended to join the French King,
whose arms he had quartered with his own in all his standards and ensigns.
Albert was not in a condition to cope with the Imperial troops, which amounted
at least to sixty thousand men, forming one of the most numerous and best
appointed armies that had been brought into the field, during that age, in any
of the wars among the Christian Princes.

THE chief command under the Emperor, was committed to the Duke of Alva,
assisted by the Marquis de Marignano, together with the most experienced of the
Italian and Spanish generals. As it was toward the end of October, these
intelligent officers represented the great danger of beginning, at such an
advanced season, a siege which could not fail to prove very tedious. But
Charles adhered to his own opinion with his usual obstinacy, and being
confident that he had made such preparations, and taken such precautions as
would ensure success, he ordered the city to be invested. As soon as the duke
of Alva appeared, a large body of the French sallied out and attacked his van
guard with great vigor, put it in confusion, and killed or took prisoners a
considerable number of men. By this early specimen, which they gave of the
conduct of their officers, as well as the valor of their troops, they showed
the Imperialists what an enemy they had to encounter, and how dear every
advantage must cost them. The place, however, was completely invested, the
trenches were opened, and the other works begun.

THE attention both of the besiegers and besieged was turned for some time
toward Albert of Brandenburgh, and they strove with emulation which should
gain that Prince, who still hovered in the neighborhood, fluctuating in all
the uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who being swayed by no
principle, was allured different ways by contrary views of interest. The French
tempted him with offers extremely beneficial; the Imperialists scrupled at no
promise which they thought would make an impression upon him. After much
hesitation he was gained by the Emperor, from whom he expected to receive
advantages, which were both more immediate and more permanent. As the French
King, who began to suspect his intentions, had appointed a body of troops under
the Duke of Aumale, brother to the Duke Guise, to watch his motions, Albert
fell upon them unexpectedly, with such vigor, that he routed them entirely,
killed many of the officers, wounded Aumale himself, and took him prisoner.
Immediately after this victory, he marched in triumph to Metz, and joined his
army to that of the Emperor. Charles, in reward for this service, and the great
accession of strength which he brought him, granted Albert a pardon, in form,
of past offenses, and con^^^d him in the possession of the territories which he
had violently usurped during the war Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. ^^^.
.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affected with his brother's misfortune, did
not remit, in any degree, the vigor with which he defended the town. He
harrassed the besiegers by frequent sallies, in which his officers were so
eager to distinguish themselves, that his authority, being scarce sufficient to
restrain the impetuosity of their courage, he was obliged at different times to
shut the gates and to conceal the keys, in order to prevent the Princes of the
blood, and noblemen of the first rank, from exposing themselves to danger in
every sally. He repaired in the night what the enemy's artillery had beat down
during the day, or erected behind the ruined works, new fortifications of
almost equal strength. The Imperialists, on their part, pushed on the attack
with great spirit, and carried forward, at once, approaches against different
parts of the town. But the art of attacking fortified places was not then
arrived at that degree of perfection, to which it was carried toward the close
of the sixteenth century, during the long war in the Netherlands. The
besiegers, after the unwearied labor of many weeks, found that they had made
but little progress; and although their batteries had made breaches in
different places, they saw, to their astonishment, works suddenly appear, in
demolishing which their fatigues and dangers would be renewed. The Emperor,
enraged at the obstinate resistance which his army met with, left Thionville,
where he had been confined by a violent fit of the gout, and though still so
infirm that he was obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired to the camp;
that by his presence he might animate the soldiers, and urge on the attack with
greater spirit. Upon his arrival, new batteries were erected, and new efforts
made with redoubled ardour.

BUT, by this time, the winter had set in with great rigor; the camp was
alternately deluged with rain, or covered with snow; at the same time
provisions were become extremely scarce, as the body of French cavalry which
hovered in the neighborhood, often interrupted the convoys, or rendered their
arrival difficult and uncertain. Diseases began to spread among the soldiers,
especially among the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to such inclement
weather; great numbers were disabled from serving, and many died. At length,
such breaches were made as seemed practicable, and the Emperor resolved to
hazard a general assault, in spite of all the remonstrances of his generals
concerning the imprudence of attacking a numerous garrison, conducted and
animated by the most gallant of the French nobility, with an army weakened by
diseases, and disheartened with ill success. The Duke of Guise, suspecting his
intentions, from the extraordinary hurry which he observed in the enemy's camp,
ordered all his troops to their respective posts. They appeared immediately on
the wall, and behind the breaches, with such a determined countenance, so eager
for the combat, and so well prepared to give the assailants a warm reception,
that the Imperialists, instead of advancing to the charge, when the word of
command was given, stood motionless, in a timid dejected silence. The Emperor,
perceiving that he could not trust troops whose spirits were so much broken,
retired abruptly to his quarters, complaining that he was now deserted by his
soldiers, who deserved no longer the name of men Thuan. 397.
.

DEEPLY as this behavior of his troops mortified and affected him, Charles
would not hear of abandoning the siege, though he saw the necessity of changing
the method of attack. He suspended the fury of his batteries, and proposed to
proceed by the more secure but tedious method of sapping. But as it still
continued to rain or to snow almost incessantly, such as were employed in this
service endured incredible hardships; and the duke of Guise, whose ^ry was not
inferior to his valor, discovering a^ their mines, counter-worked them, and
prevented their effect. At last, Charles, finding it impossible to contend any
longer with the rigor of the season, and with enemies, whom he could neither
overpower by force, nor subdue by art, while at the same time a contagious
distemper raged among his troops, and cut off daily great numbers of his
officers as well as soldiers, yielded to the solicitations of his generals,
who conjured him to save the remains of his army by a timely retreat;
"Fortune," says he, "I now perceive, resembles other females, and chooses to
confer her favors on young men, while she forsakes those who are advanced in
years."

UPON this, he gave orders immediately to raise the siege, and submitted to the
disgrace of abandoning the enterprise, after having continued fifty-six days
before the town, during which time he had lost upwards of thirty thousand men,
who died of diseases, or were killed by the enemy. The Duke of Guise, as soon
as he perceived the intention of the Imperialists, took measures to prevent
their retiring unmolested, and sent out several bodies, both of cavalry and
infantry, to infest their rear, to pick up stragglers, and to seize every
opportunity of attacking them with advantage. Such was the confusion with which
they made their retreat, that the French might have annoyed them in the most
cruel manner. But when they sallied out, a spectacle presented itself to their
view, which extinguished at once all hostile rage, and melted them into
tenderness and compassion. The Imperial camp was filled with the sick and
wounded, with the dead and the dying. In all the different roads by which the
army retired, numbers were found, who having made an effort beyond their
strength to escape, were left, when they could go no farther, to perish without
assistance. This they received from their enemies, and were indebted to them
for all the kind offices which their friends had not the power to perform. The
duke of Guise immediately ordered proper refreshments for such as were dying of
hunger; he appointed surgeons to attend the sick and ^ounded; he removed such
as could bear it into the adjacent villages; and those who would have suffered
by being carried so far, he admitted into the hospitals which he had fitted up
in the city for his own soldiers. As soon as they recovered, he sent them home,
under an escort of soldiers, and with money to bear their charges. By these
acts of humanity, which were uncommon in that age, when war was carried on with
greater rancour and ferocity than at present, the Duke of Guise completed the
fame which he had acquired by his gallant and successful defense of Metz, and
engaged those whom he had vanquished to vie with his own countrymen in
extolling his name Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, etc. Pere Daniel, Hist. de
France, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of this siege is taken from the
journal of the Sieur de Salignac, who was present. Natal. Commit. Histor. 129.
.

TO these calamities in Germany, were added such unfortunate events in Italy,
as rendered this the most disastrous year in the Emperor's life. During his
residence at Villach, Charles had applied to Cosmo de Medici, for the loan of
two hundred thousand crowns. But his credit, at that time, was so low, that, in
order to obtain this inconsiderable sum, he was obliged to put him in
possession of the principality of Piombino, and, by giving up that, he lost the
footing which he had hitherto maintained in Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo to
assume, for the future, the tone and deportment of a Prince altogether
independent. Much about the time that his indigence constrained him to part
with this valuable territory, he lost Siena, which was of still greater
consequence, through the ill conduct of Don Diego de Mendoza Thuan. lib. xi.
376.
.

SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy, had long enjoyed a republican
government, under the protection of the Empire; but being torn in pieces by the
dissentions between the nobles and the people, which divided all the
commonwealths, the faction of the people, which gained the ascendant, besought
the Emperor to become the guardian of the administration which they had
established, and admitted into their city a small body of Spanish soldiers,
whom he had sent to countenance the execution of the laws, and to preserve
tranquillity among them. The direction of these troops was given to Mendoza, at
that time ambassador for the Emperor at Rome, who persuaded the credulous
multitude, that it was necessary for their security against any future attempt
of the nobles, to allow him to build a citadel in Siena; and as he flattered
himself that by means of this fortress he might render the Emperor master of
the city, he pushed on the works with all possible dispatch. But he threw off
the mask too soon. Before the fortifications were completed, he began to
indulge his natural haughtiness and severity of temper, and to treat the
citizens with great insolence. At the same time the soldiers in garrison being
paid as irregularly as the Emperor's troops usually were, lived almost at
discretion upon the inhabitants, and were guilty of many acts of license and
oppression.

THESE injuries awakened the Sienese to a sense of their danger. As they saw
the necessity of exerting themselves, while the unfinished fortifications of
the citadel left them any hopes of success, they applied to the French
ambassador at Rome, who readily promised them his master's protection and
assistance. At the same time, forgetting their domestic animosities when such a
mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and existence of the republic, they sent
agents to the exiled nobles, and invited them to concur with them in saving
their country from the servitude with which it was threatened. As there was not
a moment to lose, measures were concerted speedily, but with great prudence;
and were executed with equal vigor. The citizens rose suddenly in arms; the
exiles flocked into the town from different parts with all their partisans, and
what troops they could draw together; and several bodies of mercenaries in the
pay of France appeared to support them. The Spaniards, though surprised, and
much inferior in number, defended themselves with great courage; but seeing no
prospect of relief, and having no hopes of maintaining their station long, in a
half-finished fortress, they soon gave it up. The Sienese, with the utmost
alacrity, levelled it with the ground, that no monument might remain of that
odious structure, which had been raised in order to enslave them. At the same
time renouncing all connection with the Emperor, they sent ambassadors to the
King of France as the restorer of their liberty, and to entreat that he would
secure to them the perpetual enjoy^ of that blessing by continuing his
protection to their republic Pecci Memoire de Siena. vol. iii. p. 230, 261.
Thuan. 375, 377, etc. Paruta. Hist. Venet. 267. Mem. de Ribier, 424, etc.
.

TO these misfortunes, one still more fatal had almost succeeded. The severe
administration of Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples, having filled that
kingdom with murmuring and disaffection, the Prince of Salerno, the head of the
malcontents, had fled to the court of France, where all who bore ill will to
the Emperor or his ministers, were sure of finding protection and assistance.
That nobleman, in the usual style of exiles, boasting much of his partisans,
and of his great influence with them, prevailed on Henry to think of invading
Naples, from expectation of being joined by all those with whom the Prince of
Salerno held correspondence, or who were dissatisfied with Toledo's government.
But though the first hint of this enterprise was suggested by the Prince of
Salerno, Henry did not choose that its success should entirely depend upon his
being able to fulfill the promises which he had made. He applied for aid to
Solomon, whom he courted after his father's example, as his most vigorous
auxiliary against the Emperor, and solicited him to second his operations by
sending a powerful fleet into the Mediterranean. It was not difficult to obtain
what he requested of the Sultan, who, at this time, was highly incensed against
the house of Austria, on account of their proceedings in Hungary. He ordered an
hundred and fifty ships to be equipped, that they might sail toward the coast
of Naples, at whatever time Henry should name, and might cooperate with the
French troops in their attempts upon that kingdom. The command of this fleet
was given to the corsair Dragu^, an officer trained up under Barbarossa, and
scarce inferior to his master in courage, in talents, or in good fortune. He
appeared on the coast of Calabria at the time which had been agreed on, landed
at several places, plundered and burnt several villages; and at last casting
anchor in the bay of Naples, filled that city with consternation. But as the
French fleet, detained by some accident, which the contemporary historians have
not explained, did not join the Turks according to concert, they, after waiting
twenty days, without hearing any thing of it, set sail for Constantinople, and
thus delivered the viceroy of Naples from the terror of an invasion, which he
was in no condition to have resisted Thuan. 375, 380. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 403.
Giauene.
.

AS the French had never given so severe a check to the Emperor in any former
campaign, they expressed immoderate joy at the success of their arms. Charles
himself, accustomed to a long series of prosperity, felt the blow most
sensibly, and retired from Metz into the Low Countries, much dejected with the
cruel reverse of fortune which affected him in his declining age, when the
violence of the gout had increased to such a pitch, as entirely broke the
vigor of his constitution, and rendered him peevish, difficult of access, and
often incapable of applying to business. But whenever he enjoyed any interval
of ease, all his thoughts were bent upon revenge; and he deliberated, with the
utmost solicitude, concerning the most proper means of annoying France, and of
effacing the stain which had obscured the reputation and glory of his arms. All
the schemes concerning Germany, which had engrossed him so long, being
disconcerted by the peace of Passau, the affairs of the Empire became only
secondary objects of attention; and enmity to France was the predominant
passion which chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Brandenburgh excited violent commotions,
which disturbed the Empire during this year. That Prince's troops having shared
in the calamities of the siege of Metz, were greatly reduced in number. But the
Emperor, prompted by gratitude for his distinguished services on that occasion,
or perhaps with a secret view of fomenting divisions among the Princes of the
Empire, having paid up all the money due to him, he was enabled, by that sum,
to hire so many of the soldiers, dismissed from the Imperial army, that he was
soon at the head of a body of men as numerous as ever. The bishops of Bamberg
and Wurtzburg having solicited the Imperial chamber to annul, by its
authority, the iniquitous conditions which Albert had compelled them to sign,
than court unanimously finding all their engagements with him to be void in
their own nature, because they had been extorted by force; enjoined Albert to
renounce all claim to the performance of them; and exhorted all the Princes of
the Empire, if he should persist in such an unjust demand, to take arms against
him, as a disturber of the public tranquillity. To this decision, Albert
opposed the confirmation of his transactions with the two prelates, which the
Emperor had granted him as the reward of his having joined the Imperial army at
Metz; and in order to intimidate his antagonists, and to convince them of his
resolution not to relinquish his pretensions, he put his troops in motion, that
be might secure the territory in question. Various endeavors were employed,
and many expedients proposed, in order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the same warmth of temper which rendered Albert turbulent and
enterprizing, inspiring him with the most sanguine hopes of success, even in
his wildest undertakings, he disdainfully rejected all reasonable overtures of
accommodation.

UPON this, the Imperial chamber issued its decree against him, and required
the Elector of Saxony, together with several other Princes mentioned by name,
to take arms in order to carry it into execution. Maurice and those associated
with him were not unwilling to undertake this service. They were extremely
sollicitous to maintain public order, by supporting the authority of the
Imperial chamber, and saw the necessity of giving a timely check to the
usurpations of an ambitious Prince who had no principle of action but regard to
his own interest, and no motive to direct him but the impulse of ungovernable
passions. They had good reason to suspect that the Emperor encouraged Albert in
his extravagant an irregular proceedings, and secretly afforded him assistance,
that, by raising him up to rival Maurice in power, he might, in any future
broil, make use of his assistance to counterbalance and control the authority
which the other had acquired in the Empire Sleid. 585. Mem. de Ribier, ii, 442.
Arnoldi. vita Maurit. ap. Menken. ii. 1242.
.

THESE considerations united the most powerful Princes in Germany in a league
against Albert, of which Maurice was declared generalissimo. This formidable
confederacy, however, wrought no change in Albert's sentiments; but as he knew
that he could not resist so many Princes, if he should allow them time to
assemble their forces, he endeavored, by his activity, to deprive them of all
the advantage which they might derive from their united power and numbers; and,
for that reason, marched directly against Maurice, the enemy whom he dreaded
most. It was happy for the allies, that the conduct of their affairs was
committed to a Prince of such abilities. He, by his authority and example, had
inspired them with vigor, and having carried on their preparations with a
degree of rapidity, of which confederate bodies are seldom capable, he was in
condition to face Albert before he could make any considerable progress.

THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in number, each consisting of
twenty-four thousand men, met at Sieverhausen in the duchy of Lunenburgh; and
the violent animosity against each other, which possessed the two leaders, did
not suffer them to continue long inactive. The troops, inflamed with the same
hostile rage, marched fiercely to the combat; they fought with the greatest
obstinacy; and as both generals were capable of availing themselves of every
favorable occurrence, the battle remained long doubtful, each gaining ground
upon the other alternately. At last victory declared for Maurice, who was
superior in cavalry, and Albert's army fled in confusion, leaving four thousand
dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and artillery in the hands of the
conquerors. The allies bought their victory dear, their best troops suffered
greatly, two sons of the Duke of Brunswick, a Duke of Lunenburg, and many other
persons of distinction, were among the number of the slain Historia pugnae
infelicis inter Maurit. and Albert. Thom. Wintzero auctore apud Scard. ii 559.
Sleid, 583. Ruscelli epistres aux Princes 154. Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1245.
. But all these were soon forgotten, for Maurice himself, as he led up to a
second charge a body of horse which had been broken, received a wound with a
pistol bullet in the belly, of which he died two days after the battle, in the
thirty-second year of his age, and in the sixth after his attaining the
electoral dignity.

OF all the personages who have appeared in the history of this active age,
when great occurrences, and sudden revolutions, called forth extraordinary
talents to view, and afforded them full opportunity to display themselves,
Maurice may justly be considered as the most remarkable. If his exorbitant
ambition, his profound dissimulation, and his unwarrantable usurpation of his
kinsman's honors and dominions exclude him from being praised as a virtuous
man; his prudence in concerting his measures, his vigor in executing them, and
the uniform success with which they were attended, entitle him to the
appellation of a great Prince. At an age, when impetuosity of spirit commonly
predominates over political wisdom, when the highest efforts even of a genius
of the first order is to fix on a bold scheme, and to execute it with
promptitude and courage, he formed and conducted an intricate plan of policy,
which deceived the most artful Monarch in Europe. At the very juncture when the
Emperor had attained almost unlimited despotism, Maurice, with power seemingly
inadequate to such an undertaking, compelled him to relinquish all his
usurpations, and established, not only the religious, but civil, liberties of
Germany on such foundations, as have hitherto remained unshaken. Although at
one period of his life, his conduct excited the jealousy of the Protestants,
and at another drew on him the resentment of the Roman Catholics, such was his
masterly address, that he was the only Prince of the age, who in any degree
possessed the confidence of both, and whom both lamented as the most able as
well as faithful guardian of the constitution and laws of his country.

THE consternation which Maurice's death occasioned among his troops, prevented
them from making the proper improvement of the victory which they had gained.
Albert, whose active courage, and profuse liberality, rendered him the darling
of such military adventurers as were little sollicitous about the justice of
his cause, soon re-assembled his broken forces, and made fresh levies, with
such success, that he was quickly at the head of fifteen thousand men, and
renewed his depredations with additional fury. But Henry of Brunswick, having
taken the command of the allied troops, defeated him in a second battle, scarce
less bloody than the former. Even then his courage did not sink, nor were his
resources exhausted. He made several efforts, and some of them very vigorous,
to retrieve his affairs: but, being laid under the ban of the Empire by the
Imperial chamber, being driven by degrees out of all his hereditary
territories, as well as those which he had usurped; being forsaken by many of
his officers, and overpowered by the number of his enemies, he fled for refuge
into France. After having been, for a considerable time, the terror and scourge
of Germany, he lingered out a few years in an indigent and dependant state of
exile, the miseries of which his restless and arrogant spirit endured with the
most indignant impatience. Upon his death without issue, his territories, which
had been seized by the Princes who took arms against him, were restored, by a
decree of the Emperor, to his collateral heirs of the house of Brandenburgh
Sleid. 592. 945. 599. Struv. Corp. Hist Germ. 1075.
.

MAURICE, having left only one daughter, who was afterward married to William,
Prince of Orange, by whom she had a son, who bore his grandfather's name and
inherited the great talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent dispute
arose concerning the succession to his honors and territories. John Frederick,
the degraded Elector, claimed the electoral dignity, and that part of his
patrimonial estate, of which he had been violently stripped after the
Smalkaldic war. Augustus, Maurice's only brother, pleaded his right not only to
the hereditary possessions of their family, but to the electoral dignity and to
the territories which Maurice had acquired. As Augustus was a Prince of
considerable abilities, as well as of great candor and gentleness of manners,
the States of Saxony, forgetting the merits and sufferings of their former
master, declared warmly in his favor. His pretensions were powerfully
supported by the King of Denmark whose daugther he had married, and zealously
espoused by the King of the Romans out of regard to Maurice's memory. The
degraded Elector though secretly favored by his ancient enemy the Emperor, was
at last obliged to relinquish his claim, upon obtaining a small addition to the
territories which had been allotted to him, together with a stipulation,
securing to his family the eventual succession, upon a failure of male heirs in
the Albertine line. That unfortunante but magnanimous Prince died next year,
soon after ratifying this treaty of agreement; and the electoral dignity is
still possessed by the descendants of Augustus Thuan. 409. Struv. Corp. hist.
Germ.
.

DURING these transactions in Germany, war was carried on in the Low Countries
with considerable vigor. The Emperor, impatient to efface the stain which his
ignominious repulse at Metz left upon his his military reputation, had an army
early in the field, and laid siege to Terouane. Though the town was of such
importance that Francis used to call it one of the two pillows on which a King
of France might sleep with security, the fortifications were in disrepair;
Henry, trusting to what had happened at Metz, thought nothing more was
necessary to render all the efforts of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce
the garrison with a considerable number of the young nobility. But d'Esse, a
veteran officer who commanded them, (...) ^^lled, and the Imperialists pushing
the siege with (...) and perseverance, the place was taken by assault. That it
might not fall again into the hands of the French, Charles ordered not only the
fortifications but the town to be rased, and the inhabitants to be dispersed in
the adjacent cities. Elated with this success, the Imperialists immediately
invested Hesdin, which though defended with great bravery, was likewise taken
by assault, and such of the garrison as escaped the sword were made prisoners.
The Emperor entrusted the conduct of this siege to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy
Prince of Piedmont, who, on that occasion, gave the first display of his great
talents for military command, which soon entitled him to be ranked among the
first generals of that age, and facilitated his re-establishment in his
hereditary dominions, the greater part of which having been overrun by Francis
in his expeditions into Italy, were still occupied by Henry Thuan. 411. Haraei
Annals Brabant, 669.
.

THE loss of these towns, together with so many persons of distinction, either
killed or taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable calamity to France, and
Henry felt it very sensibly; but he was still more mortified at the Emperor's
having assumed his wonted superiority in the field so soon after the blow at
Metz, which the French had represented as fatal to his power. He was ashamed,
too, of his own remissness and excessive security at the opening of the
campaign; and, in order to repair that error, he assembled a numerous army, and
led it into the Low Countries.

ROUZED at the approach of such a formidable enemy, Charles left Brussels,
where he had been shut up so closely during seven months, that it came to be
believed in many parts of Europe that he was dead; and though he was so much
debilitated by the gout that he could scarce bare the motion of a litter, he
hastened to join his army. The eyes of all Europe were turned with expectation
toward these mighty and exasperated rivals, between whom a decisive battle was
now thought unavoidable. But Charles having prudently declined to hazard a
general engagement, and the violence of the autumnal rains rendering it
impossible for the French to undertake any siege, they retired without having
performed any thing suitable to the great preparations which they had made
Haraeus 672. Thuan. 414.
.

THE Imperial arms did not make the same progress in Italy. The narrowness of
the Emperor's finances seldom allowed him to act with vigor in two different
places at the same time; and having exerted himself to the utmost in order to
make a great effort in the Low Countries, his operations on the other side of
the Alps were proportionally feeble. The viceroy of Naples, in conjunction with
Cosmo di Medici, who was greatly alarmed at the introduction of French troops
into Siena, endeavored to become master of that city. But instead of reducing
the Sienese, the Imperialists were obliged to retire abruptly in order to
defend their own country, upon the appearance of the Turkish fleet, which
threatened the coast of Naples; and the French not only established themselves
more firmly in Tuscany, but by the assistance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, subject, at that time, to the Genoese Thuan. 417.
.

THE affairs of the house of Austria declined no less in Hungary during the
course of this year. As the troops which Ferdinand kept in Transylvania
received their pay very irregularly, they lived almost at discretion upon the
inhabitants; and their insolence and rapaciousness greatly disgusted all ranks
of men, and alienated them from their new sovereign, who, instead of
protecting, plundered his subjects. Their indignation at this, added to their
desire of revenging Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much upon a turbulent
nobility, impatient of injury, and upon a fierce people, prone to change, that
they were ripe for a revolt. At that very juncture, their late Queen, Isabella,
together with her son, appeared in Transylvania. Her ambitious mind could not
bear the solitude and inactivity of a private life, and repenting quickly of
the cession which she had made of the crown, in the year one thousand five
hundred and fifty-one, she left the place of her retreat, hoping that the
dissatisfaction of the Hungarians with the Austrian government, would prompt
them to recognize once more her son's right to the crown. Some noblemen of
great eminence declared immediately in his favor. The Bashaw of Belgrade, by
Solyman's order, espoused his cause in opposition to Ferdinand; the Spanish and
German soldiers, instead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied for want of
pay, declaring that they would march back to Vienna; so that Castaldo, their
general, was obliged to abandon Transylvania to Isabella and the Turks, and to
place himself at the head of the mutiniers, that by his authority he might
restrain them from plundering the Austrian territories, through which they
passed Thuan. 430.
.

FERDINAND's attention was turned so entirely toward the affairs of Germany,
and his treasures so much exhausted by his late efforts in Hungary, that he
made no attempt to recover this valuable province, although a favorable
opportunity for that purpose presented itself, as Solomon was then engaged in a
war with Persia, and involved besides in domestic calamities which engrossed
and disturbed his mind. Solomon, though distinguished, by many accomplishments,
from the other Ottoman Princes, had all the passions peculiar to that violent
and haughty race. He was jealous of his authority, sudden and furious in his
anger, and susceptible of all that rage of love, which reigns in the East, and
often produces the wildest and most tragical effects. His favorite mistress
was a Circassian slave, of exquisite beauty, who bore him a son called
Mustapha, whom, both on account of his birthright and merit, he destined to be
the heir of his crown. Roxalana, a Russian captive, soon supplanted the
Circassian, and gained the Sultan's heart. Having the address to retain the
conquest which she had made, she kept possession of his love without any rival
for many years, during which she brought him several sons and one daughter. All
the happiness, however, which she derived from the unbounded sway that she had
acquired over a monarch, whom one half of the world revered or dreaded, was
embittered by perpetual reflections on Mustapha's accession to the throne, and
the certain death of her sons, who she foresaw would be immediately sacrificed,
according to the barbarous jealousy of Turkish policy, to the safety of the new
Emperor. By dwelling continually on this melancholy idea, she came gradually to
view Mustapha as the enemy of her children, and to hate him with more than a
step-mother's ill will. This prompted her to wish his destruction, in order to
secure for one of her own sons the throne which was destined for him. Nor did
she want either ambition to attempt such a high enterprise, or the arts
requisite for carrying it into execution. Having prevailed on the Sultan to
give her only daughter in marriage to Rustan the Grand Vizier, she disclosed
her scheme to that crafty minister, who, perceiving that it was his own
interest to cooperate with her, readily promised his assistance toward
aggrandizing that branch of the royal line, to which he was now so nearly
allied.

AS soon as Roxalana had concerted her measures with this able confident, she
began to affect a wonderful zeal for the Mohammedan religion, to which Solomon
was superstitiously attached, and proposed to found and endow a royal Mosque, a
work of great expense, but deemed by the Turks meritorious in the highest
degree. The Mufti whom she consulted approved much of her pious intention; but,
having been gained and instructed by Rustan, told her that she being a slave
could derive no benefit herself from that holy deed, for all the merit of it
would accrue to Solomon, the master whose property she was. Upon this she
seemed to be overwhelmed with sorrow, and to sink into the deepest melancholy,
as if she had been disgusted with life and all its enjoyments. Solomon, who was
absent with the army, being informed of this dejection of mind, and of the
cause from which it proceeded, discovered all the solicitude of a lover to
remove it, and by a writing under his hand declared her a free woman. Roxalana
having gained this point, proceeded to build the Mosque, and reassumed her
usual cheerfulness and gaiety of spirit. But when Solomon, on his return to
Constantinople, sent an eunuch, according to the custom of the seraglio, to
bring her to partake of his bed, she, seemingly with deep regret, but in the
most peremptory manner, declined to follow the eunuch, declaring that what had
been an honor to her while a slave, became a crime, as she was now a free
woman, and that she would not involve either the Sultan or herself in the guilt
that must be contracted by such an open violation of the law of their prophet.
Solomon, whose passion this difficulty, as well as the affected delicacy which
gave rise to it, heightened and inflamed, had recourse immediately to the Mufti
for his direction. He replied, agreeably to the Koran, that Roxalana's scruples
were well founded, but added, artfully, in words which Rustan had taught him to
use, that it was in the Sultan's power to remove these difficulties, by
espousing her as his lawful wife. The amorous monarch closed eagerly with the
proposal, and solemnly married her according to the form of the Mohammedan
ritual; though by doing so, he disregarded a maxim of policy which the pride of
the Ottoman blood had taught all the Sultans since Bajezet I. to consider as
inviolable. From his time, none of the Turkish monarchs had married, because,
when he was vanquished and taken prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been
abused with barbarous insolence by the Tartars. That no similar calamity might
subject the Ottoman family to the like disgrace, the Sultans admitted none to
their bed but slaves, whose dishonor could not bring any such stain upon their
house.

BUT the more uncommon the step was, the more it convinced Roxalana of the
unbounded influence which she had acquired over the Sultan's heart; and
emboldened her to prosecute, with greater hopes of success, the scheme that she
had formed in order to destroy Mustapha. This young Prince having been
entrusted by his father, according to the practice of the Sultans in that age,
with the government of several different provinces, was at that time invested
with the administration in Diarbequir, the ancient Mesopotamia, which Solomon
had wrested from the Persians, and added to his empire. In all these different
commands, Mustapha had conducted himself with such cautious prudence as could
give no offense to his father, though at the same time, he governed with so
much moderation as well as justice, and displayed such valor and generosity as
rendered him equally the favorite of the people and the darling of the
soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice to his charge, that could impair
the high opinion which his father entertained of him. Roxalana's malevolence
was more refined, she turned his virtues against him, and made use of these as
engines for his destruction. She often mentioned, in Solyman's presence, the
splendid qualities of his son; she celebrated his courage, his liberality, his
popular arts, with malicious and exaggerated praise. As soon as she pereeived
that the Sultan heard these encomiums, which were often repeated, with
uneasiness; that suspicion of his son began to mingle itself with his former
esteem for him; and that by degrees he came to view him with jealousy and fear,
she introduced, as by accident, some discourse concerning the rebellion of his
father Selim against Bajazet his grandfather; she took notice of the bravery of
the veteran troops under Munstapha's command, and of the neighborhood of
Diarbequir to the territories of the Persian Sophi. Solyman's mortal enemy. By
these arts whatever remained of paternal tenderness was entirely extinguished,
and such passions were kindled in his breast, as gave all Roxalana's malignant
suggestions the color not only of probability but truth. A deep rooted hatred
succeeded, now, to his suspicions and fear of Mustapha. He appointed spies to
observe and report all his words and actions; he watched and stood on his guard
against him as his most dangerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart from Mustapha, Roxalana ventured upon
another step, and entreated Solomon to allow her own sons the liberty of
appearing at court, hoping that, by gaining access to their father, they might,
by their good qualities and dutiful deportment, insinuate themselves into that
place in his affections, which Mustapha had formerly held; and, though what she
demanded was contrary to the practice of the Ottoman family in that age, the
uxorious monarch granted her request. To all these female intrigues Rustan
added an artifice still more subtle, which completed the Sultan's delusion,
and heightened his jealousy and fear. He wrote to the Bashaws of the provinces
adjacent to Diarbequir, instructing them to send him regular intelligence of
Mustapha's proceedings in his government, and to each of them he gave a private
hint, flowing, in appearance, from his zeal for their interest, that nothing
would be more acceptable to the Sultan, than to receive favorable accounts of
a son, whom he destined to sustain the glory of the Ottoman name. The Bashaws,
ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and eager to pay court to their sovereign
at such an easy price, filled their letters with studied but fatal panegyricks
of Mustapha, representing him as a Prince worthy to succeed such an illustrious
father, and as endowed with talents which might enable him to emulate, perhaps
to equal his fame. These letters were industriously shown to Solomon, at the
seasons when it was known that they would make the deepest impression. Every
expression in recommendation of his son wounded him to the heart; he suspected
his principal officers of being ready to favor the most desperate attempts of
a Prince whom they were so fond to praise; and fancying that he saw them
already assaulting his throne with rebellious arms, he determined, while it was
yet in his power, to anticipate the blow, and to secure his own safety by his
son's death.

FOR this purpose, though under pretense of renewing the war against Persia, he
ordered Rustan to march toward Diarbequir at the head of a numerous army, and
to rid him of a son, whose life he deemed inconsistent with his own safety. But
that crafty minister did not choose to be loaded with the odium of having
executed this cruel order. As soon as he arrived in Syria he wrote to Solomon,
that the danger was so imminent as called for his immediate presence; that the
camp was full of Mustapha's emissaries; that many of the soldiers were
corrupted; that the affections of all leaned toward him; that he discovered a
negotiation which had been carried on with the Sophi of Persia, in order to
marry Mustapha with one his daughters; that he already felt both his talents
and his authority to be inadequate to the exigencies of such an arduous
conjecture, that the Sultan alone had sagacity to discern what resolution
should be taken in those circumstances, and power to carry that resolution into
execution.

THIS charge of courting the friendship of the Sophi, Roxalana and Rustan had
reserved as the last and most envenomed of all their calumnies. It operated
with the violence which they expected from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of
the Persians, and threw him into the wildest transports of rage. He set out
instantly for Syria, and hastened thither with all the precipitation and
impatience of fear and revenge. As soon as he joined his army near Aleppo, and
had concerted measures with Rustan, he sent a Chiaus or messenger of the court
to his son, requiring him to repair immediately to his presence. Mustapha,
though no stranger to his step-mother's machinations, or to Rustan's malice, or
to his father's violent temper, yet relying on his innocence, and hoping to
discredit the accusations of his enemies by the promptitude of his obedience,
followed the messenger without delay to Aleppo. The moment he arrived in the
camp, he was introduced into the Sultan's tent. As he entered it, he observed
nothing that could give him any alarm; no additional crowd of attendants, no
body of armed guards, but the same order and silence which always reign in the
Sultan's apartments. In a few minutes, however, several mutes appeared, at the
sight of whom Mustapha, knowing what was his doom, cried with a loud voice,
"Lo, my death!" and attempted to fly. The mutes rushed forward to seize him, he
resisted and struggled, demanding with the utmost earnestness to see the
Sultan; and despair, together with the hope of finding protection from the
soldiers, if he could escape out of the tent, animated him with such
extraordinary strength, that for some time, he bassled all the efforts of the
executioners. Solomon was within hearing of his son's cries, as well as of the
noise which the struggle occasioned. Impatient of this delay of his revenge,
and struck with terror at the thought of Mustapha's escaping, he drew aside the
curtain which divided the tent, and thrusting in his head, darted a fierce look
toward the mutes, and with wild and threatening gestures seemed to chide them
for sloth and timidity. At sight of his father's furious and unrelenting
countenance, Mustapha's strength failed, and his courage forsook him; the mutes
fastened the bowstring about his neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

THE dead body was exposed before the Sultan's tent. The soldiers gathered
round it, and contemplating that mournful object with astonishment, and sorrow,
and indignation, were ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to have broke
into the wildest excesses of rage. After giving vent to the first expressions
of their grief, they retired each man to his tent, and shutting themselves up,
bewailed in secret the cruel fate of their favorite; nor was there one of them
who tasted food or even water during the remainder of that day. Next morning,
the same solitude and silence reigned in the camp; and Solomon, being afraid
that some dreadful storm would follow this sullen calm, in order to appease the
enraged soldiers, deprived Rustan of the seals, ordered him to leave the camp,
and raised Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved in the army, to the dignity
of Vizier. This change, however, was made in concert with Rustan himself; that
crafty minister suggesting it as the only expedient which could save himself or
his master. But within a few months, when the resentment of the soldiers began
to subside, and the name of Mustapha to be forgotten, Achmet was strangled by
the Sultan's command, and Rustan re-instated in the office of Vizier. Together
with his former power, he reassumed the plan for extirminating the race of
Mustapha which he had concerted with Roxalana; and, as they were afraid that an
only son whom Mustapha had left, might grow up to avenge his death, they
redoubled their activity, and, by employing the same arts against him which
they had practiced against his father, they inspired Solomon with the same
fears, and prevailed on him to issue orders for putting to death that young
innocent Prince. These orders were executed, with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch,
who was dispatched to Bursa, the place were the Prince resided; and no rival
was left to dispute the Ottoman throne with the sons of Roxalana Angerii
Gislenii Bus^equii Legationis Turcicae Epistolae iv. Franc. 1615 p. 37. Thuan.
lib. 12. p. 432. Mem de Ribier. ii. 457. Mauroceni histor. Veaeta, lib. vii. p.
69.
.

SUCH a tragical scene, productive of so deep distress, seldom occurs but in
the history of the great monarchies of the East, where the force of the climate
works up and sublimes all the passions of the human mind into the greatest
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns enables them to act with
uncontrouled violence; but while it passed in the court of Solomon and engaged
his whole attention, Charles was pursuing with the utmost ardour a new scheme
for aggrandizing his family. About this time, Edward the sixth of England,
after a short reign, in which he displayed such virtues as filled his subjects
with sanguine hopes of being happy under his government, and made them bear
with patience all that they suffered from the weakness, the dissentions, and
the ambition of the ministers who assumed the administration during his
minority, was seized with a lingering distemper which threatened his life. The
Emperor no sooner received an account of this, than his ambition, always
attentive to seize every opportunity of acquiring an increase of power or of
territories to his son, suggested the thought of adding England to his other
kingdoms, by the marriage of Philip with the Princess Mary, the heir of
Edward's crown. Being apprehensive, however, that his son, who was then in
Spain, might decline a match with a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and
eleven years older than himself Play. hist. Council. Trid. v. ii. c. 13. p. 150.
; Charles determined, notwithstanding his own age and infirmities, to make
offer of himself as a husband to his cousin.

BUT though Mary was so far advanced in years, and destitute of every charm,
either of person or of manners, that could win affection, or command esteem,
Philip, without hesitation, gave his consent to the match proposed by his
father, and was willing, according to the usual maxim of Princes, to sacrifice
his inclination to his ambition. In order to insure success, the Emperor, even
before Edward's death, began to take such steps as might facilitate it. Upon
Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of England; the pretensions of the
lady Jane Gray proving as unfortunate, as they were ill founded. Charles sent
immediately a pompous embassy to London, to congratulate Mary on her accession
to the throne, and to propose the alliance with his son. The Queen, dazzled
with the prospect of marrying the heir of the greatest Monarch in Europe; fond
of uniting more closely with her mother's family, to which she had been always
warmly attached; and eager to secure the powerful aid which she knew would be
necessary toward carrying on her favorite scheme of re-establishing the
Romish religion in England, listened in the most favorable manner to the
proposal. Among her subjects, it met with a very different reception. Philip,
it was well known, contended for all the tenets of the church of Rome with a
sanguinary zeal, which exceeded the measure even of Spanish bigotry: this
alarmed all the numerous partisans of the Reformation. The Castilian
haughtiness and reserve were far from being acceptable to the English, who,
having several times seen their throne occupied by those who were born
subjects, had become accustomed to an unceremonious and familiar intercourse
with their sovereigns. They could not think, without the utmost uneasiness, of
admitting a foreign Prince to that influence in their councils, which the
husband of their Queen would naturally possess. They dreaded, both from
Philip's over-bearing temper, and from the maxims of the Spanish monarchy which
he had imbibed, that he would infuse ideas into the Queen's mind, dangerous to
the liberties of the nation, and would introduce foreign troops and money into
the kingdom to assist her in any attempt against them.

FULL of these apprehensions, the house of Commons, though in that age
extremely obsequious to the will of their Monarchs, presented a warm address
against the Spanish match; many pamphlets were published, representing the
dangerous consequences of the alliance with Spain, and describing Philip's
bigotry and arrogance in the most odious colors. But Mary, inflexible in all
her resolutions, paid no regard to the remonstrances of her Commons, or to the
sentiments of the people. The Emperor, having secured, by various arts, the
ministers whom he trusted most, they approved warmly of the match, and large
sums were remitted by him in order to gain the rest of the council. Cardinal
Pole, whom, the Pope, immediately upon Mary's accession, had dispatched as his
legate into England, in order to reconcile his native country to the sea of
Rome, was detained by the Emperor's command at Dillinghen, in Germany, lest by
his presence he should thwart Philip's pretensions, and employ his interest in
favor of his kinsman Courtnay Earl of Devonshire, whom the English ardently
wished their sovereign to choose for a husband Palav. hist. Council. Trid. v.
ii. c. 13. p. 150.
.

MEANWHILE, the negotiation was carried forward with the greatest rapidity, the
Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to every article in favor of England
which Mary's ministers either represented as necessary to soothe the people and
reconcile them to the match, or that was suggested by their own fears and
jealousy of a foreign master. The chief articles were, that Philip, during his
marriage with the Queen, should bear the title of King of England, but the
entire administration of affairs, as well as the sole disposal of all revenues,
offices, and benefices should remain with the Queen; that the heirs of the
marriage should, together with the crown of England, inherit the duchy of
Burgundy and the Low Countries; that if Prince Charles, Philip's only son by a
former marriage, should die without issue, his children by the Queen, whether
male or female, should succeed to the crown of Spain and all the Emperor's
hereditary dominions; that before the consummation of the marriage, Philip
should swear solemnly that he would retain no domestic who was not a subject
of the Queen, and would bring no foreigners into the kingdom that might give
umbrage to the English; that he would make no alteration in the constitution or
laws of England; that he would not carry the Queen, or any of his children born
of this marriage, out of the kingdom; that if the Queen should die before him
without issue, he should leave the crown to the lawful heir, without claiming
any right of administration whatever; that England should not, in consequence
of this marriage, be engaged in any war subsisting between France and Spain;
and that the alliance between France and England should remain in full force
Rymer's Foed. vol. xv. 377. 393. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 498.
.

BUT this treaty, though both the Emperor and Mary's ministers employed their
utmost address in framing it so as to please the English, was far from quieting
their fears and jealousies. They saw that words and promises were a feeble
security against the encroachments of an ambitious Prince, who, as soon as he
got possession of the power and advantages which the Queen's husband must
necessarily enjoy, could easily evade any of the articles that either limited
his authority, or obstructed his schemes. They were convinced that, the more
favorable the conditions of the present treaty were to England, the more
Philip would be tempted to violate them; and they dreaded that England, like
Naples, Milan, and the other countries annexed to the Spanish crown, would soon
feel the intolerable weight of its oppressive domination, and be constrained,
as these had been, to waste its wealth and vigor in wars wherein it had no
interest, and from which it could derive no advantage. These sentiments
prevailed so generally, that every part of the kingdom was filled with
discontent at the match, and with indignation against the advisers of it. Sir
Thomas Wyat, a gentleman of some note, and of good intentions toward the
public, took advantage of this, and roused the inhabitants of Kent to arms, in
order to save their country from a foreign yoke. Such numbers resorted in a
short time to his standard; he marched to London with such rapidity; and the
Queen was so unutterly provided for defense, that the aspect of affairs was
extremely threatening, and if any nobleman of distinction had joined the
malcontents, or had Wyat possessed talents equal, in any degree, to the
boldness of his enterprise, the insurrection must have proved fatal to Mary's
power. But all his measures were concerted with so little prudence, and
executed with such irresolution, that many of his followers forsook him; the
rest were dispersed by an handful of men; and he himself was taken prisoner,
without having made any effort worthy of the cause that he had undertaken, or
suitable to the ardour with which he engaged in it. He suffered the punishment
due to his rashness and rebellion. The Queen's authority was confirmed and
increased by her success in defeating this inconsiderate attempt to abridge it.
The lady Jane Gray, whose title the ambition of her relations had set up in
opposition to the Queen's, was, notwithstanding her youth and innocence,
brought to the scaffold. The lady Elizabeth, the Queen's sister, was observed
with the most jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was ratified by the
parliament.

PHILIP landed in England, with a magnificent retinue, celebrated his nuptials
with great solemnity, and though he could not lay aside his natural severity
and pride, or assume gracious and popular manners, he endeavored to conciliate
the favor of the English nobility by his extraordinary liberality. In case
that should fail of acquiring him such influence in the government of the
kingdom, as he aimed at obtaining, the Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand
men on the coast of Flanders, in readiness to embark for England, and to
support him in all his enterprises.

EMBOLDENED by all these favorable circumstances, Mary pursued the scheme of
extirpating the Protestant religion out of her dominions, with the most
precipitant zeal. The laws of Edward the sixth in favor of the Reformation
were repealed; the protestant clergy ejected; all the forms and rites of the
Popish worship were re-established; the nation was solemnly absolved from the
guilt which it had contracted during the period of its apostasy, and was
publicly reconciled to the church of Rome, by cardinal Pole, who immediately
after the Queen's marriage was permitted to continue his journey to England,
and to exercise his legantine functions with the most ample power. Not
satisfied with having overturned the Protestant church, and having established
her own system on its ruins, Mary insisted that all her subjects should conform
to the same mode of worship which she preferred; should profess their faith in
the same creed which she had approved; and abjure every practice or opinion
that was deemed repugnant to either of them. Powers, altogether unknown in the
English constitution, were vested in certain persons appointed to take
cognizance of heresy, and they proceeded to exercise them with more than
inquisitorial severity. The prospect of danger, however, did not intimidate the
teachers of the Protestant doctrines, who believed that they were contending
for truths of the utmost consequence to the happiness of mankind. They boldly
avowed their sentiments, and were condemned to that cruel death which the
church of Rome reserves for its enemies. This shocking punishment was inflicted
with that barbarity which the rancour of false zeal alone can inspire. The
English, who are inferior in humanity to no people in Europe, and remarkable
for the mildness of their public executions, beheld, with astonishment and
horror, persons who had filled the most respectable stations in their church,
and who were venerable on account of their age, their piety and their
literature, condemned to endure torments, to which even the most atrocious
criminals were not subjected.

THIS extreme rigor did not accomplish the end at which Mary aimed. The
patience and fortitude with which these martyrs for the Reformation submitted
to their suffering, the heroic contempt of death expressed by persons of every
rank, and age, and sex, confirmed many more in the Protestant faith, than the
threats of their enraged persecutors could frighten into apostasy. The business
of such as were entrusted with trying of heretics grew upon them, and appeared
to be as endless as it was odious. The Queen's ablest ministers became sensible
how impolitick as well as dangerous it was to irritate the people, by the
frequent spectacle of public executions, which they detested both as unjust and
cruel. Even Philip was so thoroughly convinced of her having run to an excess
of rigor, that, on this occasion, he assumed a part to which he was little
accustomed, becoming an advocate for moderation and lenity.

BUT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingratiate himself with the English, they
discovered a constant jealousy and distrust of all his intentions; and when
some members, who had been gained by the court, ventured to move in the house
of Commons that the nation ought to assist the Emperor, the Queen's
father-in-law, in his war against France, the proposal was rejected with
general dissatisfaction. A motion which was made, that the parliament should
give its consent that Philip might be publicly crowned as the Queen's husband,
met with such a cold reception that it was instantly withdrawn.

MEANWHILE, the King of France had observed the progress of the Emperor's
negotiation in England with much uneasiness. The great accession of territories
as well as reputation which his enemy would acquire by the marriage of his son
with the Queen of such a powerful kingdom was obvious and formidable. He easily
foresaw that the English, notwithstanding all their fears and precautions,
would be soon drawn in to take part in the quarrels on the continent, and be
compelled to act in subserviency to the Emperor's ambitious schemes. For this
reason, Henry had given it in charge to his ambassador at the court of London,
to employ all his address in order to defeat or retard the treaty of marriage;
and as there was not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in France, whom he
could propose to the Queen as a husband, he instructed him to cooperate with
such of the English as wished they sovereign to marry one of her own subjects.
But the Queen's ardour and precipitation, in closing Godwin's Annals of Q. Mary
ap. Kennett. v. ii. p. 329. Burnet's hist. of Rofor. ii. 298. 305.
with the first overtures in favor of Philip, having rendered all his
endeavors ineffectual, Henry was so far from thinking it prudent to give any
aid to the English malcontents, though earnestly solicited by Wyat and their
other leaders, who tempted him to take them under his protection, by offers of
great advantage to France, that he commanded his ambassador to congratulate the
Queen in the warmest terms upon the suppression of the insurrection.

BUT, notwithstanding these external professions, he dreaded so much the
consequence of this alliance, which more than compensated for all that the
Emperor had lost in Germany, that he determined to carry on his military
operations both in the Low Countries, and in Italy, with extraordinary vigor,
in order that he might compel Charles to accept of an equitable peace, before
his daughter-in-law could surmount the aversion of her subjects to a war on the
continent, and prevail on them to assist the Emperor either with money or
troops. For this purpose, he exerted himself to the utmost in order to have a
numerous army early assembled on the frontiers of the Netherlands, and while
one part of it laid waste the open country of Artois, the main body, under the
Constable Montmorency, advanced toward the provinces of Liege and Hainant by
the forest of Ardennes.

THE campaign was opened with the siege of Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen
of Hungary, the governess of the Low Countries, had fortified at great expense;
but, being destitute of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in six days.
Henry, elated with this success, put himself at the head of his army, and
investing Bouvines, took it by assault, after a short resistance. With equal
facility he became master of Dinant; and then, turning to the left, bent his
march toward the province of Artois. The vast sums which the Emperor had
remitted into England, had so exhausted his treasury, as to render his
preparations, at this juncture, flower and more dilatory than usual. He had no
body of troops to make head against the French at their first entrance into his
territories; and though he drew together all the forces in the country, in the
utmost hurry, and gave the command of them to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, they
were in no condition to face an enemy so far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his activity and good conduct, made up for his want of
troops. By watching all the motions of the French at a distance, and by choosing
his own posts with such skill as put it out of their power either to form any
siege of consequence or to attack him, he obliged them to fall back for want of
subsistence toward their own frontiers, after having burnt all the open towns,
and having plundered the country through which they marched with a cruelty and
license more becoming a body of light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.

BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his army without attempting some conquest
adequate to the vast preparations, as well as sanguine hopes with which he had
opened the campaign, invested Renti, a place deemed in that age of great
importance, as, by its situation on the confines of Artois and Boulonnais, it
covered the former province, and protected the parties which had made
incursions into the latter. The town, which was strongly fortified and provided
with a numerous garrison, made a gallant defense; but being warmly pressed by a
powerful army, it must soon have yielded. The Emperor, who at that time enjoyed
a short interval of ease from the gout, was so sollicitous to save it, that,
although he could bear no other motion but that of a litter, he instantly put
himself at the head of his army, which having received several reinforcements
was now strong enough to approach the enemy. The French were eager to decide by
a battle, what should be the fate of Renti, and expected it from the Emperor's
arrival in the camp; but Charles avoided it with great industry, and as he had
nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped to accomplish that, without
exposing himself to the consequences of such a dangerous and doubtful event.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a dispute, about a post which both armies
endeavored to seize, brought on an engagement which proved almost general. The
Duke of Guise, who commanded the wing of the French which stood the brunt of
the combat, displayed valor and conduct worthy of the defender of Metz; the
Imperialists, after an obstinate struggle, were repulsed; the French remained
masters of the post in dispute; and if the Constable, either from his natural
caution and slowness, or from unwillingness to support a rival whom he hated,
had not delayed bringing up the main body to second the impression which Guise
had made, the rout of the enemy must have been complete. The Emperor,
notwithstanding the loss which he had sustained, continued in the same camp;
and the French, being straitened for provisions, and finding it impossible to
carry on the siege in the face of an hostile army, quitted their intrenchments.
They retired openly, courting the enemy to approach, rather than shunning an
engagement.

BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered them to march off unmolested. As
soon as his troops entered their own country, Henry threw garrisons into the
frontier towns, and dismissed the rest of the army. This encouraged the
Imperialists to push forward with a considerable body of troops into Picardy,
and by laying waste the country with fire and sword, they endeavored to
revenge themselves for the ravages which the French had committed in Hainault
and Artois Thuan. 460, etc. Haraei Ann. Beab. 674.
. But as they were not able to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more than the enemy had done by this cruel and inglorious method of
carrying on the war.

MEANWHILE, the arms of France were still more unsuccessful in Italy. The
footing which the French had acquired in Siena occasioned much uneasiness to
Cosmo di Medici, the most sagacious and enterprizing of all the Italian
Princes. He dreaded the neighborhood of a powerful people, to whom all who
favored the ancient republican government in Florence would have recourse, as
to their natural protector against that absolute authority which the Emperor
had enabled him to usurp; he knew how odious he was to the French, on account
of his attatchment to the Imperial party; and he foresaw that if they were
permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tuscany would soon feel the effects of
their resentment. For these reasons, he wished with the utmost solicitude for
the expulsion of the French out of the Sienese, before they had time to
establish themselves thoroughly in the country, or to receive such
reinforcements from France as would render it dangerous to attack them. As
this, however, was properly the Emperor's business, who was called by his
interest as well as honor to dislodge these formidable intruders into the
heart of his dominions, Cosmo labored to throw the whole burden of the
enterprise on him; and on that account had given no assistance, during the
former campaign, but by advancing some small sums of money toward payment of
the Imperial troops.

BUT as the defense of the Netherlands engrossed all the Emperor's attention,
and his remittances into England had drained his treasury, it was obvious that
his operations in Italy would be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly perceived
that, if he himself did not take part openly in the war, and act with vigor,
the French would scarce meet any annoyance. As his situation rendered this
resolution necessary and unavoidable, his next care was to execute it in such a
manner, that he might derive from it some other advantage, beside that of
driving the French out of his neighborhood. With this view, he dispatched an
envoy to Charles, and offered to declare war against France, and to reduce
Siena at his own charges, on condition that he should be repaid whatever he
should expend in the enterprise, and be permitted to re^m all his conquests
until his demands were fully satisfied. Charles, to whom, at this juncture, the
war against Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had neither expedient nor
resource that could enable him to carry it on with proper vigor, closed gladly
with this overture; and Cosmo, well acquainted with the low state of the
Imperial finaces, flattered himself that the Emperor, finding it impossible to
re-imburse him, would suffer him to keep quiet possession of whatever places he
should conquer Adriani Istoria de suoi tempi, vol. i. 662.
.

FULL of these hopes, he made great preparations for war, and as the French
King had turned the strength of his arms against the Netherlands, he did not
despair of assembling such a body of men, as would prove more than a sufficient
match for any force which he could bring into the field in Italy. He
endeavored to obtain assistance from the Pope, or at least to secure his
remaining neutral, by giving one of his daughters to that Pontiff's nephew. He
attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini, whose family had been long attached to
the French party, from his ancient confederates, by bestowing on him another of
his daughters; and, what was of greater consequence than either of these, he
engaged John James Medecino, Marquis of Marignano, to take the command of his
army Adriani Istoria, vol. i. p. 663.
. This officer, from a very low condition in life, had raised himself, through
all the ranks of service, to high command, and had displayed talents and
acquired reputation in war, which entitled him to be placed on a level with the
greatest generals of that martial age. Having attained a station of eminence so
disproportionate to his birth, he labored with a fond solicitude to conceal
his original obscurity, by giving out that he was descended of the family of
Medici, to which honor the casual resemblance of his name was his only
pretension. Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such an easy rate,
flattered his vanity in this point, acknowledged him as a relation, and
permitted him to assume the arms of his family: Medecino, eager to serve the
head of that fa^y, of which he now considered himself as a branch, ^lied with
wonderful zeal and assiduity to raise troops; and as, during his long service,
he had acquired great credit with the leaders of those mercenary bands, which
forced the strength of Italian armies, he engaged the most eminent of them to
follow Cosmo's standard.

To oppose this able general, and the formidable army which he had assembled,
the King of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Florentine nobleman, who had
long resided in France, as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to high
reputation and command in the army. He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who, in
the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-seven, had concurred with such
ardour in the attempt to expel the family of Medici out of Florence, and to
re-establish the ancient republican form of government; and who had perished in
the undertaking. The son inherited the implacable aversion to the Medici, as
well as the same enthusiastic zeal for the liberty of Florence, which had
animated his father, whose death he was impatient to revenge. Henry flattered
himself that his army would make rapid progress under a general, whose zeal to
promote his interest was roused and seconded by such powerful passions;
especially as he had allotted him, for the scene of action, his native country,
in which he had many powerful partisans ready to facilitate all his operations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might appear which induced Henry to make
this choice, it proved fatal to the interests of France in Italy. Cosmo, as
soon as he heard that the mortal enemy of his family was appointed to take the
command in Tuscany, concluded that the King of France aimed at something more
than the protection of the Sienese, and saw the necessity of making
extraordinary efforts, not merely to reduce Siena, but to save himself from
destruction Pecci Memoire di Siena, vol. iv. p. 103, etc.
. At the same time, the Cardinal of Ferara, who had the entire direction of the
French affairs in Italy, considered Strozzi as a formidable rival in power;
and, in order to prevent him from acquiring any incre^ of authority from
success, he was extremely remi^ supplying him either with money to pay his
troops, o^ with provisions to support them. Strozzi himself, blinded by his
resentment against the Medici, pushed on his operations with impetuosity of
revenge, rather than with the caution and prudence becoming a great general.

AT first, however, he attacked several towns in the territories of Florence,
with such vigor, as obliged Medicino, in order to check his progress, to
withdraw the greater part of his army from Siena, which he had invested before
Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained the whole burden of military
operations, the expense of which must have exhausted his revenues, neither the
viceroy of Naples nor governor of Milon were in condition to afford him any
aid; and as the troops which Medecino had left in the camp before Siena could
attempt nothing against it during his absence; it was Strozzi's business to
have protracted the war, and to have transferred the seat of it into the
territories of Florence; but the hope of ruining the enemy with one decisive
blow, precipitated him into a general engagement not far from Marciano. The
armies were nearly equal in number; but a body of Italian cavalry, in which
Strozzi placed great confidence, having fled, either through the treachery or
cowardice of the officers who commanded it, without making any resistance, the
infantry remained exposed to the attacks of all Medecino's troops. Encouraged,
however, by Strozzi's presence and example, who, after receiving a dangerous
wound in endeavoring to rally the cavalry, placed himself at the head of the
infantry, and manifested an admirable presence of mind, as well as
extraordinary valor, they stood their ground with great firmness, and repulsed
such of the enemy as ventured to approach them. But these gallant troops, being
surrounded at last on every side, and torn in pieces by a battery of cannon
which Medecino brought to bear upon them, the Plorentine cavalry broke in on
their flanks, and ^ ^neral rout ensued. Strozzi, faint with the loss ^ood, and
deeply affected with the fatal consequences of his own rashness, found the
utmost difficulty in making his escape with a handful of men P^cci Memory
della Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.
.

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege of Siena with his victorious
troops, and as Strozzi could not, after the utmost efforts of activity, collect
as many men as to form the appearance of a regular army, he had leisure to
carry on his approaches against the town without molestation. But the Sienese,
instead of sinking into despair upon this cruel disappointment of their only
hope of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves to the utmost
extremity, with that undaunted fortitude, which the love of liberty alone can
inspire. This generous resolution was warmly seconded by Monluc, who commanded
the French garrison in the town. The active and enterprizing courage which he
had displayed on many occasions had procured him this command; and as he had
ambition which aspired at the highest military dignities, without any
pretensions to attain them but what he could derive from merit, he determined
to distinguish his defense of Siena by extraordinary efforts of valor and
perseverance. For this purpose, he, with unwearied industry, repaired and
strengthened the fortifications; he trained the citizens to the use of arms,
and accustomed them to go through the fatigues and dangers of service in common
with the soldiers; and as the enemy were extremely strict in guarding all the
avenues to the city, he husbanded the provisions in the magazines with the most
parsimonious oeconom, and prevailed on the soldiers, as well as the citizens,
to restrict themselves to a very moderate daily allowance for their
subsistence. Medecino, though his army was not numerous enough to storm the
town by open force, ventured twice to assault it by surprise, but he was
received each time with so much spirit, and repulsed with such loss, as
discouraged him from repeating the attempt, and left him no hopes of reducing
the town but by famine.

WITH this view, he fortified his own camp with great care, occupied all the
posts of strength round the place, and having entirely cut off the besieged
from any communication with the adjacent country, he waited patiently until
necessity should compel them to open their gates. But the enthusiastic zeal of
the citizens for liberty, made them despise the inconveniences occasioned by
scarcity of provisions, and even supported them long under all the miseries of
famine; Monluc, by his example and exhortations, taught his soldiers to vie
with them in patience and abstinence; and it was not until they had withstood a
siege of ten months, until they had eaten up all the horses, dogs, and other
animals in the place, and were reduced almost to their last morsel of bread,
that they proposed a capitulation. Even then, they demanded honorable terms;
and as Cosmo, though no stranger to the extremity of their condition, was
afraid that despair might prompt them to venture upon some wild enterprise, he
immediately granted them conditions more favorable than they could have
expected.

THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's name, who engaged to take the
republic of Siena under the protection of the Empire; he promised to maintain
the ancient liberties of the city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise
of their former authority, to secure the citizens in the undisturbed possession
of their privileges and property; he granted an ample and unlimited pardon to
all who had born arms against him; he reserved to himself the right of placing
a garrison in the town, but engaged not to rebuild the citadel without the
consent of the citizens. Monluc and his French garrison were allowed to march
out with all the honors of war.

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitulation, so far as depended on him with
great exactness. No violence or insult whatever was offered to the inhabitants,
and the French garrison was received with all the respect due to its spirit and
bravery. But many of the citizens suspecting from the extraordinary facility
with which they had obtained such favorable conditions, that the Emperor, as
well as Cosmo, would take the first opportunity of violating them and
disdaining to possess a precarious liberty, which depended on the will of
another, abandoned the place of their nativity, and accompanied the French to
Montee-Alcino, Porto Ercole, and other small towns in the territory of the
republic. They established in Montee-Alcino the same model of government to
which they had been accustomed at Siena, and appointing magistrates with the
same titles and jurisdiction, solaced themselves with this image of their
ancient liberty.

THE fears of the Sienese concerning the fate of their country were not
imaginary, or their suspicion of the Emperor and Cosmo ill-founded; for no
sooner had the Imperial troops taken possession of the town, than Cosmo,
without regarding the articles of capitulation, not only displaced the
magistrates who were in office, and nominated new ones devoted to his interest,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up their arms to persons whom he
appointed to receive them. They submitted to the former from necessity, though
with all the reluctance and regret which men accustomed to liberty feel in
obeying the first commands of a master. They did not yield the same tame
obedience to the latter; and many persons of distinction, rather than degrade
themselves, by surrendering their arms, from the rank of freemen to the
condition of slaves, fled to their countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and chose to
endure all the hardships, and encounter all the dangers which they had reason
to expect in that new station, where they had fixed the seat of their republic.

COSMO, not reckoning himself secure while such numbers of implacable and
desperate enemies were settled in his neighborhood, and retained any degree of
power, solicited Medecino to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their strength and spirits, after the many
calamities which they had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his army was
much weakened by hard duty during the siege of Siena, to invest Porto Ercole;
and the fortifications being both slight and incomplete, the besieged were soon
compelled to open their gates. An unexpected order which Medecino received from
the Emperor to detach the greater part of his troops into Piedmont, prevented
farther operations, and permitted the Sienese exiles to reside for some time
undisturbed in Monte-Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen who remained at
Siena, were not yet at the end of their sufferings; for the Emperor instead of
adhering to the articles of capitulation, granted his son Philip the
investiture of that city and all its dependencies; and Francis de Toledo, in
the name of their new master, proceeded to settle the civil and military
government, treated them like a conquered people, and subjected them to the
Spanish yoke, without paying any regard whatever to their privileges or
established forms of policy Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 526. 537. Joan.
Camerarii adnot. rer. praecipuarum ab anno 1550 ad 1561 ap Freherum, vol. iii.
p. 564. Pecci Memoric ^oll a Siena, iv. 164, etc.
.

THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been so feeble, for some time, and its
commanders so inactive that the Emperor, in order to give vigor to his
operations in that, quarter, found it necessary not only to call off Medecino's
troops from Tuscany, while in the career of conquest, but to employ in Piedmont
a general of such reputation and abilities, as might counterbalance the great
military talents of the Marchal Brissac, who was at the head of the French
forces in that country.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that purpose; but it was as much the effect
of a court intrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's merit, which led him to
this choice. Alva had long attended Philip with the utmost assiduity, and had
endeavored to work himself into his confidence by all the insinuating arts of
which his haughty and inflexible nature was capable. As he nearly resembled
that Prince in many features of his character, he began to gain much of his
good will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favorite, who dreaded the progress
which this formidable rival made in his master's affections, had the address to
prevail with the Emperor to name Alva to this command. The Duke, though
sensible that he owed this distinction to the malicious arts of an enemy, who
had no other aim than to remove him at a distance from court, was of such
punctilious honor, that he would not decline a command that appeared dangerous
and difficult, but, at the same time, so haughty that he would not accept of it
but on his own terms, insisting on being appointed the Emperor's Vicar General
in Italy, with the supreme military command in all the Imperial and Spanish
territories in that country. Charles granted all his demands; and he took
possession of his new dignity with almost unlimited authority.

HIS first operations, however, were neither proportioned to his former
reputation and the extensive powers with which he was invested, nor did they
come up to the Emperor's expectations. Brissac had under his command an army
which, though inferior in number to the Imperialists, was composed of chosen
troops, which having grown old in service in that country, where every town was
fortified, and every castle capable of being defended, were perfectly
acquainted with the manner of carrying on war there. By their valor, and his
own good conduct, Brissac not only defeated all the attempts of the
Imperialists, but added new conquests to the territories of which he was
formerly master. Alva, after having boasted with his usual arrogance, that he
would drive the French out of Piedmont in a few weeks, was obliged to retire
into winter quarters, with the ignominy of being unable to preserve entire that
part of the country of which the Emperor had hitherto kept possession Thuan.
lib. xv. 52^. Guieb^^^n Hist. de S^voye, tom. i. 670.
.

AS the operations of this campaign in Piedmont were indecisive, those in the
Netherlands were inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor King of France being
able to bring into the field an army strong enough to undertake any enterprise
of moment. But what Charles wanted in force he endeavored to supply by a bold
stratagem, the success of which would have been equal to that of the most
vigorous campaign. During the siege of Metz, Leonard Father Guardian of a
convent of Franciscans in that city had, by his attachment to the French
interest, insinuated himself far into the esteem and favor of the Duke of
Guise. Being a man of an active and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
useful both in animating the inhabitants to sustain with patience all the
hardships of the siege, and in procuring intelligence of the enemies designs
and motions. The merit of these important services, together with the warm
recommendations of the Duke of Guise, secured him such high confidence with
Vielleville, who was appointed governor of Metz, when Guise left the town, that
he was permitted to converse or correspond with whatever persons he chose, and
nothing that he did created any suspicion. This monk, from the levity natural
to bold and projecting adventurers; or from resentment against the French, who
had not bestowed on him such rewards as he thought due to his own merit; or
tempted, by the unlimited confidence which was placed in him, to imagine that
he might carry on and accomplish any scheme with perfect security; formed a
design of betraying Metz to the Imperialists.

HE communicated his intentions to the Queen-dowager of Hungary, who governed
the Low Countries in name of her brother. She approving, without any scruple,
an act of treachery, from which the Emperor might derive such signal advantage,
assisted the Father Guardian in concerting the most proper plan for ensuring
its success. They agreed that the Father Guardian should endeavor to gain the
monks of his convert to concur in promoting the design; that he should
introduce into the convent a certain number of chosen soldiers, disguised in
the habit of friars; that when every thing was ripe for execution, the governor
of Thionville should march toward Metz in the night with a considerable body
of troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts; that while the garrison was
employed in resisting the assailants, the monks should set fire to the town in
different places; that the soldiers who lay concealed should sally out of the
convent, and attack those who defended the ramparts in the rear. Amidst the
universal terror and confusion, which events so unexpected would occasion, it
was not doubted but that the Imperialists might become masters of the town. As
a recompense for this service the Father Guardian stipulated that he should be
appointed bishop of Metz, and ample rewards were promised to such of his monks
as should be most active in cooperating with him.

THE Father Guardian accomplished what he had undertaken to perform with great
secrecy and dispatch. By his authority and arguments, as well as by the
prospect of wealth or honors which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He introduced into the convent, as
many soldiers as were thought sufficient, without being suspected. The governor
of Thionville, apprised in due time of the design, had assembled a proper
number of troops for executing it; and the moment approached, which probably
would have wrested from Henry the most important of all his conquests.

BUT happily for France, on the very day that was fixed for striking the blow,
Vielleville, an able and vigilant officer, received information from a spy whom
he entertained at Thionville, that certain Franciscan friars resorted
frequently thither, and were admitted to many private conferences with the
governor, who was carrying on preparations for some military enterprise with
great dispatch, but with a most mysterious secrecy. This was sufficient to
awaken Vielleville's suspicions. Without communicating these to any person, he
instantly visited the convent of Franciscans; detected the soldiers who were
concealed there; and forced them to discover as much as they knew concerning
the nature of the enterprise. The Father Guardian, who had gone to Thionville
that he might put the last hand to his machinations, was seized at the gate as
he returned; and he, in order to save himself from the rack, revealed all the
circumstances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVILLE not satisfied with having seized the traitors, and having
frustrated their schemes, was sollicitous to take advantage of the discoveries
which he had made, so as to be revenged on the Imperialists. For this purpose
he marched out with the best troops in his garrison, and placing these in
ambush near the road, by which the father guardian had informed him that the
governor of Thionville would approach Metz, he fell upon the Imperialists with
great fury, as they advanced in perfect security, without suspecting any danger
to be near. Confounded at this sudden attack, by an enemy whom they expected to
surprise, they made little resistance; and a great part of the troops employed
in this service, among which were many persons of distinction, was killed or
taken prisoners. Before next morning, Vielleville returned to Metz in triumph.

NO resolution was taken for some time concerning the fate of the Father
Guardian and his monks, the framers and conductors of this dangerous
conspiracy. Regard for the honor of a body so numerous and respectable as the
Franciscans, and unwillingness to afford a subject of triumph to the enemies of
the Romish church by their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this delay. But at
length, the necessity of inflicting exemplary punishment upon them, in order to
deter others from venturing to commit the same crime, became so evident, that
orders were issued to proceed to their trial. Their guilt was made apparent by
the clearest evidence; and sentence of death was passed upon the Father
Guardian together with twenty monks. On the evening previous to the day fixed
for their execution, the jailor took them out of the dungeons in which they had
hitherto been confined separately, and shut them all up in one great room, that
they might confess their sins one to another, and join together in preparing
for a future state. But as soon as they were left alone, instead of employing
themselves in the religious exercises suitable to their condition, they began
to reproach the Father Guardian, and four of the senior monks, who had been
most active in seducing them, for their inordinate ambition, which had brought
such misery on them, and such disgrace upon their order. From reproaches they
proceeded to curses and exercrations, and at last in a frenzy of rage and
despair, they fell upon them with such violence, that they murdered the Father
Guardian on the spot, and so disabled the other four, that it became necessary
to carry them next morning in a cart, together with the dead body of the Father
Guardian to the place of execution. Six of the youngest were pardoned, the rest
suffered the punishment which their crime merited Thuan. lib. xv. p. 522.
Belcar. Com. Rer. Gal. 866. Memoires da Marech. Viellevllie, par M. Charloix,
tom. iii. p. 249, etc. p. 347. Par. 1757.
.

THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length of the war, carried it on in this
languishing manner, neither of them showed any disposition to listen to
overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole indeed labored with all the zeal becoming
his piety and humanity, to re-establish concord among the Princes of
Christendom. He had not only persuaded his mistress, the Queen of England, to
enter warmly into his sentiments and to offer her mediation to the contending
powers, but had prevailed both on the Emperor and King of France to send their
plenipotentiaries to a village between Gravelines and Ardres. He himself,
together with Gardener bishop of Winchester repaired thither in order to
preside as mediators in the conferences, which were to be held for adjusting
all the points in difference. But though both the monarchs committed this
negotiation to those ministers, in whom they placed the greatest confidence, it
was soon evident that they came together with no sincere desire of
accommodation. Each proposed articles so extravagant that they could have no
hopes of their being accepted. Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his zeal,
address and invention, in order to persuade them to relinquish such extravagant
demands, and to consent to the substitution of more equal conditions, became
sensible of the folly of wasting time, in attempting to reconcile those, whom
their obstinacy rendered irreconcilable, broke off the conference, and
returned into England Thuan. lib. xv. p. 523. Mem. de Ribier. tom. ii. p. 613.
.

DURING these transactions in other parts of Europe, Germany enjoyed such
profound tranquillity, as afforded the diet full leisure to deliberate, and to
establish proper regulations concerning a point of the greatest consequence to
the internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty of Passau in one thousand five
hundred and fifty-two, it had been referred to the next diet of the Empire to
confirm and perfect the plan of religious pacification, which was there agreed
upon. The terror and confusion with which the violent commotions excited by
Albert of Brandenburgh had filled the Empire, as well as the constant attention
which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary, had hitherto
prevented the holding a diet, though it had been summoned soon after the
conclusion of the treaty, to meet at Augsburg.

BUT as a diet was now necessary on many accounts, Ferdinand about the
beginning of this year had repaired to Augsburg. Though few of the Princes were
present either in person or by their deputies, he opened the assembly by a
speech, in which he proposed the termination of the dissentions, to which the
new tenets and controversies with regard to religion had given rise, not only
as the first and great business of the diet, but as the point which both the
Emperor and he had most at heart. He represented the innumerable obstacles
which the Emperor had to surmount before he could procure the convocation of a
general council, as well as the fatal accidents which had for some time
retarded, and had at last suspended the consultations of that assembly. He
observed that experience had already taught them how vain it was to expect any
remedy for evils, which demanded immediate redress, from a general council, the
assembling of which would either be prevented, or its deliberations be
interrupted by the dissentions and hostilities of the Princes of Christendom;
That a national council in Germany, which, as some imagined, might be called
with greater ease, and deliberate with more perfect security, was an assembly
of an unprecedented nature, the jurisdiction of which was uncertain in its
extent, and the form of its proceedings undefined; That in his opinion there
remained but one method for composing their unhappy differences, which though
it had been often tried without success, might yet prove effectual if it were
attempted with a better and more pacific spirit than had appeared on fomer
occasions, and that was to choose a few men of learning, abilities and
moderation, who by discussing the disputed articles in an amicable conference,
might explain them in such a manner as to bring the contending parties either
to unite in sentiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, and dispersed over the Empire,
revived the fears and jealousies of the Protestants; Ferdinand, they observed
with much surprise, had not once mentioned, in his address to the diet, the
treaty of Passau, the stipulations in which they considered as the great
security of their religious liberty. The suspicions to which this gave rise
were confirmed by the accounts which they daily received of the extreme rigor
with which Ferdinand treated their Protestant brethren in his hereditary
dominions, and as it was natural to consider his actions as the surest
indication of his intentions, this diminished their confidence in those pompous
professions of moderation or of zeal for the re-establishment of concord, to
which his practice was so utterly repugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Morone, whom the Pope had appointed to attend the
diet as his nuncio, completed their conviction, and left them no room to doubt
that some dangerous machination was forming against the peace or safety of the
Protestant church. Julius elated with the unexpected return of the English
nation from apostasy, began to flatter himself that the spirit of mutiny and
revolt having now spent its force, the happy period was come when the church
might resume its ancient authority, and he obeyed by the people with the same
tame submission as formerly. Full of these hopes, he had sent Morone to
Augsburg with instructions to employ his eloquence in order to excite the
Germans to imitate the laudable example of the English, and his political
address in order to prevent any decree of the diet to the detriment of the
catholic faith. As Morone inherited from his father, the chancellor of Milan,
uncommon talents for negotiation and intrigue, he could scarce have failed of
embarrassing the measures of the Protestants in the diet or of defeating
whatever they aimed at obtaining in it for their farther security.

BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from all the danger which they had
reason to apprehend from Morone's presence. Julius, by abandoning himself to
pleasures and amusements no less unbecoming his age than his character, having
contracted such habits of dissipation, that any serious occupation, especially
if attended with difficulty, became an intolerable burden to him, had long
resisted the solicitations of his nephew to hold a consistory, because he
expected there a violent opposition to his schemes in favor of that young man.
But when all the pretexts which he could invent for eluding his request were
exhausted, and at the same time his indolent aversion to business continued to
grow upon him, he feigned indisposition rather than yield to his nephew's
importunity; and that he might give the deceit a greater color of probability,
he not only confined himself to his apartment, but changed his usual diet and
manner of life. By persisting too long in acting this ridiculous part, he
contracted a real disease, of which he died in a few days, leaving his infamous
minion the Cardinal de Monte to bear his name, and to disgrace the dignity
which he had conferred upon him Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum. p. 320.
Thuan. lib. xv. 517.
. As soon as Morone heard of his death, he set out abruptly from Augsburg,
where he had resided only a few days, that he might be present at the election
of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being thus removed, the Protestants
soon became sensible that their conjectures concerning Ferdinand's intentions,
how plausible soever, were ill-founded, and that he had no thoughts of
violating the articles favorable to them in the treaty of Passau. Charles,
from the time that Maurice had defeated all his schemes in the Empire, and
overturned the great system of religious and civil despotism, which he had
almost established there, gave little attention to the internal government of
Germany, and permitted his brother to pursue whatever measures he judged most
salutary and expedient. Ferdinand, less ambitious and enterprizing than the
Emperor, instead of resuming a plan, which he, with power and resources so far
superior, had failed of accomplishing, endeavored to attach the Princes of the
Empire to his family by an administration uniformly moderate and equitable. To
this he gave, at present, particular attention, because his situation at this
juncture rendered it necessary to court their favor and support with more than
usual assiduity.

CHARLES had again resumed his favorite project of acquiring the Imperial
crown for his son Philip, which the ill-reception it had met with when first
proposed had obliged him to intermit, but had not persuaded him to relinquish.
This led him warmly to renew his requests to his brother that he would accept
of some compensation for his prior right of succession, and sacrifice that to
the grandeur of the house of Austria. Ferdinand who was as little disposed, as
formerly, to give such an extraordinary proof of self-denial, being sensible
that, in order to defeat this scheme, not only the most inflexible firmness on
his part, but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the Empire in behalf
of his title, were requisite; was willing to purchase their favor by
gratifying them in every point that they deemed interesting or essential.

ON the other hand, the Turks, after having wrested from him great part of his
Hungarian territories, were ready to attack the provinces still subject to his
authority with a formidable army, against which he could bring no equal force
into the field, unless the diet should grant him immediate and extraordinary
aid. For this he could not hope if the internal peace of the empire were not
established on a foundation solid in itself, and which should appear, even to
the Protestants, so secure and so permanent, as might not only allow them to
engage in a distant war with safety, but encourage them to act with vigor.

A STEP taken by the Protestants themselves, a short time after the opening of
the diet, rendered him still more cautious of giving them any new cause of
offense. As soon as the publication of Ferdinand's speech created the fears and
suspicions which have been mentioned, the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh,
together with the Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and renewing the
ancient treaty of confraternity which had long united their families, they
added to it a new article, by which the contracting parties bound themselves to
adhere to the confession of Augsburgh, and to maintain the doctrine which it
contained in their respective dominions Chytrai Saxonia, 480.
.

FERDINAND, influenced by all these considerations, employed his utmost address
in conducting the deliberations of the diet so as not to excite the jealousy of
a party on whose friendship he depended, and whose enmity, as they had not only
taken the alarm, but had begun to prepare for their defense, he had so much
reason to dread. The members of the diet readily agreed to Ferdinand's proposal
of taking the state of religion into consideration, previous to any other
business. But, as soon as they entered upon it, both parties discovered all the
zeal and animosity which a subject so interesting naturally engenders, and
which the rancour of controversy, together with the violence of civil war, had
inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Protestants contended that the security which they claimed in consequence
of the treaty of Passau should extend, without limitation, to all who had
hitherto embraced the doctrine of Luther, or who should here after embrace it.
The Catholics, having first of all asserted the Pope's right as the supreme and
final judge with respect to all articles of faith, insisted that the toleration
granted, by the treaty of Passau, to such as had adopted the new opinions;
which on account of the present situation of the Empire, and for the sake of
peace, they were willing to confirm; should not be extended either to those
cities which had conformed to the Interim, or to such ecclesiastics as should
for the future apostatize from the church of Rome. It was no easy matter to
reconcile such opposite pretensions, which were supported, on each side, by the
most elaborate arguments, and the greatest acrimony of expression, that the
abilities or zeal of theologians long exercised in disputation could suggest.
Ferdinand, however, by his address and perseverance; by softening some things
on each side; by putting a favorable meaning upon others; by representing
incessantly the necessity as well as the advantages of concord; and by
threatening on some occasions, when all other considerations were disregarded,
to dissolve the diet, brought them at length to a conclusion in which they all
agreed.

CONFORMABLY to this a recess was framed, approved of, and published with the
usual formalities. The following are the chief articles which it contained.
That such Princes and cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confession of Augsburg, shall be permitted to profess the doctrine and exercise
the worship which it authorizes without interruption or molestation from the
Emperor, the King of the Romans, or any power or person whatsoever; that the
Protestants on their part, shall give no disquiet to the Princes and States who
adhere to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome; That, for the future, no
attempt shall be made toward terminating religious differences, but by the
gentle and pacifick methods of persuasion and conference; that the Popish
ecclesiastics shall claim no spiritual jurisdiction in such states as receive
the confession of Augsburg; that such as had seized the benefices or revenues
of the church, previous to the treaty of Passau, shall retain possession of of
them, and be liable to no prosecution in the Imperial chamber on that account;
that the supreme civil power in every state shall have right to establish what
form of doctrine and worship it shall deem proper, and if any of its subjects
refuse to conform to these, shall permit them to remove with all their effects
wherever they please; that if any prelate or ecclesiastic shall hereafter
abandon the Romish religion, he shall instantly relinquish his diocese or
benefice, and it shall be lawful for those in whom the right of nomination is
vested, to proceed immediately to an election, as if the office were vacant by
death or translation, and to appoint a successor of undoubted attachment to the
ancient system Sleid. 620. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. 11. 161.
.

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Recess, which is the basis of
religious peace in Germany, and the bond of union among its various states, the
sentiments of which are so extremely different with respect to points the most
interesting and important. In our age and nation, to which the idea of
Toleration is familiar, and its beneficial effects well known, it may seem
strange that a method of terminating their dissentions, so suitable to the mind
and charitable spirit of the Christian religion, did not sooner occur to the
contending parties. But an expedient, which, how salutary soever it might be,
was repugnant to the sentiments and practice of Christians during many ages,
did not lie obvious to discovery. Among the ancient ^nens, all whose deities
were local and tute^ ^versity of sentiment concerning the object or rights of
religious worship seems to have been no source of animosity, because the
acknowledging veneration to be due to any one God, did not apply denial of the
existence or the power of any other God; nor were the modes and rites of
worship established in one country incompatible with those which other nations
approved of and observed. Thus the errors in their system of theology were of
such a nature as to be productive of concord, and notwithstanding the amazing
number of their deities, as well as the infinite variety of their ceremonies, a
sociable and tolerating spirit subsisted almost universally in the pagan world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared one Supreme Being to be the sole
object of religions veneration, prescribed the form of worship most acceptable
to him, whoever admitted the truth it held, of consequence, every other mode of
religion to be absurd and impious. Hence the zeal of the first converts to the
Christian faith in propagating its doctrines, and the ardour with which they
labored to overturn every other form of worship. They employed, however, for
this purpose no methods but such as suited the nature of religion. By the force
of powerful arguments, they convinced the understandings of men; by the charms
of superior virtue, they allured and captivated their hearts. At length the
civil power declared in favor of Christianity, and though numbers, imitating
the example of their superiors, crowded into the church, many still adhered to
their ancient superstitions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the ministers of
religion, whose zeal was still unabated, though their sanctity and virtue were
much diminished, forgot so far the nature of their own mission, and of the
arguments which they ought to have employed, that they armed the Imperial power
against these unhappy men, and as they could not persuade, they tried to compel
them to believe.

AT the same time, controversies concerning articles of faith multiplied, from
various causes, among christians themselves, and the same unhallowed weapons
which had first been used against the enemies of their religon, were turned
against each other. Every zealous disputant endeavored to interest the civil
magistrates in his cause, and each in his turn employed the secular arm to
crush or to exterminate his opponents. Not long after, the bishops of Rome put
in their claim to infallibility in explaining articles of faith, and deciding
points in controversy, and bold as the pretension was, they by their artifices
and perseverance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and brought them to
recognize it. To doubt or to deny any doctrine to which these unerring
instructors had given the sanction of their approbation, was held to be not
only a resisting of truth, but an act of rebellion against their sacred
authority; and the seculiar power, of which by various arts they had acquired
the absolute direction, was instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during many centuries, to see speculative
opinions propagated or defended by force; the charity and mutual forbearance
which Christianity recommends with so much warmth were forgotten, the sacred
rights of conscience and of private judgment were unheard of, and not only the
idea of toleration, but even the word itself, in in the sense now affixed to it
was unknown. A right to extirpate error by force was universally allowed to be
the prerogative of those who possessed the knowledge of truth, and as each
party of Christians believed that they had got possession of this invaluable
attainment, they all claimed and exercised, as far as they were able, the
rights which it was supposed to convey. The Roman catholics, as their system
rested on the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted that truth was on
their side, and openly called on the civil power to repel the impious and
heretical innovators who had risen up against it. The Protestants, no less
confident that their doctrine was well founded, required with equal ardour, the
Princes of the ^ party to check such as presumed to impugn or to oppose it.
Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the reformed church in their
respective countries, inflicted, as far as they had power and opportunity, the
same punishments which were denounced against their own disciples by the church
of Rome, on such as called in question any article in their creeds. To their
followers, and perhaps to their opponents, it would have appeared a symptom of
diffidence in the goodness of their cause, or an acknowledgment that it was not
well founded, if they had not employed in its defense all those means which it
was supposed truth had a right to employ.

IT was toward the close of the seventeenth century, before toleration, under
its present form, was admitted first into the republic of the United Provinces,
and from thence introduced into England. Long experience of the calamities of
mutual persecution, the influence of free government, the light and humanity
acquired by the progress of science, together with the prudence and authority
of the civil magistrate, were all requisite in order to establish a regulation
so repugnant to the ideas which all the different sects had adopted from
mistaken conceptions concerning the nature of religion and the rights of truth,
or which all of them had derived from the erroneous maxims established by the
church of Rome.

THE recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was founded on no such liberal and
enlarged sentiments concerning freedom of religious enquiry or the nature of
toleration. It was nothing more than a scheme of pacification, which political
considerations alone had suggested to the contending parties, and regard for
their mutual tranquillity and safety had rendered necessary. Of this there can
be no stronger proof than an article in the recess itself, by which the
benefits of the pacification are declared to extend only to the Catholics on
the one side, and to such as adhered to the Confession of Augsburg on the
other. The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin remained, in consequence of that
exclusion, without any protection from the rigor of ^^aws denounced against
heretics. Nor did they ob^ain any legal security, until the treaty of
Westphalia, near a century after this period, provided that they should be
admitted to enjoy, in as ample manner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and
protection which the recess of Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly pleased with the security which
they acquired by this recess, such as adhered to the ancient system had no less
reason to be satisfied with that article in it which preserved entire to the
Roman catholic church the benefices of such ecclesiastics as should hereafter
renounce its doctrines. This article, known in Germany by the name of the
Ecclesiastical Reservation, was manifestly so conformable to the idea and to
the rights of an established church; and it appeared so equitable to prevent
revenues, which had been originally appropriated for the maintenance of persons
attached to acertain system, from being alienated to any other purpose, that
the protestants, though they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to
relinquish their opposition to it. As the Roman catholic Princes of the Empire
have taken care to see this article exactly observed in every case where there
was an opportunity of putting it in execution, it has proved the great barrier
of the Romish church in Germany against the Reformation; and as from this
period the same temptation of interest did not allure ecclesiastics to
relinquish the established system, there have been few of that order, who have
loved truth with such disinterested and ardent affection, as to abandon for its
sake the rich benefices which they had in possession.

DURING the sitting of the diet, Marcellus Cervino, Cardinal of Santa Croce,
was elected Pope in room of Julius. He, in imitation of Adrian, did not change
his name on being exalted to the Papal Chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in
purity of intention, and excelled him much in the arts of government, and still
more in knowledge of the state and genius of the papal court; as he had
capacity to discern what reformation it needed, as well as what it could bear,
such regulations were expected from his virtue and wisdom, as would have
removed many of its grossest and most flagrant corruptions, and have
contributed toward reconciling to the church, such as from indignation at
these enormities had abandoned its communion. But this excellent Pontiff was
only shown to the church and immediately snatched away. The confinement in the
conclave had impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious ceremonies upon
his accession, together with too intense and anxious application of mind to the
schemes of improvement which he meditated, exhausted so entirely the vigor of
his feeble constitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and died on the
twentieth day after his election Thuan. 520. F. Paul, 365. Onuph. Panvin. 321,
etc.
.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, peculiar to conclaves, were
displayed in that which was held for electing a successor to Marcellus; the
Cardinals of the Imperial and French factions laboring, with equal ardour, to
gain the necessary number of suffrages for one of their own party. But, after a
struggle of no long duration, though conducted with all the warmth and
eagerness natural to men contending for so great an object, they united in
choosing John Peter Caraffa the eldest member of the sacred college and the son
of Count Montorio, a nobleman of an illustrious family in the kingdom of
Naples. The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese who favored his
pretensions, Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age, which soothed all
the disappointed candidates with the nearer prospect of a new vacancy,
concurred in bringing about this speedy union of suffrages. In order to testify
his respect for the memory of Paul III. by whom he had been created Cardinal,
and his gratitude to the family of Farnese, he assumed the name of Paul IV.

THE choice of a prelate of such a singular character, and who had long held a
course extremely different from that which usually led to the dignity now
conferred upon him, filled the Italians, who had nearest access to observe his
manners and deportment, with astonishment, and kept them in suspense and
solicitude with regard to his future conduct Paul, though born in a rank of
life which, without any other merit, might have secured to him the highest
ecclesiastical preferments, had from his early years applied to study with all
the affiduity of a man who had nothing but his personal accomplishments to
render him conspicuous. By means of this he not only acquired profound skill in
scholastic theology, but added to that a considerable knowledge of the learned
languages and of polite literature, the study of which had been lately revived
in Italy, and was pursued at this time with great ardour. His mind, however,
naturally gloomy and severe, was more formed to imbibe the four spirit of the
former, than to receive any degree of elegance or liberality of sentiment from
the latter; so that he acquired rather the qualities and passions of a recluse
ecclesiastic, than the talents necessary for the conduct of great affairs.
Accordingly, when he entered into orders, although several rich benefices were
bestowed on him, and he was early employed as nuncio in different courts, he
soon became disgusted with that course of life, and languished to be in a
situation more suited to his taste and temper. With this view he resigned at
once all his ecclesiastical preferments, and having instituted an order of
regular priests, whom he denominated Theatines, from the name of the
archbishopric which he had held, he associated himself as a member of their
fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous rules to which he had subjected them,
and preferred the solitude of a monastic life, with the honor of being the
founder of a new order, to all the vast objects which the court of Rome
presented to his ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul III. induced by the
same of his sanctity and knowledge called him to Rome, in order to consult with
him concerning the measures which might be most proper and effectual for the
suppressing of heresy, and re-establishing the ancient authority of the church.
Having thus allured him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his entreaties,
and partly by his authority, prevailed on him to accept of a Cardinal's hat, to
reassume the benefices which he had resigned, and to return again into the
usual path of ecclesiastical ambition which he seemed to have relinquished.
But, during two successive Pontificates, under the first of which the court of
Rome was the most artful and interested, and under the second the most
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monastic austerity. He was an
avowed and bitter enemy not only of all innovation in opinion, but of every
irregularity in practice; he was the chief instrument in establishing the
formidable and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal territories; he
appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for the jurisdiction and
discipline of the church, and a severe censurer of every measure which seemed
to flow from motives of policy or interest, rather than from zeal for the
honor of the ecclesiastical order, and the dignity of the Holy See. Under a
prelate of such a character, the Roman courtiers expected a severe and violent
Pontificate, during which the principles of sound policy would be sacrificed to
the narrow prejudices of priestly zeal; while the people of Rome were
apprehensive of seeing the sordid and forbidding rigor of monastic manners
substituted in place of the gaiety or magnificence to which they had long been
accustomed in the papal court. These apprehensions Paul was extremely
solicitous to remove. At his first entrance on the administration he laid aside
that austerity which had hitherto distinguished his person and family, and when
the master of his household inquired in what manner he would choose to live, he
haughtily replied, "as becomes a great Prince." He ordered the ceremony of his
coronation to be conducted with more than usual magnificence; and endeavored
to render himself popular by several acts of liberality and indulgence toward
the inhabitants of Rome Platina, p. 327. Castaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Romans 1615.
p. 70.
.

HIS natural severity of temper, however, would have soon returned upon him,
and would have justified the conjectures of the courtiers, and the fears of the
people, if he had not, immediately after his election, called to Rome two of
his nephews, sons of his brother the Count of Montorio. The eldest he promoted
to be governor of Rome, the youngest who had hitherto served as a soldier of
fortune in the armies of Spain or France, and whose disposition as well as
manners were still more foreign from the clerical character than his
profession, he created a Cardinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the
second office in power and dignity which a Pope can bestow. These marks of
favor, no less sudden than extravagant, he accompanied with the most unbounded
confidence and attachment, and forgetting all his former severe maxims, he
seemed to have no other object than the aggrandizing of his nephews. Their
ambition, unfortunately for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any
moderate acquisition. They had seen the family of Medici raised by the interest
of the Popes of that house to supreme power in Tuscany; Paul III. had by his
abilities and address secured the dutchies of Parma and Platentia to the family
of Farnese. They aimed at some establishment for themselves, no less
considerable and independent; and as they could not expect that the Pope would
carry his indulgence toward them so far as to secularize any part of the
patrimony of the church, they had no prospect of attaining what they wished,
but by dismembering the Imperial dominions in Italy, in hopes of seizing some
portion of them. This alone would have been to them a sufficient reason for
sowing the seeds of discord between their uncle and the Emperor.

BUT Cardinal Caraffa, had, besides, private reasons which filled him with
hatred and enmity to the Emperor. While he served in the Spanish troops he had
not received such marks of honor and distinction as he thought due to his
birth and merit. Disgusted with this ill-usage, he had abruptly quitted the
Imperial service, and entering into that of France; he had not only met with
such a reception as soothed his vanity, and attached him to the French
interest, but by contracting an intimate friendship with Strozzi, who commanded
the French army in Tuscany, he had imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor as
the great enemy to the liberty and independence of the Italian states. Nor was
the Pope himself indisposed to receive impressions unfavourable to the Emperor.
The opposition given to his election by the Cardinals of the Imperial faction
left in his mind deep resentment, which was heightened by the remembrance of
ancient injuries from Charles or his ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and employed various devices, in order to
exasperate him beyond a possibility of reconciliation. They aggravated every
circumstance which could be deemed any indication of the Emperor's
dissatisfaction with his promotion; they read to him an intercepted letter in
which Charles taxed the Cardinals of his party with negligence or incapacity in
not having defeated Paul's election: They pretended, at one time, to have
discovered a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister and Cosmo de Medici
against the Pope's life; they alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a plot
for assassinating themselves. By these artifices, they kept his mind, which was
naturally violent and become suspicious from old age, in such perpetual
agitation, as precipitated him into measures, which otherwise he would have
been the first person to condemn Ripamontii Hist. Patriae, lib. iii. 1146. Ap.
Graev. These. vol. ii. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 615. Adriani Istor. i. 906.
. He seized some of the Cardinals who were most attached to the Emperor, and
confined them in the castle of St. Angelo; he persecuted the Colonnas and other
Roman barons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial faction, with the utmost
severity; and discovering on all occasions his distrust, fear, or hatred of the
Emperor, he began at last to court the friendship of the French King, and
seemed willing to throw himself absolutely upon him for support and protection.

THIS was the very point to which his nephews wished to bring him as most
favorable to their ambitious schemes; and as the accomplishment of these
depended on their uncle's life, whose advanced age did not admit of losing a
moment unnecessarily in negotiations, instead of treating at second hand with
the French ambassador at Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a person
of confidence directly to the court of France, with such overtures on his part
as they hoped would not be rejected. He proposed an alliance offensive and
defensive between Henry and the Pope; that they should attack the duchy of
Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with their united forces; and if their arms
should prove successful, that the ancient republican form of government should
be re-established in the former, and the investiture of the latter should be
granted to one of the French King's sons, after reserving a certain territory
which should be annexed to the patrimony of the church, together with an
independent and princely establishment for each of the Pope's nephews.

THE King, allured by these specious projects, gave a most favorable audience
to the envoy. But when the matter was proposed in council, the constable
Montmorency, whose natural caution and aversion to daring enterprises increased
with age and experience, remonstrated with great vehemence against the
alliance. He put Henry in mind how fatal every expedition into Italy had been
to France during three successive reigns, and if such an enterprise had proved
too great for the nation even when its strength and finances were entire, there
was no reason to hope for success, if it should be attempted now when both were
exhausted by extraordinary efforts during wars, which had lasted, with little
interruption, almost half a century. He represented the manifest imprudence of
entering into engagements with a Pope of fourscore, as any system which rested
on no better foundation than his life must be extremely precarious, and upon
the event of his death, which could not be distant, the face of things together
with the inclination of the Italian States must instantly change, and the whole
weight of the war be left upon the King alone. To these considerations he added
the near prospect which they now had of a final accommodation with the Emperor
who having taken the resolution of retiring from the world, wished to transmit
his kingdoms in peace to his son; and he concluded with representing the
absolute certainty of drawing the arms of England upon France, if it should
appear that the re-establishment of tranquillity in Europe was prevented by the
ambition of its Monarch.

THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and urged by a minister of great
authority, would probably have determined the King to decline any connection
with the Pope. But the Duke of Guise and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain,
who delighted no less in hold and dangerous undertakings than Montmorency
shunned them, declared warmly for an alliance with the Pope. The Cardinal
expected to be entrusted with the conduct of the negociations in the court of
Rome to which this alliance would give rise; the duke laid his account with
obtaining the command of the army which would be appointed to invade Naples;
and considering themselves as already in these stations, vast projects opened
to their aspiring and unbounded ambition. Their credit, together with the
influence of the King's mistress, the famous Diana of Poitiers, who was, at
that time entirely devoted to the interest of the family of Guise, more than
counterbalanced all Montmorency's prudent remonstrances, and prevailed on an
inconsiderate Prince to listen to the overtures of the Pope's envoy.

THE Cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected, was immediately sent to Rome with
full powers to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures for carrying it
into execution. Meanwhile, the Pope, either from reflecting on the danger and
uncertain issue of all military operations, or through the address of the
Imperial ambassador who had been at great pains to sooth him, had not only
begun to lose much of the ardour with which he had set on foot the negotiation
with France, but even discovered great unwillingness to continue it. In order
to rouse him from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle his former rage, his
nephews had recourse to the arts which they had already practiced with so much
success. They alarmed him with new representations of the Emperor's hostile
intentions, with fresh accounts which they had received of threats uttered
against him by the Imperial ministers, and with new discoveries which they
pretended to have made of conspiracies formed, and just ready to take effect
against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, would not have operated a
second time with the same force, nor have made the impression which they
wished, if Paul had not been excited by an offense of that kind which he was
least able to bear. He received advice of the recess of the diet of Augsburg,
and of the toleration which was thereby granted to the Protestants, and this
threw him at once into such transports of passion against the Emperor and King
of the Romans, as carried him headlong into all the violent measures, of his
nephews. Full of high ideas with respect to the papal prerogative, and animated
with the fiercest zeal against heresy, he considered the liberty of deciding
concerning religious matters, which had been assumed by an assembly composed
partly of laymen, as a presumptuous and unpardonable encroachment on that
jurisdiction which belonged to him alone; and regarded the indulgence which had
been given to the Protestants as an impious act of that power which the diet
had usurped. He complained loudly of both to the Imperial ambassador. He
insisted that the recess of the diet should immediately be declared illegal and
void. He threatened the Emperor and King of the Romans, in case they should
either refuse or delay to gratify him in this particular, with the severest
effects of his vengeance. He talked in a tone of authority and command which
might have suited a pontiff of the twelfth century, when a papal decree was
sufficient to have shaken or to have overturned the throne of the greatest
Monarch, but which was altogether improper in that age, especially when
addressed to the minister of a Prince who had so often made Pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The ambassador, however, heard all his
extravagant propositions and menaces, with much patience, and endeavored to
sooth him by putting him in mind of the extreme distress to which the Emperor
was reduced at Inspruck, of the engagements which he had come under to the
Protestants in order to extricate himself, of the necessity of fulfilling
these, and of accommodating his conduct to the situation of his affairs. But
weighty as these considerations were, they made no impression on the mind of
the haughty and bigoted pontiff, who instantly replied, that he would absolve
him by his apostolic authority from the obligation of these engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that in carrying on the cause of God and
of the church, no regard ought to be had to the maxims of wordly prudence and
policy, and that the ill success of the Emperor's schemes in Germany might
justly be deemed a mark of the divine displeasure against him, on account of
his having paid little attention to the former, while he regulated his conduct
entirely by the latter. Having said this, he turned from the ambassador
abruptly without waiting for a reply.

HIS nephews took care to applaud and cherish these sentiments, and easily
wrought up his arrogant mind, fraught with all the monkish ideas concerning the
extent of the papal supremacy, to such a pitch of resentment against the house
of Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own power, that he talked
continually of his being the successor of those who had deposed Kings and
Emperors; that he was exalted as head over them all, and would trample such as
opposed him under his feet. In this disposition, the cardinal of Lorrain found
the Pope, and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty, which had for its object,
the ruin of a Prince against whom he was so highly exasperated. The
stipulations in the treaty were much the same as had been proposed by the
Pope's envoy at Paris; and it was agreed to keep the whole transaction secret
until their united forces should be ready to take the field Pallav. lib. 13. p.
163. F. Paul 365. Thuan lib. xv. 525. lib. xvi. 540. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 609,
etc.
.

DURING the negotiation of this treaty at Rome and Paris, an event happened
which seemed to render the fears which had given rise to it vain, and the
operations which were to follow upon it unnecessary. This was the Emperor's
resignation of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip; together with his
resolution to withdraw entirely from any concern in business or the affairs of
this world, in order that he might spend the remainder of his days in
retirement and solitude. Though it requires neither deep reflection nor
extraordinary discernment to discover that the state of royalty is not exempt
from cares and disappointment; though most of those who are exalted to a throne
find solicitude, and satiety, and disgust to be their perpetual attendants in
that envied pre-eminence; yet, to descend voluntarily from the supreme to a
subordinate station, and to relinquish the possession of power in order to
attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be an effort too great for the
human mind. Several instances, indeed, occur in history of Monarchs who have
quitted a throne, and have ended their days in retirement. But they were either
weak Princes who took this resolution rashly, and repented of it as soon as it
was taken; or unfortunate Princes from whose hands some strong rival had
wrested their scepter, and compelled them to descend with reluctance into a
private station. Dioclesian is perhaps the only Prince capable of holding the
reins of government, who ever resigned them from deliberate choice, and who
continued during many years to enjoy the tranquillity of retirement without
fetching one penitent sigh, or casting back one look of desire, toward the
power or dignity which he had abandoned.

NO wonder, then, that Charles's resignation should fill all Europe with
astonishment, and give rise, both among his contemporaries, and among the
historians of that period, to various conjectures concerning the motives, which
determined a Prince, whose ruling passion had been uniformly the love of power,
at the age of fifty-six, when objects of ambition operate with full force on
the mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour, to take a resolution so
singular and unexpected. But while many authors have imputed it to motives so
frivolous and fantastical, as can hardly be supposed to influence any
reasonable mind; while others have imagined it to be the result of some
profound scheme of policy; historians more inteligent, and better informed,
neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search for mysterious secrets of state,
where simple and obvious causes will fully account for the Emperor's conduct.
Charles had been attacked early in life with the gout, and notwithstanding all
the precautions of the most skilful physicians in his time, the violence of the
distemper increased as he advanced in age, and the fits became every year more
frequent, as well as more intolerable. Not only was the vigor of his
constitution broken, but the faculties of his mind were impared by the
excruciating torments which he endured. During the continuance of the fits, he
was altogether incapable of applying to business, and even when they began to
abate, as it was only at intervals that he could attend to what was serious, he
gave up the greatest part of his time to trifling and even childish
occupations, which served to relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeebled and worn
out with excess of pain. Under these circumstances, the conduct of such affairs
as occurred, of course, in governing so many kingdoms was a burden more than
sufficient; but to push forward and complete the vast schemes, which the
ambition of his more active years had formed, or to keep in view and carry on
the same great system of policy, extending to every nation in Europe, and
connected with the operations of every different court, were tasks, which far
exceeded his strength, and oppressed and overwhelmed his mind. As he had been
long accustomed to view the business of every department, whether civil, or
military, or ecclesiastical, with his own eyes, and to decide concerning it
according to his own ideas; it gave him the utmost pain, when he felt his
infirmities increase so fast upon him, that he was obliged to commit the
conduct of all affairs to his ministers. He imputed every misfortune which
befell him, and every miscarriage that happened, even when the former was
unavoidable, and the latter accidental, to his inability to take the inspection
of business himself. He complained of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in
his declining years, to a rival, who was in the full vigor of life, and that
while Henry could take and execute all his resolutions in person, he should now
be reduced, both in council and in action, to rely on the abilities of other
men. Having thus grown old before his time, he wisely judged it more decent to
conceal his infirmities in some solitude, than to expose them any longer to the
public eye; and prudently determined not to forfeit the fame, or lose the
acquisitions of his better years, by struggling, with a vain obstinacy, to
retain the reins of government, when he was no longer able to hold them with
steadiness, or to guide them with address Dom Levesque in his memoirs of
cardinal Granvelle gives a reason for the Emperor's resignation, which, as I
recollect, is not mentioned by any other historian. He says, that the Emperor
having ceded the government of the kingdom of Naples and the duchy of Milan to
his son, upon his marriage with the Queen of England; Philip, notwithstanding
the advice and entreaties of his father, removed all the ministers and officers
in those countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill the places
which they held. That he aspired openly, and with little delicacy, to obtain a
share in the administration of affairs, in the Low Countries. That he
endeavored to thwart the Emperor's measures, and to limit his authority,
behaving toward him sometimes with inattention, and sometimes with
haughtiness. That Charles finding that he must either yield to his son, or
openly contend with him, in order to avoid these, which were both disagreeable
and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution of resigning his crowns, and
of retiring from the world, vol. i. p. 24, etc. Dom Levesque derived his
information concerning these curious facts, which he relates very briefly, from
the original papers of cardinal Granvelle. But as that vast collection of
papers, one of the most valuable historical monuments of the sixteenth century,
and which could not fail of throwing much light on the transactions of Charles
V. though preserved and arranged by M. L'Abbe Boizot of Besancon, is not
published, I cannot determine what degree of credit should be given to this
account of Charles's resignation. I have therefore taken no notice of it in
relating this event.
.

BUT though Charles had revolved this scheme in mind for several years, and had
communicated it to his sisters the dowager Queens of France and Hungary, who
not only approved of his intention, but offered to accompany him to whatever
place of retreat he should choose; several things had hitherto prevented his
carrying it into execution. He could not think of loading his son with the
government of so many kingdoms, until he should attain such maturity of age,
and of abilities, as would enable him to sustain that weighty burden; but as
Philip had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and had been early accustomed to
business, for which he discovered both inclination and capacity, it can hardly
be imputed to the partiality of paternal affection, that his scruples with
regard to this point, were entirely removed; and that he thought he might,
without further hesitation or delay, place him on the throne which he was about
to abandon. His mother's situation had been another obstruction in his way. For
although she had continued almost fifty years in confinement, and under the
same disorder of mind which concern for her husband's death had brought upon
her, yet the government of Spain, was still vested in her jointly with the
Emperor; her name was inserted together with his, in all the public writs
issued in that kingdom; and such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to
her, that they would probably have scrupled to recognize Philip as their
sovereign, unless she had consented to assume him as her partner on the throne.
Her utter incapacity for business rendered it impossible to obtain this. But
her death, which happened this year, removed this difficulty; and as Charles,
upon that event, became sole Monarch of Spain, it left the succession open to
his son. The war with France had likewise been a reason for retaining the
administration of affairs in his own hand, as he was extremely solicitous to
have terminated it, that he might have given up his kingdoms to his son in
peace with all the world. But as Henry had discovered no disposition to close
with any of his overtures, and had even rejected proposals of peace, which were
equal and moderate, in a tone, that seemed to indicate a fixed purpose of
continuing hostilities, he saw that it was vain to wait longer in expectation
of an event, which, how desirable soever, was altogether uncertain.

AS this, then, appeared to be the proper juncture for executing the scheme
which he had long meditated, Charles resolved to resign his kingdoms to his
son, with a solemnity, suitable to the importance of the transaction, and to
perform this last act of sovereignty, with such formal pomp, as might leave a
lasting impression on the minds not only of his subjects but of his successor.
With this view he called Philip out of England, where the peevish temper of his
Queen, which increased with her despair of having issue, renderd him extremely
unhappy, and the jealousy of the English left him no hopes of obtaining the
direction of their affairs. Having assembled the states of the Low Countries at
Brussels, on the twenty-fifth of October, he seated himself, for the last time,
in the chair of state, on one side of which was placed his son, and on the
other his sister the Queen of Hungary regent of the Netherlands, with a
splendid retinue of the grandees of Spain and princes of the Empire standing
behind him. The president of the council of Flanders, by his command, explained
in a few words his intention in calling this extraordinary meeting of the
States. He then read the instrument of resignation by which Charles surrendered
to his son Philip all his territories, jurisdiction, and authority in the
Low Countries, absolving his subjects there from their oath of allegiance to
him, which he required them to transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve
him with the same loyalty and zeal that they had manifested, during so long a
course of years, in support of his government.

CHARLES then rose from his seat, and leaning on the shoulder of the Prince of
Orange, because he was unable to stand without support, he addressed himself to
the audience, and from a paper which he held in his hand, in order to assist
his memory, he recounted, with dignity, but without ostentation, all the great
things which he had undertaken and performed since the commencement of his
administration. He observed, that from the seventeenth year of his age, he had
dedicated all his thoughts and attention to public objects, reserving no
portion of his time for the indulgence of his ease, and very little for the
enjoyment of private pleasure; that either in a pacifick or hostile manner, he
had visited Germany nine times, Spain six times, France four times, Italy seven
times, the Low Countries ten times, England twice, Africa as often, and had
made eleven voyages by sea; that while his health permitted him to discharge
his duty, and the vigor of his constitution was equal, in any degree, to the
arduous office of governing such extensive dominions, he had never shunned
labor, nor repined under fatigue; that now when his health was broken, and his
vigor exhausted by the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing infirmities
admonished him to retire, nor was he so fond of reigning, as to retain the
scepter in an impotent hand, which was no longer able to protect his subjects,
or to render them happy; that instead of a sovereign worn out with diseases,
and scarce half alive, he gave them one in the prime of life, accustomed
already to govern, and who added to the vigor of youth all the attention and
sagacity of maturer years; that, if during the course of a long administration,
he had committed any material error in government, or if under the pressure and
amidst the attention which he had been obliged to give so many and great
affairs, he had either neglected or injured any of his subjects, he now
implored their forgiveness; that for his part; he should ever retain a grateful
sense of their fidelity and attachment, and would carry the remembrance of it
along with him to the place of his retreat, as his sweetest consolation, as
well as the best reward for all his services, and in his last prayers to
Almighty God would pour forth his ardent wishes for their welfare.

THEN turning toward Philip, who fell on his knees and kissed his father's
hand, "If, says he, I had left you by my death this rich inheritance, to which
I have made such large additions, some regard would have been justly due to my
memory on that account; but now when I voluntarily resign to you what I might
have still retained, I may well expect the warmest expressions of thanks on
your part. With these, however, I dispense, and shall consider your concern for
the welfare of your subjects, and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me. It is in your power, by a wise
and virtuous administration, to justify the extraordinary proof which I give
this day of my paternal affection, and to demonstrate that you are worthy of
the confidence which I repose in you. Preserve an inviolable regard for
religion; maintain the Catholic faith in its purity; let the laws of your
country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and privileges of
your people; and if the time shall ever come, when you shall wish to enjoy the
tranquillity of private life, may you have a son endowed with such qualities,
that you can resign your scepter to him, with as much satisfaction, as I give
up mine to you."

AS soon as Charles had finished his long address to his subjects and to their
new sovereign, he sunk into the chair, exhausted and ready to faint with the
fatigue of such an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole
audience melted into tears, some from admiration of his magnanimity, others
softened by the expressions of tenderness toward his son, and of love to his
people; and all were affected with the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign,
who had distinguished the Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after returning thanks to his father,
with a low and submissive voice, for the royal gift which his unexampled bounty
had bestowed upon him, he addressed the assembly of the states, and regretting
his inability to speak the Flemish language with such facility as to express
what he felt on this interesting occasion, as well as what he owed to his good
subjects in the Netherlands, he begged that they would allow Granvelle bishop
of Arras, to deliver what he had given him in charge to speak in his name.
Granvelle, in a long discourse, expatiated on the zeal with which Philip was
animated for the good of his subjects, on his resolution to devote all his time
and talents to the promoting of their happiness, and on his intention to
imitate his father's example in distinguishing the Netherlands with peculiar
marks of his regard. Maes, a lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in name of the
States, with large professions of their fidelity and affection to their new
sovereign.

THEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary, resigned the regency, with which she had
been entrusted by her brother during the space of twenty-five years. Next day
Philip, in presence of the States, took the usual oaths to maintain the rights
and privileges of his subjects; and all the members, in their own name, and in
that of their constituents, swore allegiance to him Godleveus Relatio
Abdicationis Car. V. ap Goldast. Polit. Imper. p. 377. Strada de Bello Belgico,
lib. i. p. 5.
.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assembly no less splendid, and with a
ceremony equally pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain, with all
their territories depending on them, both in the old and in the new world. Of
all these vast possessions, he reserved nothing for himself but an annual
pension of an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges of his family, and
to afford him a small sum for acts of beneficence and charity The Emperor's
resignation is an event not only of such importance, but of such a nature, that
the precise date of it, one would expect, should have been ascertained by
historians with the greatest accuracy. There is, however, an amazing and
unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this point. All agree that
the deed by which Charles transferred to his son his dominions in the
Netherlands, bears date at Brussels the 25th of October. Sandoval fixes on the
23th of October as the day on which the ceremony of resignation happened, and
he was present at the transaction, vol. ii. p. 592. Godleveus who published a
treatise de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the public ceremony as well as the
date of the instrument of resignation on the 25th. Pere Bar, I know not on
what authority, fixes it on the 24th of November. Hist. D'Alem. viii. 976.
Herrera agrees with Godleveus in sentiment, tom i. 155, as likewise does
Pallavicini, whose authority with respect to dates, and every thing where a
minute accuracy is requisite, is of great weight. Hist. lib. xvi. p. 168.
Historians differ no less with regard to the day on which Charles resigned the
crown of Spain to his son. According to M. de Thou, it was a month after his
having resigned his dominions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the 25th of
November, Thuan. lib. 16 p. 571. According to Sandoval it was on the 16th of
January 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio di Vera agrees with him, Epitome del Vida
del Car. V. p. 110. According to Pallavicini it was on the 17th. Pal. lib. xvi.
p. 168. and with him Herrera agrees. Vida del D. Felipe, tom. i. p 233. But
Ferreras fixes it on the first day of January. Hist. Gener. tom. ix. p. 371. M.
de Beaucaire supposes the resignation of the crown of Spain to have been
executes, a few days after the resignation of the Netherlands, Com. de Reb.
Gall p. 879. It is remarkable that in the treaty of truce, at Vaucelles, though
Charles had made over all his dominions to his son some weeks previous to the
conclusion of it, all the stipulations are in the Emperor's name, and Philip is
only designed King of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was not
proclaimed King of Castile, etc. at Valladolid sooner than the 24th of March.
Sandov. ii. p. 606, and previous to that ceremony, he did not choose, it would
seem, to assume the title of King of any of his Spanish Kingdoms, or to perform
any acts of royal jurisdiction. In a deed annexed to the treaty of truce, dated
April 19th, he assumes the title of King of Castile, etc. in the usual style of
the Spanish monarchs in that age. Corpse Dipl. tom. iv. Append, p. 85.
.

AS he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hoping that the dryness of the
air and warmth of the climate in that country might mitigate the violence of
his disease, which had been much increased by the moisture of the air and the
rigor of the winters in the Netherlands he was extremely impatient to embark
for that kingdom, and to disengage himself entirely from business, which he
found impossible while he remained in Brussels. But his physicians remonstrated
so strongly against his venturing to sea at that cold and boisterous season of
the year, that he consented, though with reluctance, to put off his voyage for
some months.

BY yielding to their entreaties, he had the satisfaction, before he left the
Low Countries, of taking a considerable step toward a peace with France, which
he ardently wished for, not only on his son's account, but that he might have
the merit, when quitting the world, of re-establishing that tranquillity in
Europe, which he had banished out of it almost from the time that he assumed
the administration of affairs. Some time previous to his resignation,
commissioners had been appointed by him and by the French King, in order to
treat of an exchange of prisoners. In their conferences at the abbey of
Vaucelles, near Cambray, an expedient was accidentally proposed for terminating
hostilities betwixt the contending monarchs, by a long truce, during the
subsistence of which, and without discussing their respective claims, each
should retain what was in his possession. Charles, sensible how much his
kingdoms were exhausted by the expensive and almost continual wars in which his
ambition had engaged him, and eager to gain for his son a short interval of
peace, that he might establish himself firmly on his throne, declared warmly
for closing with the overture, though manifestly dishonorable as well as
disadvantageous; and such was the respect due to his wisdom and experience,
that Philip, notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchase peace by such
concessions, did not presume to urge his opinion in opposition to that of his
father.

HENRY could not have hesitated one moment about giving his consent to a truce
or. such conditions, as would leave him in quiet possession of the greater part
of the Duke of Savoy's dominions, together with the important conquest which he
had made on the German frontier. But it was no easy matter to reconcile such a
step with the engagements that he had come under to the Pope, in his late
treaty with him. The Constable Montmorency, however, represented in such a
striking light, the imprudence of sacrificing the true inrerests of his kingdom
to these rash obligations, and took such advantage of the absence of the
Cardinal of Lorraine, who had seduced the King into his alliance with the
Caraffas, that Henry, naturally fluctuating and unsteady, and apt to be
influenced by the advice last given him, authorized his ambassadors to sign a
treaty of truce with the Emperor for five years, on the terms which had been
proposed. But that he might not seem to have altogether forgotten his ally the
Pope, who he foresaw would be highly exasperated, he, in order to sooth him,
took care that he should be expressly included in the truce Mem. de Ribier. ii.
626. Corpse Diplom. tom. iv. App. 81.
.

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and the Admiral Coligny to Brussels,
the former to be present when the King of France, and the latter when the
Emperor and his son, ratified the treaty and bound themselves by oath to
observe it One of Admiral Coligny's attendants, who wrote to the court of
France an account of what happened while they resided at Brussels, takes
notice, as an instance of Philip's impoliteness, that he received the French
ambassador in an apartment hung with tapestry, which represented the battle of
Pavia, the manner in which Francis I. was taken prisoner, his voyage to Spain,
with all the circumstances of his captivity and imprisonment at Madrid. Mem. de
Ribier, ii. 634.
. When an account of the conferences at Vaucelles, and of the conditions of
truce which had been proposed there, were first carried to Rome, it gave the
Pope no manner of disquiet. He trusted so much to the honor of the French
monarch, that he would not allow himself to think that Henry could forget so
soon, or violate so shamefully, all the stipulations in his league with him. He
had such an high opinion of the Emperor's wisdom, that he made do doubt of his
refusing his consent to a truce on such unequal terms; and on both these
accounts he confidently pronounced that this like many preceding negociations,
would terminate in nothing. But later and more certain intelligence soon
convinced him that in political affairs no reasoning is more fallacious, than,
because an event is improbable, to conclude that it will not happen. The sudden
and unexpected conclusion of the truce filled Paul with astonishment and
terror. The Cardinal of Lorrain durst not encounter that storm of indignation,
to which he knew he should be exposed from the haughty Pontiff, who had so good
reason to be incensed; but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to the
Cardinal Tournon the difficult task of attempting to sooth Paul and his
nephews. They were fully sensible of the perilous situation in which they now
stood. By their engagements with France, which were no longer secret, they had
highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of his implacable temper.
The Duke of Alva, a minister, fitted as well by his abilities as by the
severity of his nature, for executing all Philip's rigorous schemes, had
advanced from Milan to Naples, and began to assemble troops on the frontiers of
the Ecclesiastical State. While they, if deserted by France, must not only
relinquish all the hopes of dominion and sovereignty to which their ambition
aspired, but remain exposed to the resentment of the Spanish monarch, without
one ally to protect them against an enemy with whom they were so little able to
contend.

UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourse to the arts of negotiation and
intrigue, of which the Papal court knows well how to avail itself in order to
ward off any calamity threatened by an enemy superior in power. He affected to
approve highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for putting a stop to the
effusion of Christian blood. He expressed his warmest wishes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He exhorted the rival Princes to
embrace this favorable opportunity of setting on foot a negotiation for that
purpose, and offered, as their common father, to be mediator between them.
Under this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to the court of
Brussels, and his nephew Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The public
instructions given to both were the same; that they should use their utmost
endeavors to prevail with the two monarchs to accept of the Pope's mediation,
that by means of it, peace might be re-established, and measures might be taken
for assembling a general council. But under this specious appearance of zeal
for attaining objects so desirable in themselves, and so becoming his sacred
character to pursue, Paul concealed very different intentions, Caraffa, besides
his public instructions, received a private commission to solicit the French
King to renounce the treaty of truce, and to renew his engagements with the
Holy See, and he was empowered to spare neither entreatries, nor promises, nor
bribes, in order to gain that point. This both the uncle and the nephew
considered as the real end of the embassy; while the other served to amuse the
vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his son. The Cardinal, accordingly, set
out instantly for Paris, and traveled with the greatest expedition, while
Rebiba was detained some weeks at Rome; and when it became necessary for him to
begin his journey, he received secret orders to protract it as much as
possible, that the issue of Caraffa's negotiation might be known before he
should reach Brussels, and according to that, proper directions might be given
to him with regard to the tone which he should assume, in treating with the
Emperor and his son Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 169. Burnet Hist. of Reform. ii. App.
309.
.

CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with extraordinary pomp; and having
presented a consecrated sword to Henry as the protector, on whose aid the Pope
relied in the present exigency, he besought him not to disregard the entreaties
of a parent in distress, but to employ that weapon which he gave him in his
defense. This he represented not only as a duty of filial piety, but as an act
of justice. As the Pope, from confidence in the assistance and support which
his late treaty with France entitled him to expect, had taken such steps as had
irritated the King of Spain, he conjured Henry not to suffer Paul and his
family to be crushed under the weight of that resentment which they had drawn
on themselves merely by their attachment to France. Together with this argument
addressed to his generosity, he employed another which he hoped would work on
his ambition. He affirmed that now was the time; when, with the most certain
prospect of success; he might attack Philip's dominions in Italy; that the
flower of the veteran Spanish bands had perished in the wars of Hungary,
Germany, and the Low Countries; that the Emperor had left his son an exhausted
treasury, and kingdoms drained of men; that he had no longer to contend with
the abilities, the experience, and good fortune of Charles, but with a monarch
scarce seated on his throne, unpractised in command, odious to many of the
Italian states, and dreaded by all; that the Pope, who had already levied
soldiers, would bring a considerable army into the field, which, when joined by
a sufficient number of French troops, might by one brisk and sudden effort,
drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and add to the crown of France a kingdom,
the conquest of which had been the great object of all his predecessors during
half a century, and the chief motive of all their expeditions into Italy.

EVERY word Caraffa spoke, made a deep impression on Henry; conscious, on the
one hand, that the Pope had just cause to reproach him with not having
consulted the laws either of generosity or of decency, when he renounced his
league with him, and had agreed to the truce of Vaucelles; and eager on the
other hand, not only to distinguish his reign by a conquest, which three former
monarchs had attempted without success, but likewise to acquire an
establishment of such dignity and value for one of his sons. Reverence, however
for the oath, by which he had so lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles; the
extreme old age of the Pope, whose death might occasion an entire revolution in
the political system of Italy; together with the representations of
Montmorency, who repeated all the arguments that he had used against the first
league with Paul, and pointed out the great and immediate advantages which
France derived from the truce; kept Henry for some time in suspense, and might
possibly have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But the Cardinal was not such
a novice in the arts of intrigue and negotiation, as not to have expedients
ready for removing or surmounting all these obstacles. To obviate the King's
scruple with regard to his oath, he produced powers from the Pope to absolve
him from the obligation of it. By way of security against any danger which he
might apprehend from the Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle would make
such a nomination of Cardinals, as should give Henry the absolute command of
the next election, and enable him to place in the Papal chair a person entirely
devoted to his interest.

IN order to counterbalance the effect of the Constable's opinion and
influence, he employed not only the active talents of the Duke of Guise, and
the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain, but the address of the
Queen, aided by the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who, unfortunately
for France, cooperated with Catharine in this point, though she took pleasure,
on almost every other occasion, to thwart and mortify her. They, by their
united solicitations, easily swayed the King, who leaned of his own accord to
that side, toward which they wished him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent
remonstrances were disregarded; the nuncio absolved Henry from his oath; and he
signed a new league with the Pope, which rekindled the flames of war both in
Italy and in the Low Countries.

AS soon as Paul was informed by his nephew that there was a fair prospect of
his succeeding in this negotiation, he dispatched a messenger after the nuncio
Rebiba, with orders to return to Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As it
was now no longer necessary to preserve that tone of moderation, which suited
the character of a mediator, and which he had affected to assume, or to put any
farther restraint upon his resentment against Philip, he boldly threw off the
mask, and took such violent steps as rendered a rupture unavoidable. He seized
and imprisoned the Spanish envoy at his court. He excommunicated the
Collonna's; and having deprived Mark Antonio, the head of that family, of the
dukedom of Paliana, he granted that dignity, together with the territory
annexed to it, to his nephew the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal
information to be presented in the consistory of Cardinals against Philip,
setting forth that he, notwithstanding the fidelity and allegiance due by him
to the Holy See, of which he held the crown of Naples, had not only afforded a
retreat in his dominions to the Collonna's, whom the Pope had excommunicated
and declared rebels, but had furnished them with arms, and was ready, in
conjunction with them, to invade the Ecclesiastical State in an hostile manner;
that such conduct in a vassal was to be deemed treason against his liege lord,
the punishment of which was the forfeiture of his fief. Upon this the
consistoral advocate requested the Pope to take cognizance of the cause, and to
appoint a day for hearing of it, when he would make good every article of the
charge, and expect from his justice that sentence which the heinousness of
Philip's crimes merited. Paul, whose pride was highly flattered with the idea
of trying and passing judgment on so great a King, assented to his request; and
as if it had been no less easy to execute than to pronounce sentence, declared
that he would consult with the Cardinals concerning the formalities requisite
in conducting the trial Pallav. lib. xiii. 171.
.

BUT while Paul allowed his pride and resentment to drive him on with such
headlong impetuosity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation on his part. He
had been taught by the Spanish ecclesiastics who had the charge of his
education, a profound veneration for the Holy See. This sentiment, which had
been early infused, grew up with him as he advanced in years, and took full
possession of his mind, which was naturally thoughtful, serious, and prone to
superstition. When he foresaw a rupture with the Pope approaching, he had such
violent scruples with respect to the lawfulness of taking arms against the
Vicegerent of Christ, and the common father of all Christians, that he
consulted some Spanish divines upon that point. Though they, with the usual
dexterity of casuists in accommodating their responses to the circumstances of
those who apply to them for direction, assured him that, after employing
prayers and remonstrances in order to bring the Pope to reason, he had full
right, both by the laws of nature and of Christianity, not only to defend
himself when attacked, but to begin hostilities, if that were judged the most
proper expedient, for preventing the effects of Paul's violence and injustice.
Yet Philip still deliberated and delayed, considering it as a most cruel
misfortune, that his administration should open with an attack on a person,
whose sacred function and character he so highly respected Ferrer. Hist. de
Espagne ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.
.

AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compliance with his master's scruples, had
continued to negociate long after he should have begun to act, finding Paul
inexorable, and that every overture of peace, and every appearance of
hesitation on his part increased the Pontiff's natural arrogance, took the
field and entered the ecclesiastical territories. His army did not exceed
twelve thousand men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers, and commanded
chiefly by those Roman barons, whom Paul's violence had driven into exile. The
valor of the troops, and the animosity of their leaders who fought in their
own quarrel, and to recover their own estates, supplied the want of numbers. As
none of the French forces were yet arrived, Alva soon became master of the
Compagna Romana; some cities being surrendered through the cowardice of the
garrisons, which consisted of raw soldiers, ill disciplined, and worse
commanded; the gates of others being opened by the inhabitants, who were eager
to receive back their ancient masters. Alva, that he might not be taxed with
impiety in seizing the patrimony of the church, took possession of the towns
which capitulated, in the name of the college of cardinals, to which, or to the
Pope that should be chosen to succeed Paul, he declared that he would
immediately restore them.

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose light troops made inroads to the
gates of Rome, filled that city with consternation; and Paul, though inflexible
and undaunted himself, was obliged to give way so far to the fears and
solicitations of the Cardinals, as to send deputies to Alva in order to propose
a cessation of arms. The Pope yielded the more readily, as he was sensible of a
double advantage which might be derived from obtaining that point. It would
deliver the inhabitants of Rome from their present terror, and would afford
time for the arrival of the succors which he expected from France. Nor was
Alva unwilling to close with the overture, both as he knew how desirous his
master was to terminate a war, which he had undertaken with reluctance, and as
his army was so much weakened by garrisoning the great number of towns which he
had reduced, that it was scarce in a condition to keep the field without fresh
recruits, A truce was accordingly concluded first for ten, and afterward for
forty days, during which various schemes of peace was proposed, and perpetual
negociations were carried on, but with no sincerity on the part of the Pope.
The return of his nephew the cardinal to Rome, the receipt of a considerable
sum remitted by the King of France, the arrival of one body of French troops,
together with the expectation of others which had begun their march, rendered
him more arrogant than ever, and banished all thoughts from his mind, but those
of war and revenge Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 588. Mem. de
Ribier, ii. 664.
.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XII.
WHILE these operations or intrigues kept the Pope and Philip busy and
attentive, the Emperor disentangled himself finally from all the affairs of
this world, and set out for the place of his retreat. He had hitherto retained
the Imperial dignity not from any unwillingness to relinquish it, for after
having resigned the real and extensive authority that he enjoyed in his
hereditary dominions, to part with the limited and often ideal jurisdiction,
which belongs to an elective crown, was no great sacrifice. His sole motive for
delay was to gain a few months, for making one trial more, in order to
accomplish his favorite scheme in behalf of his son. At the very time Charles
seemed to be most sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur, and when he
appeared to be quitting it not only with indifference, but with contempt, the
vast schemes of ambition, which had so long occupied and engrossed his mind,
still kept possession of it. He could not think of leaving his son, among the
Princes of Europe, in a rank inferior to that which he himself had held. As he
had, some years before, made a fruitless attempt to secure the Imperial crown
to Philip, that by uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of
the house of Burgundy, he might put it in his power to prosecute, with a better
prospect of success, those great plans, which his own infirmities had obliged
him to abandon, he was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering project as
chimerical or unattainable.

NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had formerly met with from his brother
Ferdinand, he renewed his solicitations with fresh importunity, and during the
summer, had tried every art, and employed every argument, which he thought
could induce him to quit the Imperial throne to Philip, and to accept of the
investiture of some province, either in Italy, or in the Low Countries, as an
equivalent Ambassades des No^illes, tom. v. 356.
. But Ferdinand, who was so firm and inflexible with regard to this point, that
he had paid no regard to the solicitations of the Emperor, even when they were
enforced with all the weight of authority, which accompanies supreme power,
received the overture, that now came from him in the situation to which he had
descended, with greater indifference, and would not deign to listen to it.
Charles, ashamed of his own credulity in having imagined that he might
accomplish that now, which he had attempted formerly without success, desisted
finally from his scheme. He then resigned the government of the Empire, and
having transferred all his claims of obedience and allegiance from the
Germanick body, to his brother the King of the Romans, he executed a deed to
that effect, with all the formalities, requisite in such an important
transaction. The instrument of resignation he committed to William Prince of
Orange, and empowered him to lay it before the college of electors Goldast.
Constit. Imper. pars i. 576.
.

NOTHING now remained to detain Charles from that retreat for which he
languished. Every thing having been prepared some time for his voyage, he set
out for Zuitburg in Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendezvous. In his
way thither he passed through Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to
indulge that tender and pleasant melancholy, which arises in the mind of every
man in the decline of life, on visiting the place of his nativity, and viewing
the scenes and objects familiar to him in his early youth, he pursued his
journey accompanied by his son Philip, his daughter the archdutchess, his
sisters the dowager Queens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his son-in-law,
and a numerous retinue of the Flemish nobility. Before he went on board, he
dismissed them, with marks of his attention or regard, and taking leave of
Philip with all the tenderness of a father who embraced his son for the last
time, he set sail on the seventeenth of September under the convoy of a large
fleet of Spanish, Flemish and English ships, He declined a pressing invitation,
from the Queen of England, to land in some part of her dominions, in order to
refresh himself, and that she might have the comfort of seeing him once more.
It cannot surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to receive a visit from a
father-in-law, who is now nothing more than a private gentleman.

HIS voyage was prosperous and agreeable, and he arrived at Laredo in Biscay on
the eleventh day after he left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell prostrate
on the ground; and considering himself now as dead to the world, he kissed the
earth and said, "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked I now return
to thee, thou common mother of mankind." From Laredo he pursued his journey to
Burgos, carried by his attendants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a
horse litter, suffering exquisite pain at every step, and advancing with the
greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish nobility repaired to Burgos in order
to pay court to him, but they were so few in number, and their attendance was
so negligent, that Charles observed it, and felt, for the first time, that he
was no longer a Monarch. Accustomed from his early youth to the dutiful and
officious respect with which those who possess sovereign power are attended, he
had received it with the credulity common to Princes, and was weak enough to be
mortified, when he now discovered, that he had been indebted to his fortune,
for much of that obsequious regard, which he had fondly thought was paid to his
personal qualities. But though he might have soon learned to forget the levity
of his subjects, or to have despised their neglect, he was more deeply
afflicted with his son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how much he owed
to his father's bounty, obliged him to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he
paid him the first moiety of that small pension, which was all that he had
reserved of so many kingdoms. As without this sum, Charles could not dismiss
his domestics with such rewards as their services merited, or his generosity
had destined for them, he could not help expressing both surprise and
dissatisfaction Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.
. At last the money was paid, and Charles having dismissed a great number of
his domestics, whose attendance he thought would be superfluous or cumbersome
in his retirement, he proceeded to Valadolid. There he took a last and tender
leave of his two sisters, whom he would not permit to accompany him to his
solitude, though they entreated it with tears, not only that they might have
the consolation of contributing by their attendance and care to mitigate or to
sooth his sufferings, but that they might reap instruction and benefit by
joining with him in those pious exercises, to which he had consecrated the
remainder of his days.

FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to Plazencia in Estremadura. He had
passed through that city a great many years before, and having been struck at
that time with the delightful situation of the monastry of St. Justus belonging
to the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant from that place, he had then
observed to some of his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dioclesian
might have retired with pleasure. The impression had remained so strong on his
mind, that he pitched on it as the place of his retreat. It was seated in a
vale of no great extent, watered by a small brook, and surrounded by rising
grounds, covered with lofty trees; both from the nature of the soil, and
temperature of the climate, it was esteemed the most healthful and delicious
situation in Spain. Some months before his resignation he had sent an architect
thither, to add a new apartment to the monastery, for his accommodation; but he
gave strict orders that the style of the building should be such as suited his
present station, rather than his former dignity. It consisted only of six
rooms, four of them in the form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the
other two, each twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth, and furnished
in the most simple manner. They were all level with the ground; with a door on
one side into a garden, of which Charles himself had given the plan, and had
filled it with various plants, which he proposed to cultivate with his own
hands. On the other side it communicated with the chapel of the monastery, in
which he was to perform his devotions. Into this humble retreat, scarce
sufficient for the comfortable accommodation of a private gentleman, did
Charles enter, with twelve domestics only. He buried there, in solitude and
silence, his grandeur, his ambition, together with all those vast projects,
which, during half a century, had alarmed and agitated Europe, filling every
kingdom in it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and the dread of being
subjected to his power Sandov. ii. 607 and Zuniga. 110. Thuan. lib. xviii. 609.
.

THE contrast between Charles's conduct, and that of the Pope at this juncture,
was so obvious, that it struck even the most careless observers; nor was the
comparison which they made much to Paul's advantage. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accustomed to the splendor which accompanies supreme
power, and to those busy and interesting scenes in which an active ambition had
engaged him, quitted the world, at an early period of life, that he might close
the evening of his days in tranquillity, and secure some interval for sober
thought, and serious recollection. The latter, a priest, who had passed the
early part of his life in the shade of the schools, and in the study of the
speculative sciences, who was seemingly so detached from the world, that he had
shut himself up for many years in the solitude of a cloister, and who was not
raised to the Papal throne until he had reached the extremity of old age,
discovered at once all the impetuosity of youthful ambition, and engaged in
vast schemes, in order to accomplish which, he scrupled not to scatter the
seeds of discord and to kindle the flames of war in every corner of Europe. But
Paul, regardless of the opinion and censures of mankind, held on his own course
with his wonted arrogance and violence. These, although they seemed already to
have exceeded all bounds, rose to a still greater height, upon the arrival of
the duke of Guise in Italy.

THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain foresaw and desired, had happened. The
duke of Guise was entrusted with the command of the army appointed to march to
the Pope's assistance. It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the best troops
in the service of France. So high was the Duke's reputation, and such the
general expectation of beholding some extraordinary exertion of his courage and
abilities in a war, into which he had precipitated his country, chiefly with
the design of gaining a field where he might display his own talents, that many
of the French nobility, who had no command in the troops employed, accompanied
him as volunteers. This army passed the Alps in a rigorous season, and advanced
toward Rome, without any opposition from the Spaniards, who, as they were not
strong enough to act in different parts, had collected all their forces in one
body on the frontiers of Naples, for the defense of that kingdom.

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, the Pope let loose all the fury of
his resentment against Philip, which, notwithstanding the natural violence of
his temper, prudential considerations had hitherto obliged him to keep under
some restraint. He named commissioners, whom he empowered to pass judgment in
the suit, which the consistoral advocate had commenced against Philip, in order
to prove that he had forfeited the crown of Naples, by taking arms against the
Holy See, of which he was a vassal. He recalled all the nuncios resident in the
courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies. This was chiefly
levelled against Cardinal Pole, the Papal legate in the court of England, whose
great merit, in having contributed so successfully to reconcile that kingdom to
the church of Rome, together with the expectation of farther services that he
might perform, was not sufficient to screen him from the resentment which he
had incurred by his zealous endeavors to re-establish peace between the house
of Austria and France. He commanded an addition to be made to the anathemas
annually denounced against the enemies of the church on Maunday-Thursday,
whereby he inflicted the censure of excommunication on the authors of the late
invasion of the ecclesiastical territories, whatever their rank or dignity
might be; and, in consequence of this, the usual prayers for the Emperor were
omitted next day in the Pope's chapel. Pal. lib. xiii. 180. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
678.


BUT while the Pope indulged himself in these wild and childish sallies of
rage, he either neglected, or it exceeded his power, to take such measures as
would have rendered his resentment really formidable, and fatal to his enemies.
For, when the Duke of Guise entered Rome, where he was received with a
triumphal pomp, which would have been more suitable if he had been returning
from having terminated the war with glory, than when he was going to begin it
with a doubtful chance of success, he found none of the preparations for war in
such forwardness as Caraffa had promised, or he had expected. The Papal troops
were far inferior in number to the quota stipulated; no magazines sufficient
for their subsistence were formed; nor was money for paying them provided. The
Venetians, agreeably to that cautious maxim which the misfortunes of their
state had first led them to adopt, and which was now become a fundamental
principle in their policy, declared their resolution to preserve an exact
neutrality, without taking any part in the quarrels of Princes, so far their
superiors in power. The other Italian states were either openly united in
league with Philip, or secretly wished success to his arms against a Pontiff,
whose inconsiderate ambition had rendered Italy once more the seat of war.

THE Duke of Guise perceived that the whole weight of the war would devolve on
him; and became sensible, though too late, how imprudent it is to rely, in the
execution of great enterprises, on the aid of feeble allies. Pushed on,
however, by the Pope's impatience for action, as well as by his own desire of
performing something of what he had so confidently undertaken, he marched
toward Naples, and began his operations. But the success of these fell far
short of his former reputation, of what the world expected, and of what he
himself had promised. He opened the campaign with the siege of Civetella, a
town of some importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But the obstinacy with
which the Spanish governor defended it, baffled all the impetuous efforts of
the French valor, and obliged Guise, after a siege of three weeks, to retire
from the town with disgrace. He endeavored to wipe off that stain, by
advancing boldly toward the Duke of Alva's camp, and offering him battle. But
that prudent commander, sensible of all the advantages of standing on the
defensive before an invading enemy, declined an engagement, and kept within his
entrenchments; and adhering to his plan with the steadiness of a Castilian,
eluded with great address all Guise's stratagems, to draw him into action
Herrera vida de Felipe, 181.
. Meanwhile sickness wasted the French army; violent dissensions had arisen
between Guise and the commander of the Pope's forces; the Spaniards renewed
their incursions into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope, when he found,
instead of the conquests and triumphs which he had fondly expected, that he
could not secure his own territories from depredation, murmured, complained,
and began to talk of peace. The duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree
with having acted such an inglorious part, not only solicited his court either
to reinforce his army, or to recall him, but urged Paul to fulfill his
engagements; and called on Cardinal Caraffa, sometimes with reproaches, and
sometimes with threats, to make good these magnificent promises, from a rash
confidence in which he had advised his master to renounce the truce of
Vaucelles, and to join in league with the Pope Thuan. lib. xxviii. 614. Palav.
lib. xiii. 181. Durn. ii. app. 317.
.

BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in this wretched situation, an
unexpected event happened in the Low Countries, which called the Duke of Guise
from a station wherein he could acquire no honor, to the most dignified and
important charge which could be committed to a subject. As soon as the French
had discovered their purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles, not only by
sending an army into Italy, but by attempting to surprise some of the frontier
towns in Flanders, Philip, though willing to have avoided a rupture, determined
to prosecute the war with such spirit, as should make his enemies sensible,
that his father had not erred, when he judged him to be so capable of
government, that he had given up the reins into his hands. As he knew that
Henry had been at great expense in fitting out the army under the Duke of
Guise, and that his treasury was hardly able to answer the exorbitant and
endless demands of a distant war, he foresaw that all his operations in the
Low Countries must, of consequence, be feeble, and be considered only as
secondary to those in Italy. For that reason he prudently resolved to make his
principal effort in that place where he expected the French to be weakest; and
to bend his chief force against that quarter where they would feel a blow most
sensibly. With this view, he assembled in the Low Countries an army of about
fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving him on this occasion with that active
zeal, which subjects are wont to exert in obeying the commands of a new
sovereign. But Philip, cautious and provident, even at that early period of
life, did not rest all his hopes of success on that formidable force alone.

HE had been laboring for some time to engage the English to espouse his
quarrel; and though it was manifestly the interest of that kingdom to maintain
a strict neutrality, and the people themselves were sensible of the advantages
which they derived from it; though he knew how odious his name was to the
English, and how averse they would be to cooperate with him in any measure, he
nevertheless did not despair of accomplishing his point. He relied on the
affection wherewith the Queen doated on him, which was so violent, that even
his coldness and neglect had not extinguished it; he knew her implicit
reverence for his opinion, and her fond desire of gratifying him in every
particular. That he might work on these with greater facility, and more certain
success, he set out for England. The Queen who, during her husband's absence,
had languished in perpetual dejection, resumed fresh spirits on his arrival;
and without paying the least attention either to the interest or to the
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into all his schemes. In vain did
her privy council remonstrate against the imprudence as well as danger of
involving the nation in an unnecessary war; in vain did they put in her mind of
the solemn treaties of peace subsisting between England and France, which the
conduct of that nation had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary, soothed by
Philip's caresses, or intimidated by the threats which his ascendant over her
emboldened him at some times to throw out, was deaf to every thing that could
be urged in opposition to his sentiments, and insisted with the greatest
vehemence on an immediate declaration of war against France. The council,
though all Philip's address and Mary's authority were employed to gain or
overawe them, struggled long, and yielded at last, not from conviction, but
merely from deference to the will of their sovereign. War was declared against
France, the only one perhaps against that kingdom into which the English ever
entered with reluctance. As Mary knew the aversion of the nation to this
measure, she durst not call a parliament in order to raise money for carrying
on the war. She supplied this want, however, by a strain of prerogative; and
levied large sums on her subjects by her own authority. This enabled her to
assemble a sufficient body of troops, and to send eight thousand men under the
conduct of the Earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army Carte iii. 337.
.

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military glory, gave the command of his army
to Emanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his own residence at Cambray,
that he might be at hand to receive the earliest intelligence of his motions,
and to aid him with his counsels. The duke opened the campaign with a masterly
stroke of address, which justified Philip's choice, and discovered such a
superiority of genius over the French generals, as almost ensured success in
his subsequent operations. He appointed the general rendezvous of his troops at
a place considerably distant from the country which he destined to be the scene
of action; and having kept the enemy in suspense for a good time with regard to
his intentions, he at last deceived them so effectually by the variety of his
marches and counter-marches, that they concluded that he meant to bend all his
force against the province of Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into
the kingdom on that side. In consequence of this opinion, they drew all their
strength toward that quarter, and reinforcing the garrisons there, left the
towns on other parts of the frontier destitute of troops sufficient to defend
them.

EMANUEL, as soon as he perceived that this feint had its full effect, turned
suddenly to the right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy, and sending his
cavalry, in which he was extremely strong, before him, invested St. Quintin.
This was a town deemed in that age of considerable strength, and of great
importance, as there were few fortified cities between it and Paris. The
fortifications, however, had been much neglected, the garrison, weakened by
draughts sent toward Champagne, did not amount to a fifth part of the number
requisite for its defense; and the governor, though a brave officer, was
neither of rank nor authority, equal to the command in a place of so much
consequence, besieged by such a formidable army. A few days must have put the
Duke of Savoy in possession of the town, if the Admiral de Coligny, who thought
it concerned his honor to attempt saving a place of such importance to his
country, and which lay within his jurisdiction as governor of Picardy, had not
taken the gallant resolution of throwing himself into it, with such a body of
men as he could collect of a sudden. This resolution he executed with great
intrepidity, and considering the nature of the enterprise, with no contemptible
success; for though one half of his small body was cut off, he, with the other,
broke through the enemy, and entered the town. The unexpected arrival of an
officer of such high rank and reputation, and who had exposed himself to such
danger in order to join them, inspired the desponding garrison with courage.
Every thing that the Admiral's great skill and experience in the art of war
could suggest, for annoying the enemy, or defending the town, was attempted;
and the citizens as well as the garrison seconding his zeal with equal ardour,
seemed to be determined that they would hold out to the last and sacrifice
themselves in order to save their country Thuan. lib. xix. 647.
.

THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English under the Earl of Pembroke, joined about
this time, pushed on the siege with, the greatest vigor. An army so numerous,
and so well supplied with every thing requisite, carried on its approaches with
great advantage against a garrison which was still so feeble that it durst
seldom venture to disturb or retard the enemies operations by sallies. The
Admiral, sensible of the approaching danger and unable to avert it, acquainted
his uncle the constable Montmorency, who had the command of the French army,
with his situation, and pointed out to him a method by which he might throw
relief into the town. The Constable, solicitous to save a town, the loss of
which would open a passage for the enemy into the heart of France; and eager to
extricate his nephew out of that perilous situation, in which zeal for the
public had engaged him; he resolved, though aware of the danger, to attempt
what he desired. With this view he marched from La Fere toward St. Quintin at
the head of his army, which was not by one half so numerous as that of the
enemy, and having given the command of a body of chosen men to Coligny's
brother Dandelot who was colonel general of the French infantry, he ordered him
to force his way into the town by that avenue which the Admiral had represented
as most practicable, while he himself with the main army would give the alarm
to the enemies camp on the opposite side, and endeavor to draw all their
attention toward that quarter. Dandelot executed his orders with greater
intrepidity than conduct. His soldiers rushed on with such headlong
impetuosity, that though it broke the first body of the enemy which stood in
their way, it threw themselves into the utmost confusion; and being attacked by
fresh troops which closed in upon them on every side, the greater part of them
were cut in pieces, Dandelot, with about five hundred of the most adventrous,
and most fortunate, making good his entrance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Constable, in executing his part of the plan, advanced so near
the camp of the besiegers, as rendered it impossible to retreat with safety in
the face of an enemy so much superior in number. The Duke of Savoy instantly
perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared, with the presence of mind and
abilities of a great general, to avail himself of it. He drew up his army in
order of battle, with the greatest expedition, and watching the moment when the
French began to file off toward La Fere, he detached all his cavalry under the
command of the count of Egmont to fall on the rear, while he at the head of his
infantry, advanced to support him. The French retired at first in perfect
order, and with a good countenance; but when they saw Egmont draw near with his
formidable body of cavalry, the shock of which they were conscious that they
could not withstand, the prospect of imminent danger, added to distrust of
their general, whose imprudence every soldier now perceived, struck them with
general consternation. They began insensibly to quicken their pace, and those
in the rear began to press so violently on such as were before them, that in a
short time their march resembled a slight rather than a retreat. Egmont
observing their confusion, charged them with the greatest fury, and in a moment
all their Gensdarmerie, the pride and strength of the French armies in that
age, gave way and fled with precipitation. The infantry, however, whom the
constable, by his presence and authority, kept to their colors, still
continued their retreat, until the enemy brought some pieces of cannon to bear
upon their center, which threw them into such disorder, that the cavalry
renewing their attack, broke in, and the rout became universal. About four
thousand of the French fell in the field, and among those the Duke of Anguyen a
Prince of the blood, together with six hundred gentlemen. The Constable, as
soon as he perceived the fortune of the the day to be irretrievable, rushed
into the thickest of the enemy, with a resolution not to survive the calamity,
which his ill-conduct had brought upon his country; but having received a
dangerous wound, and being wasted with the loss of blood, he was surrounded
with by some Flemish officers, to whom he was known, who protected him from the
violence of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Besides the Constable,
the Dukes of Montpensier and Longucville, the Marechal St. Andre, many officers
of distinction, three hundred gentlemen, and near four thousand private
soldiers were taken prisoners. All the colors belonging to the infantry, all
the ammunition, and all the cannon, two pieces excepted, fell into the enemies
hands. The victorious army did not lose above fourscore men. Thuan. 650. Haraei
Annal. Brabant. ii. 692. Herrera, 291.
.

THIS battle no less fatal to France than the ancient victories of Cressy and
Agincourt, gained by the English on the same frontier, bore a more near
resemblance to these, in the suddenness of the rout; in the rashness of the
commander in chief; in the number of persons of note slain or taken; and in the
small loss sustained by the enemy. It filled France with equal consternation.
Many inhabitants of Paris with the same precipitancy and trepidation, as if the
enemy had been already at their gates, quitted the city, and retired into the
interior provinces. The King, by his presence and exhortations, endeavored to
console and to animate such as remained, and applying himself with the greatest
diligence to repair the ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to defend
it against the attack which he instantly expected. But happily for France,
Philip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness of the Admiral de Coligny
not only saved the capital from the danger to which it was exposed, but gained
the nation a short interval, during which the people recovered from the terror
and dejection occasioned by a blow no less severe than unexpected, and Henry
had leisure to take measures for the public security with the spirit which
became the sovereign of a powerful and martial people.

PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited the camp at St. Quintin, where
he was received with all the exultation of military triumph; and such were his
transports of joy on account of an event, which threw so much luster on the
beginning of his reign, that they softened his severe and haughty temper, into
an unusual flow of courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy approached, and was
kneeling to kiss his hands, he caught him in his arms, and embracing him with
warmth, "It becomes me, says he, rather to kiss your hands, which have gained
me such a glorious and almost bloodless victory."

AS soon as the rejoicings and congratulations on Philip's arrival were over, a
council of war was held in order to determine how they might improve their
victory to the best advantage. The Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the
ablest officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they should immediately
relinquish the siege of St. Quintin, the reduction of which was now an object
below their attention, and advance directly toward Paris; that as there were
neither troops to oppose, nor any town of strength to retard their march, they
might reach that capital while under the full impression of the astonishment
and terror occasioned by the rout of the army, and take possession of it
without resistance. But Philip, less adventrous or more prudent than his
generals, preferred a moderate but certain advantage, to an enterprise of
greater splendor, but of more doubtful success. He represented to the council
the infinite resources of a kingdom so powerful as France; the great number as
well as martial spirit of its nobles; their attachment to their sovereign; the
vast advantages with which they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable destruction, which must be the consequence of their
penetrating too rashly into the enemy's country, before they had secured such a
communication with their own, as might render a retreat safe, if upon any
disastrous event that should become necessary. On all these accounts, he
advised the continuance of the siege, and his generals acquiesced the more
readily in his opinion, as they made no doubt of being masters of the town in a
few days, a loss of time of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might easily repair it by their subsequent activity Belcar.
Commentar. di Reb. Gallic. 901.
.

THE weakness of the fortifications, and the small number of the garrison,
which could no longer hope either for reinforcement, or relief, seemed to
authorize this calculation of Philip's generals. But, in making it, they did
not attend sufficiently to the character of Admiral de Coligny, who commanded
in the town. A courage undismayed and undisconcerted amidst the greatest
dangers, an invention fruitful in resources, a genius which rouzed and seemed
to acquire new force upon every disaster, a talent of governing the minds of
men, together with a capacity of maintaining his ascendant over them even under
circumstances the most adverse and distressful, were qualities which Coligny
possessed in a degree superior to any general of that age. These qualities were
peculiarly adapted to the station in which he was now placed; and as he knew
the infinite importance to his country of every hour which he could gain at
this juncture, he exerted himself to the utmost in contriving how to protract
the siege, and to detain the enemy from attempting any enterprise more
dangerous to France. Such were the perseverance and skill with which he
conducted the defense, and such the fortitude and patience with which he
animated the garrison, that though the Spaniards, the Flemings, and the
English, carried on the attack with all the ardour which national emulation
inspires, he held out the town seventeen days. He was taken prisoner, at last,
on the breach, overpowered by the superior number of the enemy.

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost activity, of the interval which the
Admiral's well-timed obstinacy had afforded him. He appointed officers to
collect the scattered remains of the constable's army; he issued orders for
levying soldiers in every part of the kingdom; he commanded the ban and arriere
ban of the frontier provinces instantly to take the field, and to join the Duke
of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he recalled the greater part of the veteran
troops which served under the Marechal Brissac at Piedmont; he sent courier
after courier to the Duke of Guise, requiring him, together with all his army,
to return instantly for the defense of their country; he dispatched one envoy
to the Grand Seignior, to solicit the assistance of his fleet, and the loan of
a sum of money; he sent another into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade
the north of England, that by drawing Mary's attention to that quarter, he
might prevent her from reinforcing her troops which served under Philip. These
efforts of the King were warmly seconded by the zeal of his subjects. The city
of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred thousand livres. The other
great towns imitated the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of distinction engaged to garrison and to defend
at their own expense the towns which lay most exposed to be attacked by the
enemy. Nor was this general concern for the public confined to communities
alone, or to those in the higher sphere of life, but diffusing itself among
persons of every rank, each individual seemed disposed to act with as much
vigor as if the honor of the King, and the safety of the state had depended
on his personal efforts Mem. de Ribier, ii. 701, 703.
.

PHILIP, who was no stranger either to the prudent measures taken by the French
monarch for the security of his dominions, or to the spirit with which his
subjects prepared to defend themselves, perceived, when it was too late, that
he had lost an opportunity which could never be recalled, and that it was now
vain to think of penetrating into the heart of France, He abandoned, therefore,
without much reluctance, a scheme which was too bold and hazardous to be
perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper; and employed his army, during the
remainder of the campaign, in the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of these, he soon
became master; and the reduction of these two petty towns, together with the
acquisition of St. Quintin, were all the advantages which he derived from one
of the most decisive victories gained in that century. Philip himself, however,
continued in high exultation, on account of his success; and as all his
passions were tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the battle of St.
Quintin, which had been fought on the day consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to
build a church, a monastery, and a palace sacred to that saint and martyr.
Before the expiration of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice, in
which all these were united, at the Escurial in the neighboured of Madrid; and
the same principle, which dictated the vow, directed the building. But the plan
of the work was so formed as to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the
legendary tale, had been the instrument of St. Laurence's martyrdom.
Notwithstanding the vast and expensive schemes, in which his restless ambition
involved him, Philip continued the building with such perseverance for
twenty-two years, and reserved such vast sums for this monument of his piety
and vanity, that the monarchs of Spain are indebted to him for a royal
residence, which though not the most elegant, is certainly the most sumptuous
and magnificient of any in Europe Colmenar Annals d'Espagne, tom. ii. p. 136.
.

THE first account of that fatal blow which the French had received at St.
Quintin was carried to Rome by the courier whom Henry had sent to recall the
Duke of Guise. As Paul, even with the assistance of his French auxiliaries, had
scarce been able to check the progress of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that as
soon as he was deprived of their protection, his territories must be overran
in a moment. He remonstrated therefore with the greatest violence against the
departure of the French army, reproaching the Duke of Guise for his ill
conduct, which had brought him into such an unhappy situation; and complaining
of the King for deserting him so ungenerously under such circumstances. Guise's
orders, however, were peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he was, found it
necessary to accommodate his conduct to the exigency of his affairs, and to
employ the mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di Medici in order to
obtain peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillingly to a rupture with the
Pope, and who, even while success crowned his arms, doubted so much the justice
of his own cause, that he had made frequent overtures of pacification, listened
eagerly to the first proposals of this nature from Paul, and discovered such
moderation in his demands as could scarce have been expected from a Prince
elated with victory.

THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the Cardinal Caraffa in the name
of his uncle, met at Cavi, and both being equally disposed to peace, they,
after a short conference, terminated the war by a treaty on the following
terms: That Paul should renounce his league with France, and maintain for the
future such a neutrality as became the common father of Christendom; That
Philip should instantly restore all the towns of the ecclesiastical territory
of which he had taken possession; That the claims of the Caraffa's, to the
duchy of Paliano, and other demesnes of the Colonna's should be referred to
the decision of the republic of Venice; that the Duke of Alva should repair in
person to Rome, and after asking pardon of Paul in his own name, and in that of
his master, for having invaded the patrimony of the church, should receive the
Pope's absolution from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's scrupulous
timidity, finished an unprosperous war without any detriment to the Papal See.
The conqueror appeared humble, and acknowledged his error; while he who had
been vanquished retained his usual haughtiness, and was treated with every mark
of superiority Pallav. lib. xiii. 183, F. Paul. 380. Herrera, vol. i. 310.
* The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, repaired to Rome, and and in the
posture of a supplicant, kissed the feet, and implored the forgiveness of that
very person, whom his arms had reduced to the last extremity. Such was the
superstitious veneration of the Spaniards for the Papal character, that Alva,
though perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed from his infancy to
a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknowledged that when he approached the
Pope, he was so much overawed, that his voice failed, and his presence of mind
forsook him Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Summonte Istoria di Napoli, iv. 286.
.

BUT though this war, which at its commencement threatened mighty revolutions,
was brought to an end without occasioning any alteration in those States, which
were its immediate object, it produced effects of considerable consequence in
other parts of Italy. As Philip was extremely solicitous to terminate his
quarrel with Paul as speedily as possible, he was willing to make any sacrifice
in order to gain those Princes, who, by joining their troops to the Papal and
French army, might have prolonged the war. With this view, he entered into a
negotiation with Octavio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in order to seduce him
from his alliance with France, he restored to him the city of Placentia with
the territory depending on it, which Charles V. having seized in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-seven, had kept from that time in his
possession, and had transmitted together with his other dominions to Philip.

THIS step made such a discovery of Philip's character and views to Cosmo di
Medici, the most sagacious and provident of all the Italian Princes, that he
conceived hopes of accomplishing his favorite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his success in this attempt
depended entirely on the delicacy of address with which it was conducted, he
employed all the refinements of policy in the negotiation which he set on foot
for this purpose. He (...) Philip, whose treasury he knew to be entirely
drained by the expense of the war, to repay the great sums which he had
advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Siena. When Philip endeavored to
elude a demand which he was unable to satisfy, he affected to be extremely
disquieted, and making no secret of his disgust, instructed his ambassador at
Rome to open a negotiation with the Pope, which seemed to be the effect of it.
The ambassador executed his commission with such dexterity, that Paul,
imagining Cosmo to be entirely alienated from the Spanish interest, proposed to
him an alliance with France, which should be cemented by the marriage of his
eldest son to one of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the overture with such
apparent satisfaction, and with so many professions of gratitude for the high
honor of which he had the prospect, that not only the Pope's ministers, but
the French envoy at Rome talked confidently, and with little reserve, of the
accession of that important ally, as a matter certain and decided. The account
of this was quickly carried to, Philip; and Cosmo, who foresaw how much it
would alarm him, had dispatched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into the
Netherlands, that he might be at hand to observe and take advantage of his
consternation, before the first impression which it made should in any degree
abate. Cosmo was extremely fortunate in the choice of the instrument whom he
employed. Toledo waited, with patience, until he discovered with certainty,
that Philip had received such intelligence of his uncle's negociations at Rome,
as must have filled his suspicious mind with fear and jealousy; and then
craving an audience, he required payment of the money which had been borrowed
by the Emperor, in the most earnest and peremptory terms. In urging that point,
he artfully threw out several dark hints and ambiguous declarations, concerning
the extremities to which Cosmo might be driven by a refusal of this just
demand, as well as by other grievances of which he had good reason to complain.

PHILIP, astonished at an address in such a strain, from a Prince so far his
inferior as the Duke of Tuscany, and comparing what he now heard with the
information which he had received from Italy, immediately concluded that Cosmo
had ventured to assume this bold and unusal tone on the prospect of his union
with France. In order to prevent the Pope and Henry from acquiring an ally, who
by his abilities and the situation of his dominions would have added both
reputation and strength to their confederacy, he offered to grant Cosmo the
investiture of Siena, if he would consent to accept of this, as an equivalent
for the sums due to him, and engage to furnish a body of troops toward the
defense of Philip's territories in Italy, against any power who should attack
them. As soon as Cosmo had brought Philip to this, which was the object of all
his artifices and intrigues, he did not protract the negotiation by any
unnecessary delay, or any excess of refinement, but closed eagerly with the
proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remonstrances of his ablest counselors,
signed a treaty with him to that effect Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Herrera, i.
263. 275. P^lav. lib. xiii. 180.
.

AS no Prince was ever more tenacious of his rights than Philip, or less
willing to relinquish any territory which he possessed, by what tenure soever
he held it, these unsual concessions to the Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by
which he wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defending which, his
father had employed many years, and wasted much blood and treasure, cannot be
accounted for from any motive, but his superstitious desire of extricating
himself out of the war which he had been forced to wage against the Pope. By
these treaties, however, the balance of power among the Italian states was
poized with greater equality, and rendered less variable than it had been since
it received the first violent shock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of
France. From this period Italy ceased to be the great theater, on which the
monarchs of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for power or for fame. Their
dissentions and hostilities were nevertheless as frequent and as violent as
ever; but being excited by new objects, they stained other regions of Europe
with blood, and rendered them, in their turn, miserable by the devastations of
war.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the same day that his adversary the Duke of
Alva made his ignominious submissions to the Pope. He was received in France as
the guardian angel of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy seeemed to be
forgotten, while his former services, particularly his defense of Metz, were
recounted with exaggerated praise; and he was welcomed in every city through
which he passed, as the restorer of public security, who, after having set
bounds by his conduct and valor to the victorious arms of Charles V. returned
now at the call of his country, to check the formidable progress of Philip's
power. The reception which he met with from Henry was no less cordial and
honorable. New titles were invented, and new dignities created in order to
distinguish him. He was appointed lieutenant general in chief both within and
without the kingdom, with a jurisdiction almost unlimited, and hardly inferior
to that which was possessed by the king himself. Thus, through the singular
felicity which attended the Princes of Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own
schemes contributed to aggrandize them. The calamities of his country, and the
ill conduct of his rival the Constable, exalted the Duke of Guise to a height
of dignity and power, which he could not have expected to attain by the most
fortunate and most complete success of his own ambitious projects.

THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform something suitable to the high
expectations of his countrymen, and that he might justify the extraordinary
confidence which the King had reposed in him, ordered all the troops, which
could be got together, to assemble at Campiegne. Though the winter was well
advanced, and had set in with extreme rigor, he placed himself at their head,
and took the field. By Henry's activity and the zeal of his subjects, so many
soldiers had been raised in the kingdom, and such considerable reinforcements
had been drawn from Germany and Swisserland, as formed an army respectable even
in the eyes of a victorious enemy. Philip, alarmed at seeing it put in motion
at such an uncommon season, began to tremble for his new conquests,
particularly St. Quintin, the fortifications of which were hitherto but
imperfectly repaired.

BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more important enterprise; and after amusing
the enemy with threatening successively different towns on the frontiers of
Flanders, he turned suddenly to the left and invested Calais with his whole
army. Calais had been taken by the English under Edward III. and was the fruit
of that monarch's glorious victory at Cressy. Being the only place that they
retained of their ancient and extensive territories in France, and which opened
to them, at all times, an easy and secure passage into the heart of that
kingdom, their keeping possession of it soothed the pride of the one nation as
much as it mortified the vanity of the other. Its situation was naturally so
strong, and its fortifications deemed so impregnable, that no monarch of
France, how adventurous soever, had been bold enough to attack it. Even when
the domestic strength of England was broken and exhausted by the bloody wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted
from foreign objects, Calais had remained undisturbed and unthreatened. Mary
and her council, composed chiefly of Ecclesiastics, unacquainted with military
affairs, and whose whole attention was turned toward extirpating heresy out of
the kingdom, had not only neglected to take any precautions for the safety of
this important place, but seemed to think that the reputation of its strength
alone was sufficient for its security. Full of this opinion, they ventured,
even after the declaration of war, to continue a practice which the low state
of the Queen's finances, had introduced in times of peace. As the country
adjacent to Calais was overflowed during the winter, and the marshes around it
became impassable, except by one avenue, which the forts of St. Agatha and
Newnhambridge commanded, it had been the custom of the English to dismiss the
greater part of the garrison toward the end of autumn, and to replace it in
the spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the governor of Calais, remonstrate
against this ill-timed parsimony, and represent the possibility of his being
attacked suddenly, while had not troops sufficient to man the works. The privy
council treated these remonstrances with scorn, as if they had flowed from the
timidity or the rapaciousness of the governor; and some of them, with that
confidence which is the companion of ignorance, boasted that they would defend
Calais with their white rods against any enemy who should approach it during
winter Car^e. iii. 345.
. In vain did Philip, who had passed through Calais as he returned from England
to the Netherlands, warn the Queen of the danger to which it was exposed; and
acquainting her with what was necessary for its security, offered to reinforce
the garrison during winter with a detachment of his own troops. Mary's
counselors, though obsequious to her in all points wherein religion was
concerned, distrusted, as much as the rest of their countrymen, every
proposition that came from her husband; and suspected this to be an artifice of
Philip's in order to gain the command of the town, they neglected his
intelligence, declined his offer, and left Calais with less than a fourth of
the men requisite for its defense.

IT was his knowledge of this, which encouraged the Duke of Guise to venture on
an enterprise, that surprised his own countrymen no less than his enemies. As
he knew that its success depended on conducting his operations with such
rapidity, as would afford the English no time for throwing relief into the town
by sea, and prevent Philip from giving him any interruption by land, he pushed
the attack with a degree of vigor little known in carrying on sieges, during
that age. He drove the English from Fort St. Agatha at the first assault;
obliged them to abandon the fort of Newnhambrige, after defending it three
days; took the castle which commanded the harbor by storm; and, on the eighth
day after he appeared before Calais compelled the governor, whose feeble
garrison, which did not exceed five hundred men, was worn out with the fatigue
of sustaining so many attacks, and defending such exten^^^ (...), to sign a
capitulation.

THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the English time to recover from the
consternation occasioned by this blow, immediately invested Guisnes, the
garrison of which, though more numerous, defended itself with less vigor, and
after standing one brisk assault, surrendered the town. The castle of Hames was
abandoned by the troops posted there, without waiting the approach of the enemy.

THUS, in a few days, during the depth of winter, and at a time when the fatal
battle of St. Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit of the French, that
their utmost aim was to protect their own country, without dreaming of making
conquests on the enemy; the enterprizing valor of one man drove the English
out of Calais, after they had held it two hundred and ten years, and deprived
them of every foot of land in a kingdom, where their dominions had been once so
extensive. This exploit, at the same time that it gave an high idea of the
power and resources of France to all Europe, set the Duke of Guise, in the
opinion of his countrymen, far above all the generals of the age. They
celebrated his conquests with immoderate transports of joy; while the English
gave vent to all the passions, which animate a high-spirited people, when any
great national calamity is manifestly owing to the ill conduct of their rulers.
Mary and her ministers, formerly odious, were now contemptible in their eyes.
All the terrors of her severe and arbitrary administration could not restrain
them from uttering execrations and threats against those who, having wontonly
involved the nation in a quarrel wherein it was no wise interested, had, by
their negligence or incapacity, brought irreparable disgrace on their country,
and lost the most valuable possession belonging to the English crown.

THE French King imitated the conduct of its former conqueror, Edward III. with
regard to Calais. He commanded all the English inhabitants to quit the town,
and giving their houses to his own subjects, whom he allured to settle there by
granting them various immunities, he left a numerous garrison, under an
experienced governor, for their defense. After this, his victorious army went
into quarters of refreshment, and the usual inaction of winter returned.

MEANWHILE Ferdinand assembled the college of electors at Frankfort, in order
to lay before them the deed whereby Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown,
and transferred it to him. This he had hitherto delayed, on account of some
difficulties which had occurred concerning the formalities requisite in
supplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to which there was no parallel in
the annals of the Empire. These being at length adjusted, the Prince of Orange
executed the commission with which he had been entrusted by Charles; the
Electors accepted of his resignation; declared Ferdinand his lawful successor;
and put him in possession of all the ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

BUT when the new Emperor sent Gusman, his chancellor, to acquaint the Pope
with this transaction, to testify his reverence toward the Holy See, and to
signify that, according to form, he would soon dispatch an ambassador
extraordinary to treat with his holiness concerning his coronation; Paul, who
neither experience nor disappointments could teach to bring down his lofty
ideas of the papal prerogative to such a moderate standard as suited the genius
of the times, refused to admit the envoy into his presence, and declared all
the proceedings at Frankfort irregular and invalid. He, contended that the
Pope, as the vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the keys both of
celestial and terrestrial government; that from him the Imperial jurisdiction
was derived; that though his predecessors had authorized the Electors to choose
an Emperor, whom the Holy See confirmed, this privilige was confined to those
cases when a vacancy was occasioned by death; that the instrument of Charles's
resignation had been presented in an improper court, as it belonged to the Pope
alone to reject or to accept of it, and to nominate a person to supply his
place; that, setting aside all these objections, Ferdinand's election labored
under two defects which alone were sufficient to render it void, for the
Protestant Electors had been admitted to vote, though, by their apostasy from the
catholic faith, they had forfeited that and every other privilege of the
electoral office; that Ferdinand, by ratifying the concessions of several Diets
in favor of heretics, had rendered himself unworthy of the Imperial dignity,
which was instituted for the protection, not for the destruction of the church.
But after thundering out these extravagant maxims, he added with an appearance
of condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce all title to the Imperial
crown, founded on the election at Frankfort, make professions of repentance for
his past conduct, and supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm Charles's
resignation, as well as his assumption to the Empire, he might expect every
mark of favor from his paternal clemency and goodness. Gusman, though he had
laid his account with considerable difficulties in his negotiation with the
Pope, little expected that he would have revived these antiquated and wild
pretensions, which astonished him so much that he scarce knew in what tone he
ought to reply. He prudently declined entering into any controversy concerning
the nature or extent of the papal jurisdiction, and confining himself to the
political considerations, which should determine the Pope to recognize an
Emperor already in possession, he endeavored to place these in such a light,
as he imagined could scarce fail to strike Paul, if he were not altogether
blind to his own interest. Philip seconded Gusman's arguments with great
earnestness, by an ambassador whom he sent to Rome of purpose, and besought the
Pope to desist from claims so unseasonable, as might not only irritate and
alarm Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but furnish the enemies of the
Holy See with a new reason for representing its jurisdiction as incompatible
with the rights of Princes, and subversive of all civil authority. But Paul,
who deemed it a crime to attend any consideration suggested by human prudence
or policy, when he thought himself called to assert the prerogatives of the
Papal See, remained inflexible; and, during his pontisicate, Ferdinand was not
acknowledged as Emperor by the court of Rome Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap.
Gold. polit. Imp. 392. Palav. lib. xiii. 189. Ribier. ii. 746. 759.
.

WHILE Henry was preparing for the approaching campaign, he received accounts
of the issue of his negociations in Scotland. Long experience having at last
taught the Scots the imprudence of involving their country in every quarrel
between France and England, neither the solicitations of his ambassador, nor
the address and authority of the Queen-regent, could prevail on them to take
arms against a kingdom, with which they were at peace. On this occasion, the
ardour of a martial nobility and of a turbulent people, was restrained by
regard for the public interest and tranquillity, which, in former
deliberations of this kind, had been seldom attended to, by a nation always
prone to rush into every new war. But though the Scots adhered with steadiness
to their pacific system, they were extremely ready to gratify the French King
in another particular, which he had given in charge to his ambassador.

THE young Queen of Scots had been affianced to the Dauphin, in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-eight, and having been educated since that time
in the court of France, she had grown up to be the most amiable, and one of the
most accomplished Princesses in that age. Henry demanded the consent of her
subjects to the celebration of the marriage, and a parliament which was held
for that purpose, appointed eight commissioners to represent the whole body of
the nation at that solemnity, with power to sign such deeds as might be
requisite before it was concluded. In settling the articles of the marriage,
the Scots took all the precautions, that prudence could dictate, in order to
preserve the liberty and independence of their country, while the French used
every art to secure to the Dauphin the conduct of affairs during the Queen's
life, and the succession of the crown on the event of her demise. The marriage
was celebrated with pomp, suitable to the dignity of the parties, and the
magnificence of a court, at that time, the most splendid in Europe Keith's
history of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corpse Diplom. v. 21.
. Thus Henry, in the course of a few months, had the glory of recovering an
important possession which anciently belonged to the crown of France, and of
adding to it the acquisition of a new kingdom. By this event, too, the Duke of
Guise acquired new consideration and importance; the marriage of his niece to
the apparent heir of the crown, raising him so far beyond the condition of
other subjects, as seemed to render the credit he had gained by his great
actions, no less permanent than it was extensive.

WHEN the campaign opened, soon after the Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise
was placed at the head of the army with the same unlimited powers as formerly.
Henry had received such liberal supplies from his subjects, that the troops
under his command were both numerous and well appointed; while Philip,
exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of the preceding year, had been obliged
to dismiss so many of his forces during the winter, that he could not bring an
army into the field capable of making head against him. The Duke of Guise did
not lose the favorable opportunity which his superiority afforded him. He
invested Toinville in the duchy of Luxemburg, one of the strongest towns on
the frontier of the Netherlands, and of great importance to France by its
neighborhood to Metz; and, notwithstanding the obstinate valor with which it
was defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege of three weeks Thuan.
lib. xx. ^^9.
.

BUT the success of this enterprise which it was expected would lead to other
conquests, was more than counterbalanced by an event that happened in another
part of the Low Countries. The Marechal de Terms, governor of Calais, having
penetrated into Flanders without opposition, invested Dunkirk with an army of
fourteen thousand men, and took it by storm on the fifth day of the siege. From
that he advanced toward Nieuport, which must have soon fallen into his hands,
if the approach of the Count of Egmont with a superior army had not made it
prudent to retreat. The French troops were so much encumbered with the booty
which they had got at Dunkirk, or by ravaging the open country, that they moved
slowly; and Egmont, who had left his heavy baggage and artillery behind him,
marched with such rapidity, that he came up with them near Gravelines, and
attacked them with the utmost impetuosity. De Terms, who had the choice of the
ground, having posted his troops to advantage in the angle formed by the mouth
of the river Aa and the sea, received him with great firmness. Victory remained
for some time in suspense, the desperate valor of the French, who foresaw the
unavoidable destruction that must follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the Flemings, when one of those
accidents to which human prudence does not extend, decided the contest in
favor of the latter. A squadron of English ships of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing toward the place of
engagement, entered the river Aa and turned its great guns against the right
wing of the French with such effect as immediately broke that body, and spread
terror and confusion through their whole army. The Flemings, to whom
assistance, so unexpected and so seasonable, gave fresh spirit, redoubling
their efforts, that they might not lose the advantage which fortune had
presented them, or give the enemy time to recover from their consternation, the
rout of the French soon became universal. Near two thousand were killed on the
spot; a greater number fell by the hands of the peasants, who, in revenge for
the cruelty with which their country had been plundered, pursued the fugitives
and massacred them without mercy; the rest were taken prisoners, together with
de Terms their general, and many officers of distinction. Thuan. lib. xx. 694.


THIS signal victory, for which the Count of Egmont was afterward so ill
requited by Philip, obliged the Duke of Guise to relinquish all other schemes,
and to hasten toward the frontier of Picardy, that he might oppose the
progress of the enemy there. This disaster reflected new luster on his
reputation, and once more turned the eyes of his countrymen toward him, as the
only general on whose arms victory always attended, and in whose conduct as
well as good fortune, they could confide in every danger. Henry reinforced
Guise's army with so many troops, drawn from the adjacent garrisons, that it
soon amounted to forty thousand men. That of the enemy, after the junction of
Egmont with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in number. They encamped at the
distance of a few leagues from one another; and each monarch having joined his
respective army, it was expected that, after the vicissitudes of good and bad
success during this and the former campaign, a decisive battle would at last
determine which of the rivals should take the ascendant for the future, and
give law to Europe. But though both had it in their power, neither of them
discovered any inclination to bring the decision of a point of such importance
to depend upon the uncertain and fortuitous issue of a single battle. The fatal
engagements at St. Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to be soon forgotten,
and the prospect of encountering the same troops, commanded by the same
generals, who had twice triumphed over his arms, inspired Henry with a degree
of caution which was not common to him. Philip, of a genius averse to bold
operations in war, naturally leaned to cautious measures, and would hazard
nothing against a general, so fortunate and successful as the Duke of Guise.
Both monarchs, as if by agreement, stood on the defensive, and fortifying their
camps carefully, avoided every skirmish or rencounter that might bring on a
general engagement.

WHILE the armies continued in this inaction, peace began to be mentioned in
each camp, and both Henry and Philip discovered an inclination to listen to any
overture that tended to re-establish it. The kingdoms of France and Spain had
been engaged during half a centry in almost continual wars, carried on at a
great expense and productive of no considerable advantage to either. Exhausted
by extraordinary and unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those to which the
nations of Europe had been accustomed before the rivalship between Charles V.
and Francis I. both nations longed so much for an interval of repose, in order
to recruit their strength, that their sovereigns drew from them with difficulty
the supplies necessary for carrying on hostilities. The private inclinations of
both the Kings concurred with those of their people. Philip was prompted to
wish for peace by his fond desire of returning to Spain. Accustomed from his
infancy to the climate and manners of that country, he was attached to it with
such extreme predilection, that he was unhappy in any other part of his
dominions. But as he could not either with decency or safety quit the
Low Countries, and venture on a voyage to Spain, during the continuance of war,
the prospect of a pacification which would put it in his power to execute this
favorite scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry was no less desirous of being
delivered from the burden and avocations of war, that he might have leisure to
turn all his attention, and bend the whole force of his government toward
suppressing the opinions of the Reformers, which were spreading with such
rapidity in Paris, and other great towns of France, that they began to grow
formidable to the established church.

BESIDES these public and avowed considerations arising from the state of the
two hostile kingdoms, or from the wishes of their respective monarchs, there
was a secret intrigue carried on in the court of France, which contributed as
much as either of the other, to hasten and to facilitate the negotiation of a
peace. The Constable Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld the rapid
success and growing favor of the Duke of Guise, with the envious solicitude of
a rival. Every advantage gained by him he considered as a fresh wound to his
own reputation, and he knew with what malevolent address it would be improved
to diminish his credit with the King, and to augment that of the Duke of Guise.
These arts, he was afraid, might by degrees, work on the easy and ductile mind
of Henry, so as to efface all remains of his ancient affection toward him. But
he could not discover any remedy for this unless he were allowed to return
home, that he might try whether by his presence he could defeat the artifices
of his enemies, and revive those warm and tender sentiments which had long
attached Henry to him, with a confidence so entire, as resembled rather the
cordiality of private friendship, than the cold and selfish connection between
a monarch and one of his courtiers. While Montmorency was forming schemes and
wishes for his return to France with much anxiety of mind, but with little hope
of success, an unexpected incident prepared the way for it. The Cardinal of
Lorrain, who had shared with his brother in the King's favor, and participated
of the power which that conferred, did not bear prosperity with the same
discretion as the Duke of Guise. Intoxicated with their good fortune, he forgot
how much they had been indebted for their present elevation to their connexions
with the Duchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to the extraordinary
merit of their family. This led him not only to neglect his benefactress, but
to thwart her schemes, and to talk with a sarcastick liberty of her character
and person. That singular woman, who, if we may believe contemporary writers,
retained the beauty and charms of youth at the age of threescore, and on whom
it is certain that Henry still doated with all the fondness of love, felt this
injury with sensibility, and set herself with eagerness to revenge it. As there
was no method of supplanting the Princes of Lorrain so effectually as by a
coalition of interests with the Constable, she proposed the marriage of her
granddaughter with one of his sons, as the bond of their future union, and
Montmorency readily gave his consent to the match. Having thus cemented their
alliance, the duchess employed all her influence with the King in order to
confirm his inclinations toward peace, and to induce him to take the steps
necessary for attaining it. She insinuated that any overture of that kind would
come with great propriety from the Constable, and if committed to the conduct
of his prudence, could hardly fail of success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all affairs of importance on the Constable,
and needing only this encouragement to return to his ancient habits, wrote to
him immediately with his usual familiarity and affection, impowering him, at
the same time, to take the first opportunity of sounding Philip and his
ministers with regard to peace. Montmorency made his application to Philip by
the most proper channel. He opened himself to the Duke of Savoy, who,
notwithstanding the height of preferment to which he had been raised, and the
military glory which he had acquired in the Spanish service, was weary of
remaining in exile, and languished to return into his dominions. As there was
no prospect of his recovering possession of these by force of arms, he
considered a definitive treaty of peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain restitution. Being no stranger to
Philip's private wishes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed on him not
only to discover a disposition on his part toward accommodation, but to permit
Montmorency to return, on his parole, to France, that he might confirm his own
sovereign in his pacifick sentiments. Henry received the Constable with the
most flattering marks of regard; absence, instead of having abated or
extinguished his friendship, seemed to have given it new ardour; and he
assumed, from the moment of his appearance in court, a higher place, if
possible, in his affection, and a more perfect ascendant over his mind, than
ever. The Cardinal of Lorrain and Duke of Guise, prudently gave way to a tide
of favor too strong for them to oppose, and confining themselves to their
proper departments, permitted, without any struggle, the Constable and Duchess
of Valentinois to direct public affairs at their pleasure. They soon prevailed
on the King to nominate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace. Philip did the
same. The abbey of Cercamp was fixed on as the place of congress; and all
military operations were immediately terminated by a suspension of arms.

WHILE these preliminary steps were taking toward a treaty which restored
tranquillity to Europe, Charles V. whose ambition had so long disturbed it,
ended his days in the monastry of St. Justus. When Charles entered this
retreat, he formed such a plan of life for himself, as would have suited the
condition of a private gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table was neat but
plain; his domestics few; his intercourse with them familiar; all the
cumbersome and ceremonious forms of attendance in his person were entirely
abolished, as destructive of that social ease and tranquillity which he courted
in order to sooth the remainder of his days. As the mildness of the climate,
together with his deliverance from the burdens and cares of government procured
him at first, a considerable remission from the acute pains with which he had
been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps, more complete satisfaction in this
humble solitude, than all his grandeur had ever yielded him. The ambitious
thoughts and projects which had so long engrossed and disquited him, were quite
effaced from his mind: Far from taking any part in the political transactions
of the Princes of Europe, he restrained his curiosity even from any inquiry
concerning them; and he seemed to view the busy scene which he had abandoned
with all the contempt and indifference arising from his thorough experience of
its vanity, as well as from the pleasing reflection of having disentangled
himself from its cares.

OTHER amusements, and other objects now occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated
the plants in his garden with his own hands; sometimes he rode out to the
neighboring wood on a little horse, the only one that he kept, attended by a
single servant on foot. When in infirmities confined him to his apartment,
which often happened, and deprived him of these more active recreations, he
either admitted a few gentlemen who resided near the monastry to visit him, and
entertained them familiarly at his table; or he employed himself in studying
the principles and in forming curious works of mechanism, of which he had
always been remarkably fond, and to which his genius was peculiarly turned.
With this view he had engaged Turriano, one of the most ingenious artists of
that age, to accompany him in his retreat. He labored together with him in
framing models of the most useful machines, as well as making experiments with
regard to their respective powers, and it was not seldom that the ideas of the
monarch assisted or perfected the inventions of the artist. He relieved his
mind, at intervals, with slighter and more fantastic works of mechanism, in
fashioning puppets, which by the structure of internal springs, mimicked the
gestures and actions of men, to the no small astonishment of the ignorant
monks, who beholding movements, which they could not comprehend, sometimes
distrusted their own senses, and sometimes suspected Charles and Turriano of
being in compact with invisible powers. He was particularly curious with regard
to the construction of clocks and watches, and having found, after repeated
trials, that he could not bring any two of them to go exactly alike, he
reflected, it is said, with a mixture of surprise and regret on his own folly,
in having bestowed so much time and labor on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of sentiment concerning the intricate and
mysterious doctrines of religion.

BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed of the rest of his time, he
constantly reserved a considerable portion of it for religious exercises. He
regularly attended divine service in the chapel of the monastry, every morning
and evening; he took great pleasure in reading books of devotion, particularly
the works of St. Augustine and St. Bernard; and conversed much with his
confessor, and the prior of the monastry on pious subjects. Thus did Charles
pass the first year of his retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a man perfectly
disengaged from the affairs of the present life, and standing on the confines
of a future world either in innocent amusement which soothed his pains, and
relieved a mind worn out with excessive application to business; or in devout
occupations, which he deemed necessary in preparing for another state.

BUT about six months before his death, the gout, after a longer intermission
than usual, returned with a proportional increase of violence. His shattered
constitution had scarce vigor enough remaining to withstand such a shock. It
enfeebled his mind as much as his body, and from that period we scarce discern
any traces of that sound and masculine understanding, which distinguished
Charles among his contemporaries. An illiberal and timid, superstition
depressed his his spirit. He had no relish for amusements of any kind. He
endeavored to conform, in his manner of living, to all the rigor of monastic
austerity. He desired no other society than that of monks, and was almost
continually employed with them in chanting the hymns in the Missal. As an
expiation for his sins, he gave himself the discipline in secret with such
severity, that the whip of cords which he employed as the instrument of his
punishment, was found after his decease tinged with his blood. Nor was he
satisfied with these acts of mortification, which however severe, were not
unexampled. The timorous and distrustful solicitude which always accompanies
superstition still continued to disquiet him, and depreciating all that he had
done, prompted him to aim at something extraordinary, at some new and singular
act of piety that would display his zeal, and merit the favor of heaven. The
act on which he fixed was as wild and uncommon, as any that superstition ever
suggested to a weak and disordered fancy. He resolved to celebrate his own
obsequies before his death. He ordered his tomb to be created in the chapel of
the monastry. His domestics marched thither in funeral procession, with black
tapers in their hands. He himself followed in his shroud. He was laid in his
coffin, with much solemnity. The service for the dead was chanted, and Charles
joined in the prayers which were offered up for the rest of his soul, mingling
his tears with those which his attendants shed, as if they had been celebrating
a real funeral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling holy water on the coffin in
the usual form, and all the assistants retiring, the doors of the chapel were
shut. Then Charles arose out of the coffin and withdrew to his apartment, full
of these awful sentiments, which such a singular solemnity was calculated to
inspire. But either the fatiguing length of the ceremony, or the impression
which this image of death left on his mind affected him so much, that the next
day he was seized with a fever. His feeble frame could not long resist its
violence, and he expired on the twenty-first of September, after a life of
fifty-eight years, six months, and twenty-five days Strada de Bello Belg. lib.
i. p. 11. Thuan. 723. Sandov. ii. 609, etc. Miniana Contin Marianae, vol. iv.
216. Very Zuniga vida de Carlos, p. 111.
.

AS Charles was the first prince of the age in rank and dignity, the part which
he acted, whether we consider the greatness, the variety, or the success of his
undertakings, was the most conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation of
his conduct, not from the exaggerated praises of the Spanish historians, or the
undistinguishing censure of the French, that a just idea of Charles's genius
and abilities is to be collected. He possessed qualities so peculiar, as
strongly mark his character, and not only distinguish him from the Princes who
were his contemporaries, but account for that superiority over them which he so
long maintained. In forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as well as by
habit, cautious and considerate. Born with talents, which unfolded themselves
slowly, and were late in attaining maturity, he was accustomed to ponder every
subject that demanded his consideration with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of his mind toward it, and dwelling upon it
with a serious application, undiverted by pleasure, and hardly relaxed by any
amusement, he revolved it, in silence in his own breast. He then communicated
the matter to his ministers, and after hearing their opinions, took his
resolution with a decisive firmness, which seldom follows such slow
consultations. In consequence of this, Charles's measures, instead of
resembling the desultory and irregular sallies of Henry VIII. or Francis I. had
the appearance of a consistent system, in which all parts were arranged, the
effects were foreseen, and the accidents were provided for. His promptitude in
execution was no less remarkable than his patience in deliberation. He
consulted with phlegm, but he acted with vigor; and did not discover greater
sagacity in his choice of the measures which it was proper to pursue, than
fertility of genius in finding out the means for rendering his pursuit of them
successful. Though he had naturally so little of the martial turn, that during
the most ardent and bustling period of life, he remained in the cabinet
inactive, yet when he chose at length to appear at the head of his armies, his
mind was so formed for vigorous exertions in every direction, that he acquired
such knowledge in the art of war, and such talents for command, as rendered him
equal in reputation and success to the most able generals of the age. But
Charles possessed, in the most eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knowing men, and of adapting their talents to
the various departments which he allotted to them. From the death of Chievres
to the end of his reign, he employed no general in the field, no minister in
the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court, no governor of a province, whose
abilities were inadequate to the trust which he reposed in them. Though
destitute of that bewitching affability of manners, which gained Francis the
hearts of all who approached his person, he was no stranger to the virtues
which secure fidelity and attachment. He placed unbounded confidence in his
generals; he rewarded their services with munificence; he neither envied their
fame, nor discovered any jealousy of their power. Almost all the generals who
conducted his armies may be placed on a level with those illustrious
personages, who have attained the highest eminence of military glory; and his
advantages over his rivals are to be ascribed so manifestly to the superior
abilities of the commanders whom he set in opposition to them, that this might
seem to detract in some degree, from his own merit, if the talent of
discovering and employing such instruments were not the most undoubted proof of
a capacity for government.

THERE were, nevertheless, defects in his political character which must
considerably abate the admiration due to his extraordinary talents. Charles's
ambition was insatiable; and though there seems to be no foundation for an
opinion prevalent in his own age, that he had formed the chimerical project of
establishing an universal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that his desire of
being distinguished as a conqueror involved him in continual wars, which
exhausted and oppressed his subjects, and left him little leisure for giving
attention to the interior police and improvement of his kingdoms, the great
objects of every Prince who makes the happiness of his people the end of his
government. Charles, at a very early period of life, having added the Imperial
crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and to the hereditary dominions of the houses
of Austria and Burgundy, this opened to him such a vast field of enterprise,
and engaged him in schemes so complicated as well as arduous, that feeling his
power to be unequal to the execution of these, he had often recourse to low
artifices unbecoming his superior talents, and sometimes ventured on such
deviations from integrity as were dishonorable in a great Prince. His
insidious and fraudulent policy appeared more conspicuous, and was rendered
more odious, by a comparison with the open and undesigning character of his
contemporaries Francis I. and Henry VIII. This difference, though occasioned
chiefly by the diversity of their tempers, must be ascribed, in some degree to
such an opposition in the principles of their political conduct as affords some
excuse for this defect in Charles's behavior, though it cannot serve as a
justification of it. Francis and Henry seldom acted but from the impulse of
their passions, and rushed headlong toward the object in view. Charles's
measures being the result of cool reflection, were disposed into a regular
system, and carried on upon a concerted plan. Persons who act in the former
manner naturally pursue the end in view without assuming any disguise, or
displaying much address. Such as hold the latter course are apt, in forming as
well as in executing their designs, to employ such refinements, as always lead
to artifice in conduct and often degenerate into deceit.

THE circumstances transmitted to us, with respect to Charles's private
deportment and character, are fewer and less interesting, than might have been
expected, from the great number of authors who have undertaken to write an
account of his Life. These are not the object of this history, which aims at
representing the transactions of the reign of Charles V. not at delineating his
private virtues or defects.

MEANWHILE the plenipotentiaries of France, Spain and England continued their
conferences at Cercamp; and though each of them, with the usual art of
negociators, made at first very high demands in name of their repective courts,
yet as they were all equally desirous of peace, they would have consented
reciprocally to such abatements and restrictions of their claims as must have
removed every obstacle to an accommodation. The death of Charles V. was a new
motive with Philip to hasten the conclusion of a treaty, as it increased his
impatience for returning into Spain, where there was now no person greater or
more illustrious than himself. But in spite of the concurring wishes of all the
parties interested, an event happened which occasioned an unavoidable delay in
their negociations. About a month after the opening of the conferences at
Cercamp, Mary of England ended her short and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth
her sister was immediately proclaimed Queen by the English with universal joy.
As the powers of the English plenipotentiaries expired on the death of their
mistress, they could not proceed until they received a commission and
instructions from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation to the throne with equal
solicitude. As during Mary's jealous administration, under the most difficult
circumstances, and in a situation extremely delicate, she had conducted herself
with prudence and address far exceeding her years, they had conceived an high
idea of her abilities, and already formed expectations of a reign very
different from that of her sister. Equally sensible of the importance of
gaining her favor, both monarchs set themselves with emulation to court it,
and employed every art in order to insinuate themselves into her confidence.
Each of them had something meritorious, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in
his own behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat in his dominions, if the dread
of her sister's violence should force her to fly for safety out of England.
Philip had, by his powerful intercession, prevented Mary from proceeding to the
most fatal extremities against her. Each of them endeavored now, to avail
himself of the circumstances in his favor. Henry wrote to Elizabeth soon after
her accession, with the warmest expressions of regard and friendship. He
represented the war which had unhappily been kindled between their kingdoms,
not as a national quarrel, but as the effect of Mary's blind partiality to her
husband and fond compliance with all his wishes. He entreated her to disengage
herself from an alliance which had proved so unfortunate to England, and to
consent to a separate peace with him, without mingling her interests with those
of Spain, from which they ought now to be altogether disjoined. Philip on the
other hand, unwilling to lose his connection with England, the importance of
which during a rupture with France he had so recently experienced, not only
vied with Henry in declarations of esteem for Elizabeth, and in professions of
his resolution to cultivate the strictest amity with her, but in order to
confirm and perpetuate their union, he offered himself to her in marriage, and
undertook to procure a dispensation from the Pope to that effect.

ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two Monarchs attentively, and with that
provident discernment of her true interest which was conspicuous in all her
deliberations. She gave some encouragement to Henry's overture of a separate
negotiation, because it opened a channel of correspondence with France, which
she might find to be of great advantage, if Philip should not discover
sufficient zeal and solicitude for securing to her proper terms in the joint
treaty. But she ventured on this with the utmost reserve and caution, that she
might not alarm Philip's suspicious temper, and lose an ally in attemping to
gain an enemy Forbes i. p. 4.
. Henry himself, by an unpardonable act of indiscretion, prevented her from
carrying her intercourse with him to such a length as might have offended or
alienated Philip. At the very time he was courting Elizabeth's friendship with
the greatest assiduity, he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the
solicitations of the Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-law the
Queen of Scots to assume the title and arms of England. This ill-timed
pretension, the source of many calamities to the unfortunate Queen of Scots,
extinguished at once all the confidence that might have grown between Henry and
Elizabeth, and left in its place distrust, resentment and antipathy. Elizabeth
found that she must unite her interests closely with Philip's, and expect peace
only from negociations carried on in conjunction with him Strype's Annals of
the Reformation, i. 11. Car^e's Hist. of England. vol. iii. p. 275.
.

AS she had granted a commission, immediately after her accession, to the same
plenipotentiaries whom her sister had employed, she now instructed them to act
in every point in concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no
step until they had previously consulted with them Forbes full view, i. 1. 37,
40.
. But though she deemed it prudent to assume this appearance of confidence in
the Spanish Monarch, she knew precisely how far to carry it; and discovered no
inclination to accept of that extraordinary proposal of marriage which Philip
had made to her. The English had expressed so openly the detestation of her
sister's choice of him, that it would have been highly imprudent to have
exasperated them by renewing that odious alliance. She was too well acquainted
with Philip's harsh imperious temper, to think of him for a husband. Nor could
she admit a dispensation from the Pope to be sufficient to authorize her
marrying him, without condemning her father's divorce from Catherine of Aragon,
and acknowledging of consequence that her mother's marriage was null and her
own birth illegitimate. But though she determined not to yield to Philip's
addresses, the situation of her affairs rendered it dangerous to reject them;
she returned her answer, therefore, in terms which were evasive, but so
tempered with respect, that though they gave him no reason to be secure of
success, they did not altogether extinguish his hopes.

BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence with which she concealed her
sentiments and intentions concerning religion, for some time after her
accession, she so far gained upon Philip, that he warmly espoused her interest
in the conferences which were renewed at Cercamp, and afterward removed to
Chateau-Cambresis. A definitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims and
pretensions of so many Princes, required the examination of such a variety of
intricate points, and led to such infinite and minute details, as drew out the
negociations to a great length. But the Constable Montmorency exerted himself
with such indefatigable zeal and industry, repairing alternately to the courts
of Paris and Brussels, in order to obviate or remove every difficulty, that all
points in dispute were adjusted, at length, in such a manner, as to give entire
satisfaction, in every particular, to Henry and Philip; and the last hand was
ready to be put to the treaty between them.

THE claims of England remained as the only obstacle to retard it. Elizabeth
demanded the restitution of Calais, in the most preremptory tone, as an
essential condition of her conse^ting to peace; Henry refused to give up that
important conquest; and both seemed to have taken their resolution with
unalterable firmness. Philip warmly supported Elizabeth's pretensions to
Calais, not merely from a principle of equity toward the English nation, that
he might appear to have contributed to their recovering what they had lost by
espousing his cause; nor solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this
manifestation of zeal for her interest; but in order to render France less
formidable, by securing to her ancient enemy this easy access into the heart of
the kingdom. The earnestness, however, with which he seconded the arguments of
the English plenipotentiaries, soon began to relax. During the course of the
negotiation, Elizabeth, who now felt herself firmly seated on the throne, began
to take such open and vigorous measures not only for overturning all that her
sister had done in favor of popery, but for establishing the protestant church
on a firm foundation, as convinced Philip that his hopes of an union with her
had been from the beginning vain, and were now desperate. From that period, his
interpositions in her favor became more cold and formal, flowing merely from
regard to decorum, or from the consideration of remote political interests.
Elizabeth having reason to expect such an alteration in his conduct, quickly
perceived it. But as nothing would have been of greater detriment to her
people, or more inconsistent with her schemes of domestic administration, than
the continuance of a war with France, she saw the necessity of submitting to
such conditions as the situation of her affairs imposed, and that she must lay
her account with being deserted by an ally who was now united to her by a very
feeble tie, if she did not speedily reduce her demands to what was moderate and
attainable. She accordingly gave new instructions to her ambassadors; and
Philip's plenipotentiaries acting as mediators between the French and them
Forbes, i. 50.
, an expedient was fallen on, which justified, in some degree, Elizabeth's
departing from the rigor of her first demand with regard to Calais. All lesser
articles were settled without much discussion or delay. Philip, that he might
not appear to have abandoned the English, insisted that the treaty between
Henry and Elizabeth should be concluded in form, before that between the French
monarch and him. The one was signed on the second day of April, the other on
the day following.

THE treaty of peace between France and England contained no articles of real
importance, but that which respected Calais. It was stipulated that the King of
France should retain possession of that town, with all its dependencies, during
eight years; that, at the expiration of that term, he should restore it to
England; that in case of nonperformance, he should forfeit five hundred
thousand crowns, for the payment of which sum, seven or eight wealthy
merchants, who were not his subjects, should grant security; that five persons
of distinction should be given as hostages till that security were provided;
that, although the forfeit of five hundred thousand crowns should be paid, the
right of England to Calais should still remain entire, in the same manner as if
the term of eight years were expired; that the King and Queen of Scotland
should be included in the treaty; that if they, or the French King, should
violate the peace by any hostile action, Henry should be obliged instantly to
restore Calais; that on the other hand, if any breach of the treaty proceeded
from Elizabeth, then Henry and the King and Queen of Scots were absolved from
all the engagements which they had come under by this treaty.

NOTWITHSTANDING the studied attention with which so many precautions were
taken, it is evident that Henry did not intend the restitution of Calais, nor
is it probable that Elizabeth expected it. It was hardly possible that she
could maintain, during the course of eight years, such perfect concord both
with France and Scotland, as not to afford Henry some pretext for alleging
that she had violated the treaty. But even if that term should elapse without
any ground for complaint, Henry might then choose to pay the sum stipulated, and
Elizabeth had no method of asserting her right but by force of arms. However,
by throwing the articles in the treaty with regard to Calais into this form,
Elizabeth satisfied her subjects of every denomination; she gave men of
discernment a striking proof of her address, in palliating what she could not
prevent; and amused the multitude, to whom the final surrender of a place of
such importance would have appeared altogether infamous, with the prospect of
recovering in a short time that favorite possession.

THE expedient which Montmorency employed, in order to facilitate the
conclusion of peace between France and Spain, was the negociating two treaties
of marriage, one between Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip, who
supplanted his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to whom that Princess had been
promised in the former conferences at Cercamp, the other between Margaret,
Henry's only sister, and the duke of Savoy. For feeble as the ties of blood
often are among Princes, or how little soever they may regard them when pushed
on to act by motives of ambition they assume on other occasions the appearance
of being so far influenced by these domestic affections, as to employ them to
justify measures and concessions which they find to be necessary, but know to
be impolitic or dishonorable. Such was the use Henry made of the two marriages
to which he gave his consent. Having secured an honorable establishment for
his sister and his daughter, he, in consideration of these, granted terms both
to Philip and the Duke of Savoy, of which he would not, on any other account,
have ventured to approve.

THE principal articles in the treaty between France and Spain were, That a
sincere and perpetual amity should be established between the two crowns and
their respective allies; that the two monarchs should labor in concert to
procure the convocation of a general council, in order to check the progress of
heresy, and restore unity and concord to the Christian church; that all
conquests made by either party, on this side of the Alps, since the
commencement of the war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, should be
mutually restored; that the duchy of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont, the
country of Bresse, and all the other territories formerly subject to the dukes
of Savoy, should be restored to Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the
celebration of his marriage with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin,
Quiers, Pignerol, Chivaz and Villanova excepted, of which Henry should keep
possession until his claims on that Prince, in right of his grandmother,
should be heard and decided in course of law; that as long as Henry retained
these places in his hands, Philip should be at liberty to keep garrisons in the
towns of Vercelli and Asti; that the French King should immediately evacuate
all the places which he held in Tuscany and the Sienese, and renounce all
future pretensions to them; that he should restore the Marquisate of Montferrat
to the duke of Mantua; that he should receive the Genoese into favor, and give
up to them the towns which he had conquered in the island of Corsica; that none
of the Princes or states, to whom these cessions were made, should call their
subjects to account for any part of their conduct while under the dominion of
their enemies, but should bury all past transactions in oblivion. The Pope, the
Emperor, the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the King and Queen of
Scots, and almost every Prince and state in Christendom, were comprehended in
this pacification as the allies either of Henry or of Philip Recuell des
Traitez, t. ii. 287.
.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re-established in Europe. All the
causes of discord which had so long embroiled the powerful monarchs of France
and Spain, which had transmitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles to
Philip, and from Francis to Henry, seemed to be wholly removed, or finally
terminated: The French alone complained of the unequal conditions of a treaty,
into which an ambitious minister, in order to recover his liberty, and an
artful mistress, than she might gratify her resentment, had seduced their too
easy monarch. They exclaimed loudly against the folly of giving up to the
enemies of France, an hundred and eighty-nine fortified places in the
Low Countries or in Italy, in return for the three insignificant towns of St.
Quintin, Ham and Catelet. They considered it as an indelible stain upon the
glory of the nation, to renounce in one day territories so extensive, and so
capable of being defended, that the enemy could not have hoped to wrest them
out of their hands, after many years of victory and success.

BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments of his people, or being moved by
the remonstrances of his council, ratified the treaty, and executed with great
fidelity whatever he had stipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired with
a numerous retinue to Paris, in order to celebrate his marrriage with Henry's
sister. The duke of Alva was sent to the same capital, at the head of a
splendid embassy, to espouse Elizabeth in name of his master. They were
received with extraordinary magnificence by the French court. Amidst the
rejoicings and festivities on that occasion, Henry's days were cut short by a
singular and tragical accident. His son, Francis II. a Prince under age of a
feeble constitution, and of a mind still weaker, succeeded him. Soon after Paul
ended his violent and imperious Pontificate, at enmity with all the world, and
disgusted even with own nephews. They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted by
the succeeding Pope, whom they had raised by their influence to the Papal
throne, were condemned to the punishment which their crimes and ambition had
merited, and their death was as infamous, as their lives had been criminal.
Thus all the personages, who had long sustained the principal characters on the
great theater of Europe, disappeared about the same time. A more known period
of history opens at this era; other actors appear on the stage, with different
views and different passions; new contests arose, and new schemes of ambition
occupied and disquieted mankind.

UPON reviewing the transactions of any active period, in the history of
civilized nations, the changes which are accomplished appear wonderfully
disproportioned to the efforts which have been exerted. Conquests are never
very extensive or rapid, but among nations, whose progress in improvement is
extremely unequal. When Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant people,
of simple manners, and formed to war by admirable military institutions,
invaded a state sunk in luxury, and enervated by excessive refinement; when
Genchizcan and Tamerlane, with their armies of hardy barbarians, poured in upon
nations enfeebled by the climate in which they lived, or by the arts and
commerce which they cultivated, they like a torrent, swept every thing before
them, subduing kingdoms and provinces in as short space of time as was
requisite to march through them. But when nations are in a similar state, and
keep pace with each other in their advances toward refinement, they are not
exposed to the calamity of sudden conquest. Their acquisitions of knowledge,
their progress in the art of war, their political sagacity and address, are
nearly equal. The fate of states in this situation, depends not on a single
battle. Their internal resources are many and various. Nor are they themselves
alone interested in their own safety, or active in their own defense. Other
states interpose, and balance any temporary advantage which either party may
have acquired. After the fiercest and most lengthened contest, all the rival
nations are exhausted, none are conquered. At length a peace is concluded,
which re-instates each in possession of almost the same power, and the same
territories.

SUCH was the state of Europe during the reign of Charles V. No Prince was so
much superior to the rest in power, as to render his efforts irresistible, and
his conquests easy. No nation had made progress in improvement so far beyond
its neighbors, as to have acquired a very manifest pre-eminence. Each state
derived some advantage, or was subject to some inconvenience, from its
situation or its climate; each was distinguished by something peculiar in the
genius of its people, or the constitution of its government, But the advantages
possessed by one, were counter-balanced by circumstances favorable to others;
and this prevented any from attaining such superiority as might have been fatal
to all. The nations of Europe in that age, as in the present, were like one
great family; there were some features common to all, which fixed a
resemblance; there were certain peculiarities conspicuous in each, which marked
a distinction. But there was not among them that wide diversity of character
and of genius which, in almost every period of history, has exalted the
Europeans above the inhabitants of the other quarters of the globe, and seems
to have destined the one to rule, and the other to obey.

BUT though the near resemblance and equality in improvement among the
different nations of Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V. from being
distinguished by such sudden and extensive conquests, as occur in some other
periods of history, yet, during the course of his administration, all the
considerable states in Europe suffered a remarkable change in their political
situation, and felt the influence of events, which have not hitherto spent
their force, but still continue to operate in a greater or in a less degree. It
was during his reign, and in consequence of the perpetual efforts to which his
enterprizing ambition rouzed them, that the different kingdoms of Europe
acquired internal vigor, that they discerned the resources of which they were
possessed, that they came both to feel their own strength, and to know how to
render it formidable to others. It was during his reign, too, that the
different kingdoms of Europe, formerly single and disjoined, became so
thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately connected with each other, as to form
one great political system, in which each took a station, wherein it has
remained since that time with less variation, than could have been expected
after the events of two active centuries.

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of the house of Austria, were not only
greater than those of any other power, but more discernible and conspicuous. I
have already enumerated the vast territories which descended to Charles from
his Austrian, Burgundian, and Spanish ancestors Vol. i. p, 331
. To these he himself added the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had been
too little, the bounds of the universe were extended, and a new world subjected
to his command. Upon his resignation, the Burgundian provinces, and the Spanish
kingdoms with their dependencies, both in the old and new worlds, devolved to
Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions to his son, in a condition very
different from that in which he had received them. They were augmented by the
accession of new provinces; they were habituated to obey an administration
which was no less vigorous than steady; they were accustomed to expensive and
persevering efforts, which, though necessary in the contests between civilized
nations, had been little known in Europe before the sixteenth century. The
provinces of Friesland, Utrecht and Overyssel, which he acquired by purchase
from their former proprietors, and the duchy of Gelders, of which he made
himself master, partly by force of arms, and partly by the arts of negotiation,
were additions of great value to his Burgundian dominions. Ferdinand and
Isabella had transmitted to him all the provinces of Spain, from the bottom of
the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal; but as he maintained a perpetual
peace with that kingdom, amidst the various efforts of his enterprizing
ambition, he made no acquisition of territory in that quarter.

CHARLES had gained, however, a vast accession of power in this part of his
dominions. By this success in the war with the commons of Castile, he exalted
the regal prerogative on the ruins of the privileges of the people. Though he
allowed the name of the Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it to be
continued, he reduced its authority and jurisdiction to nothing, and modelled
it in such a manner, that it became rather a junto of the servants of the
crown, than an assembly of the representatives of the people. One member of the
constitution being thus lopped off, it was impossible but that the other must
feel the stroke, and suffer by it. The suppression of the popular power
rendered the aristocratical less formidable. The grandees, prompted by the
warlike spirit of the age, or allured by the honors which they enjoyed in a
court, exhausted their fortunes in military service, or in attending on the
person of their Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did not observe, the
dangerous progress of the royal authority, which leaving them the vain
distinction of being covered in presence of their sovereign, stripped them by
degrees of that real power which they possessed while they formed one body, and
acted in concert with the people. Charles's success in abolishing the
privileges of the commons, and in breaking the power of the nobles of Castile,
encouraged Philip to invade the liberties of Aragon, which were still more
extensive. The Castilians, accustomed to subjection themselves, assisted in
imposing the yoke on their more happy and independent neighbors. The will of
the sovereign became the supreme law in all the kingdoms of Spain; and Princes
who were not checked in their plans by the jealousy of the people, nor
controuled in the executing them by the power of the nobles, could both aim at
great objects and call forth the whole strength of the monarchy in order to
attain them.

AS Charles, by extending the regal prerogative, rendered the monarchs of Spain
masters at home, he added new dignity and power to their crown by his foreign
acquisitions. He secured to Spain the quiet possession of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud, and held with difficulty. He
united the duchy of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous provinces in
Italy, to the Spanish crown; and left his successors, even without taking their
other territories into the account, the most considerable Princes in that
country, which had been long the theater of contention to the great powers of
Europe, and in which they had struggled with emulation to obtain the
superiority. When the French, in consequence of the treaty of
Chateau-Cambresis, withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally relinquished
all their schemes of conquest on that side of the Alps, the Spanish dominions
there rose in importance, and enabled their Kings, as long as the monarchy
retained any degree of vigor, to preserve the chief sway in all the
transactions of that country. But whatever accession either of interior
authority or of foreign dominion Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain in
Europe, it was inconsiderable when compared with his acquisitions in the new
world. He added, there, not provinces, but empires to his crown. He conquered
territories of such immense extent; he discovered such inexhaustible veins of
wealth, and opened such boundless prospects of every kind, as must have rouzed
and called forth to action his successor, though his ambition had been much
less ardent than Philip's and must have rendered him not only enterprizing but
formidable.

WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian family rose to such pre-eminence in
Spain, the younger of which Ferdinand was the head, grew to be considerable in
Germany. The ancient hereditary dominions of the house of Austria in Germany,
united to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had acquired by
marriage, formed a respectable power, and when the Imperial dignity was added
to these, Ferdinand possessed territories more extensive than had belonged to
any Prince, Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head of the Empire during
several ages. Fortunately for Europe, the disgust which Philip conceived, on
account of Ferdinand's refusing to relinquish the Imperial crown in his favor
not only prevented for some time the separate members of the house of Austria
from acting in concert, but occasioned a visible alienation and rivalship. By
degrees, however, regard to the interest of their family extinguished this
impolitic animosity. The confidence which was natural returned; the
aggrandizing of the house of Austria became the common object of all their
schemes; they gave and received assistance alternately toward the execution of
them; and each derived consideration and importance from the other's success. A
family so great and so aspiring became the general object of jealousy and
terror. All the power as well as policy of Europe were exerted during a
century, in order to check and humble it. Nothing can give a more striking idea
of the ascendant which it had acquired, and of the terror which it had
inspired, than that after its vigor was spent with extraordinary exertions of
its strength, after Spain was become only the shadow of a great name, and its
monarchs were sunk into debility and dotage, the house of Austria still
continued to be formidable. The nations of Europe had so often felt its
superior power, and had been so constantly employed in guarding against it,
that the dread of it became a kind of political habit, the influence of which
remained when the causes, which had formed it, ceased to exist.

WHILE the house of Austria went on with such success in enlarging its
dominions, France made no inconsiderable acquisition of new territory. All its
schemes of conquest in Italy had proved abortive; it had hitherto obtained no
establishment of consequence in the new world; and after the continued and
vigorous efforts of four successive reigns, the confines of the kingdom were
much the same as Louis XI. had left them. But though France made not such large
strides toward dominion as the house of Austria, it continued to advance by
steps which were more secure, because they were gradual and less observed. The
conquest of Calais put it out of the power of the English to invade France but
at their utmost peril, and delivered the French from the dread of their ancient
enemies, who, previous to that event, could at any time penetrate into the
kingdom by that avenue, and thereby retard or defeat the execution of their
best concerted enterprises against any foreign power. The important acquisition
of Metz covered that part of their frontier which formerly was most feeble, and
lay most exposed to insult. France, from the time of its obtaining these
additional securities against external invasion, must be deemed the most
powerful kingdom in Europe, and is more fortunately situated than any on the
continent, either for conquests or defense. From the confines of Artois to the
bottom of the Pyrenees, and from the British channel to the frontiers of Savoy
and the coast of the Mediterranean, its territories lay compact and unmingled
with those of any other power. Several of the considerable provinces, which, by
their having been long subject to the great vassals of the crown, who were
often at variance or at war with their master, had contracted a spirit of
independance, were now accustomed to recognize and to obey one sovereign. As
they became members of the same monarchy, they assumed the sentiments of that
body into which they were incorporated, and cooperated with zeal toward
promoting its interest and honor. The power and influence wrested from the
nobles were seized by the crown. The people were not admitted to share in these
spoils; they gained no new privilege; they acquired no additional weight in the
legislator. It was not for the sake of the people, but in order to extend their
own prerogative, that the monarchs of France had labored to humble their great
vassals. Satisfied with having brought them under entire subjection to the
crown, they discovered no solicitude to free the people from their ancient
dependence on the nobles of whom they held.

A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus united at home and secure from
abroad, was entitled to form great designs, because he felt himself in a
condition to execute them. The foreign wars which had continued with little
interruption from the accession of Charles VIII. had not only cherished and
augmented the martial genius of the nation, but by inuring the troops during
the course of long service to the fatigues of war, and accustoming them to
obedience, had added the force of discipline to their natural order. A gallant
and active body of nobles who considered themselves as idle and useless, unless
when they were in the field; who were scarce acquainted with any pastime or
exercise but what was military; and who knew no road to power, or fame, or
wealth, but war, would not have suffered their sovereign to remain long in
inaction. The people, little acquainted with the arts of peace, and always
ready to take arms at the command of their superiors, were accustomed by the
vast expense of long wars, carried on in distant countries, to bear
impositions, which, how inconsiderable soever they may seem if estimated by the
exorbitant rate of modern actions, appear immense when compared with the sums
levied in France, or in any other country of Europe, previous to the reign of
Louis XI. As all the members of which the state was composed were thus
impatient for action, and capable of great efforts, the schemes and operations
of France must have been no less formidable to Europe than those of Spain. The
superior advantages of its situation, the contiguity and compactness of its
territories, together with the peculiar state of its political constitution at
that juncture must have rendered its enterprises still more alarming and more
decesive. The King possessed such a degree of power as gave him the entire
command of his subjects; the people were strangers to those occupations and
habits of life which render men averse to war, or unfit for it; and the nobles,
though reduced to subordination necessary in a regular government, still
retained the high undaunted spirit which was the effect of their ancient
independence. The vigor of the Feudal times remained, their anarchy was at an
end; and the Kings of France could avail themselves of the martial ardour which
that singular institution had kindled or kept alive, without being exposed to
any of the dangers or inconveniences which are inseparable from it when in
entire force.

A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps, capable of greater military efforts,
than at any other period in its progress. But how formidable soever or fatal to
the other nations of Europe, the power of such a monarchy might have been, the
civil wars which broke out in France, saved them at that juncture from feeling
its effects. These wars, of which religion was the pretext and ambition the
cause; wherein great abilities were displayed by the leaders of the different
factions, and little conduct or firmness were manifested by the crown under a
succession of weak Princes, kept France occupied and embroiled for half a
century. During these commotions, the internal strength of the kingdom was much
wasted, and such a spirit of anarchy was spread among the nobles, to whom
rebellion was familiar, and the restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable
interval became requisite, not only for recruiting the internal vigor of the
nation, but for re-establishing the authority of the Prince; so that it was
long before France could turn her whole attention toward foreign transactions,
or act with her proper force in foreign wars. It was long before she rose to
that ascendant in Europe, which she has maintained since the administration of
Cardinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well as extent of the kingdom,
the nature of her government, and the character of her people, entitle her to
maintain.

WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew into power and consequence, England
likewise made considerable progress toward regular government and interior
strength. Henry VIII. probably without intention, and certainly without any
consistent plan, of which his nature was incapable, pursued the scheme of
depressing the nobility, which the policy of his father Henry VII. had begun.
The pride and caprice of his temper led him to employ chiefly new men in the
administration of affairs, because he found them most obsequious, or least
scrupulous; and he not only conferred on these such plenitude of power, but
exalted them to such pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and degraded the
ancient nobility. By the alienation or sale of the church lands, which were
dissipated with a profusion not inferior to the rapaciousness with which they
had been seized, as well as by the privilege granted by the ancient landholders
of selling their estates, or disposing of them by will, an immense property,
formerly locked up, being brought into circulation, put the spirit of industry
and commerce in motion, and gave it some considerable degree of vigor. The
road to power and to opulence became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and excessive flow of wealth from the West Indies proved fatal to
industry in Spain; a moderate accession in England to the sum in circulation
gave life to commerce, awakened the ingenuity of the nation, and and excited it
to useful enterprise. In France, what the nobles lost the crown gained. In
England, the commons were gainers as well as the King. Power and influence
accompanied of course the property which they acquired. They rose to
consideration among their fellow subjects; they began to feel their own
importance; and extending their influence in the legislative body gradually,
and often when neither they themselves nor others foresaw all the effect of
their claims and pretensions, they at last attained that high authority, to
which the British constitution is indebted for the existence, and must owe the
preservation of its liberty. At the same time that the English constitution
advanced toward perfection, several incidents brought on a change in the
ancient system with respect to foreign powers, and introduced another more
beneficial to the nation. By disclaiming the supremacy and jurisdiction of the
Papal See, considerable sums were saved to the nation, of which it had been
annually drained, by remittances to Rome for dispensations and indulgences, or
in order to defray the expense of pilgrimages into foreign countries The loss
which the nation sustained by most of these articles is obvious, and must have
been great. Even that by pilgrimages was not inconsiderable In the year 1428,
license was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit the shrine of St.
James of Compostella in Spain. Rymer, vol x. In 1434, the number of pilgrims to
the same place was 2460. Ibid. In 1445, they were 2100 vol. xi.
, or by payment of annates, first fruits, and a thousand other taxes which that
artful and rapacious court levied on the credulity of mankind. The idea of a
jurisdiction different from the civil powers, and claiming not only to be
independent but superior to it, a wild solecism in government, apt not only to
perplex and disquiet weak minds, but tending directly to disturb society, was
finally abolished. Government became more simple as well as more respectable,
when no rank or character exempted any person from being amenable to the same
courts, from being tried by the same judges, and from being acquitted or
condemned by the same laws.

BY the loss of Calais the English were excluded from the continent. All
schemes for invading France became of course as chimerical as they had formerly
been pernicious. The views of the English were confined, first by necessity,
and afterward from choice with in their own island. That rage for conquest
which had possessed the nation during many centuries, and wasted its strength
in perpetual and fruitless wars, at length ceased. Those active spirits which
had known and followed no profession but war, sought for occupation in the arts
of peace, and their country benefited as much by the one as it had suffered by
the other. The nation, exhausted by frequent expeditions to the continent,
recruited, and acquired new strength; and when rouzed by any extraordinary
exigency to take part in foreign operations, the vigor of its efforts were
proportionally great, because they were only occasional and of a short
continuance.

THE same principle which had led England to adopt this new system with regard
to the powers on the continent occasioned a change in its plan of conduct with
respect to Scotland, the only foreign state, with which, on account of its
situation in the same island, the English had such a close connection as
demanded their perpetual attention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient scheme
of conquering that kingdom, which the nature of the country, defended by a
brave and hardy people, rendered dangerous if not impracticable; it appeared
more eligible to endeavor at obtaining such influence in Scotland as might
exempt England from any danger or disquiet from that quarter. The national
poverty of the Scots, together with the violence and animosity of their
factions rendered the execution of this plan easy to a people far superior to
them in wealth. Their popular leaders were gained; the ministers and favorites
of the crown were corrupted; and such absolute direction of their councils
acquired, as rendered the operations of the one kingdom dependant in a great
measure on the sovereign of the other. Such perfect external security added to
the interior advantages which England now possessed, must soon have raised it
to new consideration and importance; the long reign of Elizabeth, equally
conspicuous for wisdom, for steadiness, and for vigor, accelerated its
progress, and carried it with greater rapidity toward that elevated station
which it has since held among the powers of Europe.

DURING the period in which the political state of the great kingdoms underwent
such changes, revolutions of considerable importance happened in that of the
secondary or inferior powers. Those in the Papal court are most obvious, and of
more extensive consequence.

IN the Preliminary Work, I have mentioned the rise of that spiritual
jurisdiction which the Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have traced
the progress of that authority which they possess as temporal Princes Vol. I.
p. 99.
. There was nothing previous to the reign of Charles V. that tended to
circumscribe or to moderate their authority, but science and philosophy, which
began to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of these, however, was still
inconsiderable; they always operate slowly; and it is long before their
influence reaches the people, or can produce any sensible effect upon them.
They may perhaps gradually, and in along course of years, undermine and shake
an established system of false religion, but there is no instance of their
having overturned one. The battery is too feeble to demolish those fabrics
which superstition raises on deep foundations, and can strengthen with the most
consummate art.

LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy with other weapons, and with an
impetuosity more formidable. The time and manner of his attack concurred with a
multitude of circumstances, which have been explained, in giving him immediate
success. The charm which had bound mankind for so many ages was broken at once.
The human mind, which had continued long as tame and passive, as if it had been
formed to believe whatever was taught, and to bear whatever was imposed, roused
of a sudden and became inquisitive, mutinous, and disdainful of the yoke to
which it had hitherto submitted. That wonderful ferment and agitation of mind,
which, at this distance of time, appears unaccountable or is condemned as
extravagant, was so general, that it must have been excited by causes which
were natural and of powerful efficacy. The Kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden, England
and Scotland, and almost one half of Germanany threw off their allegiance to
the Pope, abolished his jurisdiction within their territories, and gave the
sanction of law to modes of discipline and systems of doctrine which were not
only independent of his power, but hostile to it. Nor was this spirit of
innovation confined to those countries which openly revolted from the Pope; it
spread through all Europe, and broke out in every part of it with various
degrees of violence. It penetrated early into France and made progress apace.
The number of converts to the opinions of the Reformers was so great, their
zeal so enterprizing, and the abilities of their leaders so distinguished, that
they soon ventured to contend for superiority with the established church, and
were sometimes on the point of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany,
which continued to acknowledge the Papal supremacy, as well as in the
Low Countries, the Protestant doctrines were secretly taught, and had gained so
many proselytes, that they were ripe for revolt, and were restrained merely by
the dread of their rulers from imitating the example of their neighbors, and
asserting their independance. Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of the same
disposition to shake off the yoke appeared. The pretensions of the Pope to
infallible knowledge and supreme power were treated by many persons of eminent
learning and abilities with such scorn, or impugned with such vehemence, that
the most vigilant attention of the civil magistrate, the highest strains of
pontifical authority, and all the rigor of the inquisitorial jurisdiction were
requisite to check and extinguish it.

THE defection of so many opulent and powerful kingdoms from the Papal See, was
a fatal blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged the dominions of the Popes
in extent, it diminished their revenues, and left them fewer rewards to bestow
on the ecclesiastics of various denominations, attached to them by vows of
obedience as well as by ties of interest, and whom they employed as instruments
to establish or support their usurpations in every part of Europe. The
countries too which now disclaimed their authority, were those which formerly
had been most devoted to it. The empire of superstition differs from every
other species of dominion; its power is often greatest, and most implicitly
obeyed in the provinces most remote from the seat of government; while such as
are situated nearer to that are more apt to discern the artifices by which it
is upheld, or the impostures on which it is founded. The personal frailities or
vices of the Popes, the errors as well as corruption of their administration,
the ambition, venality and deceit which reigned in their court, fell
immediately under the observation of the Italians, and could not fail of
diminishing that respect which begets submission. But in Germany, England, and
the more remote countries, these were either altogether unknown, or being only
known by report, made a slighter impression* Their veneration for the Papal
dignity increased with their distance from Rome; and that, added to their gross
ignorance, rendered them equally credulous and passive. In tracing the progress
of the Papal domination, the boldest and most successful instances of
encroachment are to be found in Germany and other countries distant from Italy.
In these its impositions were heaviest, and its exactions the most rapacious;
so that in estimating the diminution of power which the court of Rome suffered
in consequence of the Reformation, not only the number but the character of the
people who revolted, not only the great extent of territory, but the
extraordinary obsequiousness of the subjects which it lost, must be taken into
the account.

NOR was it only by this defection of so many kingdoms and states which it
occasioned, that the Reformation contributed to diminish the power of the Roman
Pontiffs. It obliged them to adopt a different system of conduct toward the
nations which continued to recognize their jurisdiction, and to govern them by
new maxims and with a milder spirit. The Reformation taught them, by a fatal
example, what they seem not before to have apprehended, that the credulity and
patience of mankind might be overburdened and exhausted. They became afraid of
venturing on any such exertion of their authority as might alarm or exasperate
their subjects, and excite them to a new revolt. They saw a rival church
established in many countries of Europe, the members of which were on the watch
to observe any errors in their administration, and eager to expose them. They
were sensible that the opinions adverse to their power and usurpations were not
confined to their enemies alone, but had spread even among the people who still
adhered to them. Upon all these accounts, it was no longer possible to lead and
to govern their flock in the same manner as in those dark and quiet ages, when
faith was implicit, when submission was unreserved, and all tamely followed and
obeyed the voice of their shepherd. From the era of the Reformation, the Popes
have ruled rather by address and management than by authority. The style of
their decrees is the same, but the effect of them is very different. Those
Bulls and Interdicts which, before the Reformation, made the greatest Princes
tremble, have since that period been disregarded or despised by the most
inconsiderable. Those bold decisions and acts of jurisdiction which, during
many ages, not only passed uncensured, but were revered as the awards of a
sacred tribunal, would, since Luther's appearance, be treated by one part of of
Europe as the effect of folly or arrogance, and be detested by the other as
impious and unjust, The Popes, in their administration, have been obliged not
only to accommodate themselves to the notions of their adherents, but to pay
some regard to the prejudices of their enemies. They seldom venture to claim
new powers, or even to insist obstinately on their ancient prerogatives, lest
they should irritate the former; they carefully avoid every measure that may
either excite the indignation or draw on them the derision of the latter. The
policy of the court of Rome has become as cautious, circumspect, and timid, as
it was once adventurous and violent; and though their pretensions to
infallibility, on which all their authority is founded, does not allow them to
renounce any jurisdiction which they have at any time claimed or exercised,
they find it expedient to suffer many of their prerogatives to lie dormant, and
not to expose themselves by ill-timed attempts toward reviving these, to the
risque of losing that remainder of power which they still enjoy. Before the
sixteenth century, the Popes were the movers and directors in every
considerable enterprise; they were at the head of every great alliance; and
being considered as arbiters of the affairs of Christendom, the court of Rome
was the center of political negotiation and intrigue. From that time the
greatest operations in Europe have been carried on independent of them; they
have sunk almost to a level with the other petty Princes of Italy; they
continue to claim, though they dare not exercise, the same spiritual
jurisdiction, but scarce retain any shadow of the temporal power which they
^ciently possessed.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may have been to the power of the Popes,
it contributed to improve the church of Rome both in science and in morals. The
desire of equalling the Reformers in those talents which had procured them
respect; the necessity of acquiring the knowledge requisite for defending their
own tenets, or refuting the arguments of their opponents; together with the
emulation natural between two rival churches, engaged the Roman Catholic clergy
to apply themselves to the study of useful science, which they cultivated with
such assiduity and success, that they have gradually become as eminent in
literature, as they were in some periods infamous for ignorance. The same
principle occasioned a change no less considerable in the manners of the clergy
of the Romish church. Various causes which have formerly been enumerated, had
concurred in introducing great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners
among the Popish clergy. Luther and his adherents began their attack on the
church with such vehement invectives against these, that in order to remove the
scandal, and silence their declamations, greater decency of conduct became
necessary. The Reformers themselves were so eminent not only for the purity but
even austerity of their manners, and had acquired such reputation among the
people on that account, that the Roman Catholic Clergy must have soon lost all
credit, if they had not endeavored to conform in some measure to their
standard. They knew that all their actions fell under the severe inspection of
the Protestants, whom enmity and emulation prompted to observe every vice, or
even impropriety in their conduct; to censure them without indulgence, and to
expose them without mercy. This rendered them, of course, not only cautious to
avoid such enormities as might give offense, but studious to acquire the
virtues that might merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the tyrannical
jurisdiction of the Inquisition crushed the Protestant faith as soon as it
appeared, the spirit of Popery continues invariable; science has made small
progress, and the character of ecclesiastics has undergone little change. But
in those countries where the members of the two churches have mingled freely
with each other, or have carried on any considerable intercourse, either
commercial or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas as well as in
the morals of the Popish ecclesiastics, is manifest. In France, the manners of
the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become decent and exemplary in an high
degree. Many of them have been distinguished for all the accomplishments and
virtues which can adorn their profession; and differ greatly from their
predecessors before the Reformation, both in their maxims and in their conduct.

NOR has the influence of the Reformation been felt only by the inferior
members of the Roman Catholic Church; it has extended to the Sea of Rome, to
the sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Violations of decorum, and even trespasses
against morality, which passed without censure in those ages, when neither the
power of the Popes, nor the veneration of the people for their character, had
any bounds; when there was no hostile eye to observe the errors in their
conduct, and no adversaries zealous to inveigh against them; would be liable
now to the severest animadversion, and excite general indignation or horror.
Instead of rivalling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety, and surpassing
them in licentiousness, the Popes have studied to assume manners more severe
and more suitable to their ecclesiastical character. The chair of St. Peter
has not been polluted, during two centuries, by any Pontiff that resembled
Alexander VI. or several of his predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion
and to human nature. Throughout this long succession of Popes, a wonderful
decorum of conduct, compared with that of preceding ages, is observable. Many
of them have been conspicuous for the virtues becoming their high station; and
by their humanity, their love of literature, and their moderation, have made
some atonement to mankind for the crimes of their predecessors. Thus the
beneficial influences of the Reformation have been more extensive than they
appear on a superficial view; and this great division in the Christian church
has contributed, in some measure, to increase purity of manners, to diffuse
science, and to inspire humanity. History recites such a number of shocking
events, occasioned by religious dissensions, that it must afford particular
satisfaction to trace any one salutary or beneficial effect to that source,
from which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

THE republic of Venice which, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, had
appeared so formidable, that almost all the potentates of Europe united in a
confederacy for its destruction, declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendor. The Venetians not only lost a great part of their territory in the
war excited by the league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as vigor of the
state were exhausted by their extraordinary and long continued efforts in their
own defense; and that commerce by which they had acquired their wealth and
power began to decay, without any hopes of its reviving. All the fatal
consequences to their republic, which the sagacity of the Venetian senate
foresaw on the first discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope, took place. Their endeavors to prevent the Portuguese from
establishing themselves in the East Indies, not only by exciting the Soldans of
Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to turn their arms against such dangerous
intruders, but by affording secret aid to the Infidels in order to insure their
success Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. 529.
, proved ineffectual. The activity and valor of the Portuguese surmoun^ed
every obstacle, and obtained such firm footing in that fertile country, as
secured to them large possessions, together with influence still more
extensive. Lisbon, instead of Venice, became the staple for the precious
commodities of the East. The Venetians, after having possessed for many years
the monopoly of that beneficial commerce, had the mortification to be excluded
from almost any share in it. The discoveries of the Spaniards in the western
world, proved no less fatal to inferior branches of their commerce. The
original defects which were formerly pointed out in the constitution of the
Venetian republic continued, and the disadvantages with which it undertook any
great enterprise, increased rather than diminished. The sources from which it
derived its extraordinary riches and power being dried up, the interior vigor
of the state declined, and of course, rendered its external operations less
formidable. Long before the middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased to
be one of the principal powers in Europe, and became a secondary and subaltern
state. But as the senate had the address to conceal its diminution of power,
under the veil of moderation and caution; as it made no rash effort that could
discover its impotence; as the symptoms of political decay, in states are not
soon observed, and are seldom so apparent to their neighbors as to occasion
any sudden alteration in their conduct toward them, Venice continued long to
be considered and respected. She was treated not according to her present
condition, but according to the rank which she had formerly held. Charles, as
well as the monarchs of France his rivals, courted her assistance with
emulation and solicitude in all their enterprises. Even down to the close of
the century, Venice remained not only an object of attention, but a
considerable seat of political negotiation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the first Cosmo de Medici, and Lawrence, his grandson,
had acquired in the republic of Florence by their beneficence and abilities,
inspired their descendants with the ambition of usurping the sovereignty in
their country, and paved their way toward it. Charles placed Alexander de
Medici at the head of the republic, and to the natural interest and power of
the family added the weight and credit of the Imperial protection. Of these,
his successor Cosmo, surnamed the Great, availed himself; and establishing his
supreme authority on the ruins of the ancient republican constitution, he
transmitted that, together with the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany, to his
descendants. Their dominions were composed of the territories which had
belonged to the three commonwealths of Florence, Pisa, and Siena, and formed
one of the most respectable of the Italian states.

THE dukes of Savoy, during the former part of the sixteenth century, possessed
territories which were not considerable either for extent or value; and the
French, having seized the greater part of them, obliged the reigning duke to
retire for safety to the strong fortress of Nice, where he shut himself up for
several years; while his son, the Prince of Piedmont, endeavored to better his
fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies of Spain. The peace of
Chateau Cambresis restored to him his paternal dominions. As these are
environed on every hand by powerful neighbors, all whose motions the dukes of
Savoy must observe with the greatest attention, in order not only to guard
against the danger of being surprised and overpowered, but that they may choose
their side with discernment in those quarrels wherein it is impossible for them
to avoid taking part, this peculiarity in their situation seems to have had no
inconsiderable influence on their character. By rouzing them to perpetual
attention, by keeping their ingenuity always on the stretch, and engaging them
in almost continual action, it has formed a race of Princes more sagacious in
discovering their true interest, more decisive in their resolutions, and more
dextrous in availing themselves of every occurrence which presented itself,
than any perhaps that can be singled out in the history of mankind. By gradual
acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy have added to their territories as well as to
their own importance; and aspiring at length to regal dignity, which they
obtained about half a century ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank among the
monarchs of Europe.

THE territories which now form the republic of the united Netherlands, were
lost during the first part of the sixteenth century, among the numerous
provinces subject to the house of Austria; and were then so inconsiderable,
that hardly one opportunity of mentioning them has occurred in all the busy
period of this history. But soon after the peace of Chateau Cambresis, the
violent and bigoted maxims of Philip's government, carried into execution with
unrelenting vigor by the duke of Alva, exasperated the free-people of the
Low Countries to such a degree* that they threw of the Spanish yoke, and
asserted their ancient liberties and laws. These they defended with a
persevering valor, which occupied the arms of Spain during half a century,
exhausted the vigor, ruined the reputation of that monarchy, and at last
constrained their ancient masters to recognize and to treat with them as a free
independent state. This state founded on liberty, and reared by industry and
economy, had grown into reputation, even while struggling for its existence.
But when peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views, and to extend its
commerce, it rose to be one of the most respectable as well as enterprizing
powers in Europe.

THE transactions of the kingdoms in the North of Europe, have been seldom
attended to in the course of this history.

RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism and obscurity, from which it was
called about the beginning of the present century, by the creative genius of
Peter the Great, who made his country known and formidable to the rest of
Europe.

IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of Charles V. great revolutions
happened in their constitutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical. In the former
kingdom, a tyrant being degraded from the throne and expelled the country, a
new Prince was called by the voice of the people to assume the reigns of
government. In the latter, a fierce people, rouzed to arms by injuries and
oppression, shook off the Danish yoke, and conferred the regal dignity on its
deliverer, Gustavus Ericson, who had all the virtues of a hero and of a
patriot. Denmark, exhausted by foreign wars, or weakened by the dissensions
between the King and the nobles, became incapable of such efforts as were
requisite in order to recover the ascendant which it had long possessed in the
North of Europe. Sweden, as soon as it was freed from the dominion of
strangers, began to recruit its strength, and acquired in a short time such
interior vigor, that it became the first kingdom in the North. Early in the
subsequent century, it rose to such a high rank among the powers of Europe,
that it had the chief merit both in forming and conducting that powerful
league, which protected not only the Protestant religion, but the liberties of
Germany against the bigotry and ambition of the house of Austria.

THE END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
Speedily will be PUBLISHED, (BY THE SAME AUTHOR) A Sequel to the History of
Charles Vth. CONTAINING, THE HISTORY OF THE DISCOVERY AND CONQUEST OF THE NEW
WORLD.

WITH THE Establishment of COLONIES IN THE ISLANDS AND CONTINENT OF AMERICA.

LIKEWISE, A VIEW OF THE STATE OF SOCIETY Among its Ancient Inhabitants; Their
Characters -- Manners and Arts, THE GENIUS OF THE European Settlements in its
various Provinces; Together, with the Influence of these upon the Systems of
Policy or Commerce in EUROPE.

INDEX TO THE HISTORY OF THE AGE OF CHARLES V.
N. B. The Roman numerals direct to the volume, and the figures to the page.
A
ABSOLUTION, the form of that used by father Tetzel in Germany, II. 40. Adorni,
the faction of, assists the Imperial general Colonna in the reduction of Genoa,
II. 97. Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. under William de Croy,
lord of Chievres, I. 349. His character, ib. Sent by Charles with power to
assume the regency of Castile on the death of his grandfather, 353. His claim
admitted by Cardinal Ximenes, and executed by conjunction, ib. Authorized by
Charles to hold the Cortes of Valencia, which refuses to assemble before him,
II. 25. Made viceroy of Castile on the departure of Charles for Germany, 27.
His election remonstrated against by the Castilians, ib. Is chosen Pope, 95.
Retrospect of his conduct in Spain during the absence of Charles, 104. Sends
Ronquillo to reduce the Segovians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonseca to
besiege the city, who is repulsed by the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, 105.
Apologizes for Fonseca's conduct to the people, 106. Recals Fonseca and
dismisses his troops, ib. His authority disclaimed by the Holy Junta, 107.
Deprived of power by them, 109. His ill reception on his arrival at Rome, on
being chosen to the papacy, 129. Restores the territories acquired by his
predecessor, ib. Labors to unite the contending powers of Europe, 130.
Publishes a bull for three years truce among them, ib. Accedes to the league
against the French King, 131. His death, 136. The sentiments and behavior of
the people on that occasion, ib. A retrospect of his conduct toward the
Reformers, 144. His brief to the Diet at Nuremburgh, 145. Receives a list of
grievances from the Diet, 146. His conduct to the Reformers, how esteemed at
Rome, 148. Africa, the Spanish troops sent by Cardinal Ximenes against
Barbarossa, defeated there, II. 2. Aigues-Mortes, interview between the Emperor
Charles and Francis, there, II. 322. Ai^-la-Chapelle, the Emperor Charles
crowned there, II. 37. Ferdinand his brother crowned King of the Romans there,
256. Alarcon, Don Ferdinand, Francis I. of France, taken prisoner at the battle
of Pavia, committed to his custody, II. 163. Conducts Francis to Spain, 171.
Delivers up Francis in pursuance of the treaty of Madrid, 183. Is sent
ambassador to Francis to require the fulfillment of his treaty, 195. Pope
Clement VII. taken prisoner by the Imperialists, is committed to his custody,
210. Albany, John Stuart Duke of, commands the French army sent by Francis I.
to invade Naples, II. 159. Albert, of Brandenburgh, grandmaster of the Teutonic
order, becomes a convert to the doctrines of Luther, II. 191. Obtains of
Sigismund King of Poland, the investiture of Prussia, erected into a duchy,
ib. Is put under the ban of the empire, ib. His family fixed in the inheritance
of Prussia, 192. Commands a body of troops in behalf of Maurice of Saxony, but
endeavors to assert an independency, III. 201. Defeats and takes the Duke
d'Aumale prisoner, and joins the Emperor at Metz, 199. Is condemned by the
Imperial chamber for his demands on the bishops of Bamberg and Wurtsburgh, 207.
A league formed against him, 208. Is defeated by Maurice, ib. Is again defeated
by Henry of Brunswick, 201. Is driven out of Germany and dies in exile, ib. His
territories restored to his collateral heirs, ib. Albert, Elector of Metz, the
publication of indulgences in Germany, committed to him, II. 40. Alexander VI.
Pope, remarks on the pontificate of, II. 59. Alexander di Medici. See Medici.
Algiers, how it was seized by Barbarossa, II. 281. Is seized by the brother of
the same name, on the death of the former, 282. Is taken under the protection
of the Port, ib. Is governed by Hascen Again the absence of Barbarossa, 368.
Is besieged by the Emperor Charles V. 370. Charles forced to re-embark by bad
weather, 374. Alraschid, brother of Muley Hascen King of T^nis, solicits the
protection of Barbarossa against him, II. 281. His treacherous treatment by
Barbarossa, 282. Alva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute
with the Archduke Philip concerning the regency of Castile, I. 338. Forces the
Dauphin to abandon the siege of Perpignan, III. 7. Presides at the
court martial which condemns the Elector of Saxony to death, 116. Detains the
Landgrave prisoner by the Emperor's order, 124. Commands under the Emperor, the
army destined against France, 198. Is appointed commander in chief in Piedmont,
238. Enters the ecclesiastical territories and seizes the Campagna Romana, 278.
Concludes a truce with the Pope, 279. Negociates a peace between Philip and the
Pope, with Cardinal Cara^sa, 298. Goes to Rome to ask pardon of the Pope for
his hostilities, 299. Is sent to Paris in the name of Philip to espouse the
Princess Elizabeth, 328. Amersrorf, a nobleman of Holland, associated by
Charles V. with Cardinal Ximenes, in the regency of Castile, I. 360.
Anabaptists, the origin of that sect deduced, II. 267. Their principal tenets,
269. Their settlement at Munster, ib. Character of their principal leaders,
270. They seize the city of Munster, ib. They establish a new form of
government there, ib. Choose Bocold King, 272. Their licentious practices, 273.
A confederacy of the German Princes formed against them, 274. Are blockaded in
Munster by the bishop, ib. The city taken, and great slaughter made of them,
276. Their King put to death, ib. Character of the sect since that period, ib.
See Matthi^s and Bo^old. Angleria, his authority cited in proof of the
extortions of the Flemish ministers of Charles V. 119. Anhalt, Prince of, avows
(...) opinions of Martin Luther, II. 144. Annats to the ^^^rt o^ Rome, what,
II. 68 Aragon, how Ferdinand became possessed of that kingd^^ ^. 332. The
Cortes of, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's title to the crown, 333. Ancient
enmity between this kingdom and Casti^e, 336. Navarre added to this crown by
the arts of Ferdinand, 346. Arrival of Charles V. 10. The Cortes not allowed to
assemble in his name, ib. The refractory behavior of the Aragonians, ib. They
refuse restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, II. Don John Lanuza appointed
regent on the departure of Charles for Germany, 28. Who composes the
disturbances there, 127. The moderation of Charles toward the insurgents on
his arrival in Spain, 128. See Spain. Ard^es, an interview there between
Francis I. and Henry VIII. of England, II. 36. Asturias, Charles son of Philip
and Joanna, acknowledged Prince of, by the Cortes of Castile, I. 342.
Augsburgh, a Diet called there by Charles V. II. 251. His public entry into
that city, ib. The confession of faith named from this city, drawn up by
Melancthon, 252. Resolute behavior of the Protestant Princes at, 253. Its form
of government violently altered, and rendered submissive to the Emperor, 124.
The Diet re-assembled there, III. 155. The Diet again assembled there, 130. Is
intimidated by being surrounded with the Emperor's Spanish troops, ib. The
Emperor re-establishes the Romish worship, in the churches of, ib. The Diet, by
the Emperor's order, petitions the Pope for the return of the council to Trent,
136. A system of theology laid before the Diet by the Emperor, 140. The
archbishop of Ment^^ declares, without authority, the Diet's acceptance of it,
ib. The Diet takes part with the Emperor against the city of Magdeburgh, 161.
Is seized by Maurice of Saxony, 192. Another Diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 244.
Cardinal Morone attends the Diet as the Pope's nuncio, 245. Morone departs on
the Pope's death, 246. Recess of the Diet on the subject of religion, 249,
Remarks on this recess, 252. Avila, a convention of the malecont^^^s in Spain
held there, II. 107. A confederacy termed the Holy Junta, formed there, ib.
Which disclaims the authority of Adrian, ib. The Holy Junta removed to
Tordesillas, 109. See Junta. Austria, by what means the house of, became so
formidable in Germany, II. 212. The extraordinary acquisitions of the house of,
in the person of the Emperor Charles V. III. 331, 334.
B
Barbarossa, Horuc, his rise to the kingdoms of Algiers and Tunis, II. 2.
Defeats the Spanish troops sent against him by Cardinal Ximenes, ib. His
parentage, 280. Commences pirate with his brother Hayraddin, ib. How he
acquired possession of Algiers 282. Infests the coast of Spain, ib. Is reduced
and killed by Comares the Spanish governor of Oran, ib. Barbarossa, Hayraddin,
brother to the former of the same name, takes possession of Algiers on his
brother's death, II. 282. Put his dominions under the protection of the Grand
Signior, ib. Obtains the command of the Turkish fleet, 283. His treacherous
treatment of Alraschid, brother to the King of Tunis, 284. Seizes Tunis, ib.
Extends his depredations by sea, ib. Prepares to resist the Emperor's armament
against him, 285. The goletta and his fleet taken, ib. Is defeated by Charles,
ib. Tunis taken, 288. Makes a descent on Italy, III. 14. Burns Rheggio, ib.
Besieges Nice in conjunction with the French, but is forced to retire, ib. Is
dismissed by Francis, 23. Barbary a summary view of the revolutions of, II.
280. Its division into independent kingdoms, ib. Rise of the piratical states,
ib. See Barbarossa. Barcelona, the public entry of the Emperor Charles V. into
that city as its Count, II. 244. The treaties of Charles with the Italian
states published there, 247. Bayard, chevalier, his character, II. 86. His
gallant defense of Mezieres, besieged by the Imperialists, ib. Obliges them to
raise the siege, ib. His noble behavior at his death, 141. His respectful
funeral, 142. Bellay, M. his erroneous account of the education of Charles V.
corrected, II. 348, Note. His account of the disastrous retreat of the Emperor
Charles V. from his invasion of Provence, II. 313. Bible, a translation of,
undertaken by Martin Luther, and its effects in opening the eyes of the people,
II. 143. Bicocca, battle of, between Colonna and Marechal Lautrec, II. 96.
Bocold, or Beukels, John, a journeyman tailor, becomes a leader of the
Anabaptists at Munster, II. 269. Succeeds Matthias in the direction of their
affairs, 271. His enthusiastic extravagancies, ib. Is chosen King, 272. Marries
fourteen wives, 273. Beheads one of them, 275. Is put to a cruel death at the
taking of Munster, 276. See Anabaptists. Bohemia, the Archduke Ferdinand chosen
King of, II. 212. Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties of the Bohemians, III.
128. The Reformation introduced by John Huss and Jerome of Prague, 129. Raise
an army to no purpose, ib. Is closely confined in the citadel of Mechlin, 164.
Bonnivet, admiral of France, appointed to command the invasion of Milan, II.
135. His character, ib. Enables Colonna, to defend the city of Milan by his
imprudent delay, 136. Forced to abandon the Milanese, 141. Is wounded and his
army defeated by the Imperialists, ib. Stimulates Francis to an invasion of the
Milanese, 155. Advises Francis to besiege Pavia, 156. ^dvises him to give
battle to Bourbon, who advanced to the relief of Pavia, 161. Is killed at the
battle of Pavia, 162. Bologne, an interview between the Emperor Charles V. and
Pope Clement VII. there, II. 245. Another meeting between them there, 260.
Bouffer, sent by Francis I. King of France, to negociate a peace with Charles
V. II. 4. Bouillon, Robert de la Mark, lord of, declares war against the
Emperor Charles, at the instigation of Francis, II. 85. Is ordered by Francis
to disband his troops, ib. His territories reduced by the Emperor, 86.
Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of England, III. 28. Taken, 34. Bourbon,
Charles Duke of, his character, II. 132. The causes of his discontent with
Francis I. ib. His duchess dies, 133. Rejects the advances of Louise the
King's mother, ib. His estate sequestered by her intrigues, ib. Negociates
secretly with the Emperor, ib. Is included in a treaty between the Emperor and
Henry VIII. of England, 134. Is taxed by the King with betraying him, which he
denies, 135. Escapes to Italy, ib. Directs the measures of the Imperial army
under Lannoy, 140. Defeats the French on the banks of the Sessia, 142.
Instigates Charles to an invasion of France, 151. Advances to the relief of
Pavia, 159. Defeats Francis and takes him prisoner, 162. Hastens to Madrid to
secure his own interests on the interview between Charles and Francis, 172. His
kind reception by Charles, 178. Obtains a grant of the duchy of Milan, and is
made general of the Imperial army, ib. Obliges Sforza to surrender Milan, 198.
Is forced to oppress the Milanese to satisfy his troops mutinying for their
pay, 201. Sets Morone at liberty, and makes him his confidant, ib. Appoints
Leyva governor of Milan, and advances to invade the Pope's territories, 203.
His disappointed troops mutiny, ib. He determines to plunder Rome, 206. Arrives
at Rome and assaults it, 207. Is killed, 208. Brandenburgh, Elector of, avows
the opinions of Luther, II. 144. Brandenburgh, Albert of. See Albert. Bru^es, a
league concluded there between the Emperor and Henry VIII. of England, against
France, II. 88. Brunswick, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther, II. 144.
Brunswick, Henry, Duke of, driven from his dominions by the Protestant Princes
of the league of Smalkalde, III. 19. Raises men for Francis, but employs them
to recover his own dominions, 44. Is taken prisoner, ib. Buda, siege of, by
Ferdinand King of the Romans, II. 365. Is treacherously seized by Sultan
Solomon, 366.
C
Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Germany, appointed to examine the
doctrines of Martin Luther, II. 47. Requires Luther peremptorily to retract his
errors, ib. Requires the Elector of Saxony to surrender or banish Luther, 49.
His conduct justified, 50. Calais, an ineffectual congress there between the
Emperor and Francis, under the mediation of Henry VIII. II. 88. The careless
manner in which it was guarded in the reign of Mary Queen of England, III. 303.
Ineffectual remonstrances of Philip, and Lord Wentworth the governor,
concerning its, defenseless state, 304. Is invested and taken by the Duke of
Guise, ib. The English inhabitants turned out, 305. Stipulations concerning, in
the treaty of Chateau Cambresis, 325. Cambray, articles of the peace concluded
there, between the Emperor Charles and Francis of France, II. 240. Remarks on
this treaty, 241. Camp, peace of, between Henry VIII. and Francis, III. 67.
Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from Pope Clement VII. to the to the second
Diet at Nuremburgh, II. 149. Publishes articles for reforming the inferior
clergy, 150. Advises Charles to rigorous measures against the Protestants, 253.
Capitulation of the Germanic body, signed by Charles V. and prescribed to all
his successors, II. 22. Caraffa, Cardinal, his precipitate election, III. 256.
Is appointed legate to Bologna, ib. Reasons of his disgust with the Emperor,
257. His nephews persuade him to solicit an alliance with France against the
Emperor, 259, 260, 262. His insiduous commission to the court of France, 273.
His public entry into Paris, 274. Exhorts Henry to break his truce with the
Emperor, 275. Absolves Henry from his oath, 276. Negociates a peace between the
Pope and Philip, with the Duke d'Alva, 298. The fate of him and his brother on
the death of Pope Paul, 329. Carlostadius, imbibes the opinions of Martin
Luther, at Wittemburgh, II. 55. His intemperate zeal, 142. Awed by the reproofs
of Luther, 143. Carignan, besieged by the Count d'Enguien, and defended by the
Marquis de Guasto, III. 23. Guasto defeated in a pitched battle, 25. The town
taken, 26. Castaldo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno. Castile, how Isabella
became possessed of that kingdom, I. 332. The Archduke Philip's title
acknowledged by the Cortes of that kingdom, 333. Isabella dies and leaves her
husband Ferdinand of Aragon, regent, 335. Ferdinand resigns the crown of, ib.
Ferdinand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, 336. Enmity between this kingdom
and Aragon, ib. The particular dislike of the Castilians to Ferdinand, ib. The
regency of, jointly vested in Ferdinand, Philip and Joanna, by the treaty of
Salamanca, 340. Declares against Ferdinand, ib. The regency of, resigned by
Philip to Ferdinand, 341. Philip and Joanna acknowledged King and Queen by the
Cortes, ib. Death of Philip, 342. The perplexity of the Castilians on Joanna's
incapacity for government, ib. Ferdinand gains the regency and the goodwill of
the Castilians by his prudent administration, 345. Oran and other places in
Barbary annexed to this kingdom by Ximenes, 346. Ximenes appointed regent by
Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles V. 351. Charles assumes the
regal title, 354. Ximenes procures its acknowledgment, 355. The nobility
depressed by Ximenes, 356. The grandees mutiny against Ximenes, 357. The mutiny
suppressed, ib. Ximenes resumes the grants made by Ferdinand to the nobles,
358. The bold reply of Ximenes to the discontented nobles, 359. Other
associates in the regency appointed with Ximenes at the instigation of the
Flemish courtiers, 360. Ximenes dies, II. 7. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in favor of his mother Joanna, 8.
The Castilians receive unfavourable impressions of him, 9. Disgusted by his
partiality to his Flemish ministers, ib. Sauvage made Chancellor, ib. William
de Croy, appointed archbishop of Toledo, 10. The principal cities confederate
and complain of their grievances, 11. The clergy of, refuse to levy the tenth
of benefices granted by the Pope to Charles V. 24. Interdicted, but the
interdict taken off, by Charles's application, ib. An insurrection there, 26.
Increase of disaffection, 27. Cardinal Adrian appointed regent on the departure
of Charles for Germany, ib. The views and pretensions of the commons, in their
insurrections, 105. The confederacy called the Holy Junta formed, 107. The
proceedings of which are carried on in the name of Queen Joanna, 109. Receives
circulatory letters from Charles for the insurgents to lay down their arms,
with promises of pardon, 110. The nobles undertake to suppress the insurgents,
114. Raise an army against them under the Conde de Haro, 116. Haro gets
possession of Joanna, ib. Expedients by which they raise money for their
troops, 117. Unwilling to proceed to extremities with the Junta, 118. The army
of the Junta routed and Padilla executed, 121. Dissolution of the Junta, 122.
The moderation of Charles toward the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 128.
He acquires the love of the Castilians, 129. See Spain. Catherine of Aragon, is
divorced from Henry VIII. of England, II. 265. Dies, 327. Catherine a Boria, a
nun, flies from her cloister, and marries Martin Luther, II. 190. Catherine
Medici. See Medici. Cavi, peace concluded there between Pope Paul IV. and
Philip II. of Spain, III. 298. Cercamp, negociations for peace entered into
there between Philip II. of Spain, and Henry II. of France, III. 314, 321. The
negociations removed to Chateau Cambresis, 324. See Chateau Cambresis.
Characters of men, rules for forming a proper estimate of them, III. 53.
Applied to the case of Luther, 54. Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, his
observations on the manners of the clergy, in his letter to the Archbishop of
Mentz, II. 60, Note. Charles V. Emperor, his descent and birth, I. 331. How he
came to inherit such extensive dominions, ib. Acknowledged Prince of Austrias,
by the Cortes of Castile, 342. His father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy and hatred
of his grandfather Ferdinand toward him, 346. Left heir to his dominions, 348.
Death of Ferdinand, ib. His education committed to William de Croy, lord of
Chievres, ib. Adrian of Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor, 349. The first
opening of his character, ib. Assumes the government of Flanders and attends to
business, 350. Sends Cardinal Adrian to be regent of Castile, who executes it
jointly with Ximenes, 353. Assumes the regal title, 354. His title admitted
with difficulty by the Castilian nobility, 355. Persuaded to add associate
regents to Ximenes, 360. His Flemish court corrupted by the avarice of
Chievres, II. 2. Persuaded by Ximenes to visit Spain, but how that journey is
retarded, 3. The present state of his affairs, ib. Concludes a peace at Noyen
with Francis I. of France, and the conditions of the treaty, 4. Arrives in
Spain 6. His ungrateful treatment of Ximenes, 7. His public entry into
Valladolid. 8. Is acknowledged King by the Cortes, who vote him a free gift,
ib. The Castilians receive unfavourable impressions of him, 10. Disgusts them
by his partiality to his Flemish ministers, ib. Sets out for Aragon, ib. Sends
his brother Ferdinand to visit their grandfather Maximilian, ib. Cannot
assemble the Cortes of Aragon in his own name, ib. The opposition made by that
assembly to his desires, ib. Refuses the application of Francis I. for the
restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 11. Neglects the remonstrances of the
Castilians, ib. Death of the Emperor Maximilian, 12. View of the present state
of Europe, ib. How Maximilian was obstructed in securing the empire to him, ib.
Francis I. aspires to the Imperial crown, 13. Circumstances favorable to the
pretensions of Charles, 14. The Swiss cantons espouse his cause, 16.
Apprehensions and conduct of Pope Leo X. on the occasion, 17. Assembling of the
Diet at Frankfort, 19. Frederick Duke of Saxony refuses the offer of the
empire, and votes for him, 20. And refuses the presents offered by his
ambassadors, ib. Concurring circumstances which favored his election, 21. His
election, ib. Signs and confirms the capitulation of the Germanic body, 22. The
election notified to him, ib. Assumes the title of Majesty, ib. Accepts the
Imperial dignity offered by the Count Palatine ambassador from the electors,
23. The clergy of Castile refuse the tenth of benefices granted him by the
Pope, ib. Procures the interdict the kingdom is laid under for refusal, to be
taken off, ib. Empowers Cardinal Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia, 25. The
nobles refuse to assemble without his presence, ib. Authorizes the insurgents
there to continue in arms, ib. Summons the Cortes of Castile to meet in
Galicia, 26. Narrowly escapes with his Flemish ministers from an insurrection
on that account, ib. Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 27. Prepares to leave
Spain, and appoints regents, ib. Embarks, ib. Motives of this journey, 29. Rise
of the rivalship between him and Francis I. ib. Courts the favor of Henry
VIII. of England and his minister Cardinal Wolsey, 34. Visits Henry at Dover,
35. Promises Wolsey his interest for the papacy, 36. Has a second interview
with Henry at Gravelines, 37. Offers to submit his differences with Francis to
Henry's arbitration, ib. His magnificent coronation at Aix-la-Chapelle, ib.
Calls a Diet at Worms, to check the Reformers, 38. Causes which hindered his
espousing the party of Martin Luther, 75. Grants Luther a safe conduct to the
Diet of Worms, ib. An edict published against him, 76. His embarrassment at
this time, 78. Concludes an alliance with the Pope, 81. The conditions of the
treaty, ib. Death of his minister Chievres, and its advantages to him, 83.
Invasion of Navarre by Francis, ib. The French driven out, and their general
L'Esparre taken prisoner, 84. War declared against him by Robert de la Mark,
lord of Bouillon, who ravages Luxemburgh, 85. ^educes Bouillon, and invades
France, 86. His demands at the congress at Calais, 87. Has an interview with
Cardinal Wolsey at Bruges, and concludes a league with Henry VIII. against
France, 88. Pope Leo declares for him against France, 91. The French driven out
of Milan, 93, 96. Visits England in his passage to Spain, 98. Cultivates the
good will of Cardinal Wolsey, and creates the Earl of Surrey his high admiral,
99. Grants the island of Malta, to the Knights of St. John, expelled from
Rhodes by Solomon the magnificent, 101. Arrives in Spain, 102. A retrospect of
his proceedings in relation to the insurrections in Spain, 109. Issues
circulatory letters for the insurgents, to lay down their arms with promises of
pardon, 110. His prudent moderation toward the insurgents, on his arrival in
Spain, 128. Acquires the love of the Castilians, 129. Enters into a league with
Charles Duke of Bourbon, 134. Why he did not endeavor to get Wolsey elected
Pope, 137. Invades Guienne and Burgundy, but without success, 139. His troops
in Milan mutiny for want of pay, but are pacified by Morone, 141. Undertakes an
invasion of Provence, 151. Orders Pescara to besiege Marseilles, ib. Pescara
obliged to retire, 153. Disconcerted by the French overrunning the Milanese
again, 155. The revenues of Naples mortgaged to raise money, 156. His troops
defeat Francis and take him prisoner at the battle of Pavia, 162. His affected
moderation at receiving the news, 163. Avails himself of a treaty concluded
between Lannoy and Pope Clement, but refuse to ratify it, 167. His army in
Pavia mutiny, and are obliged to be disbanded, 168. His deliberations on the
proper improvement of his advantages, ib. His propositions to Francis, 169.
After many delays grants Sforza, the investiture of Milan, 172. Morone's
intrigues betrayed to him by Pescara, 174. Orders Pescara to continue his
negociations with Morone, 175. His rigorous treatment of Francis, 176. Visits
Francis, 177. His kind reception of the Duke of Bourbon, 178. Grants Bourbon
the duchy of Milan, and appoints him general in chief of the Imperial army
there, ib. Fruitless negociations for the delivery of Francis, ib. Treaty of
Madrid, with Francis, 180. Delivers up Francis, 183. Marries Isabella of
Portugal, 184. An alliance formed against him at Cognac, 193. Sends ambassadors
to Francis to require the fulfillment of the treaty of Madrid, 195. Prepares for
war against Francis, 196. The Pope reduced to an accommodation with him, 200.
The exhausted state of his finances, ib. His troops under Bourbon distressed
and mutinous for want of pay, 201. Bourbon assaults Rome, and is slain, but the
city taken, 208. The Prince of Orange general on Bourbon's death takes the
castle of St. Angelo, and the Pope prisoner, 210. The Emperor's conduct on that
occasion, 211. His dissensions with the Pope, how far favorable to the
Reformation, 213. His instructions to the Diet at Spires, ib. His manifesto
against the Pope, and letter to the cardinals, ib. France and England league
against him, 222. Is refused supplies by the Cortes of Castile, 226. Delivers
the Pope for a ransom, 227. His overtures to Henry and Francis, 228. Their
declaration of war against him, 229. Is challenged by Francis to single combat,
ib. Andrew Doria revolts from Francis to him, 234. His forces defeat the French
in Italy, 236, 237. His motives for desiring an accommodation, 238. Concludes a
separate treaty with the Pope, 239. Terms of the peace of Cambray concluded
with Francis, by the mediation of Margaret of Austria and Louise of France,
240. Remarks on the advantages gained by him in this treaty, and on his conduct
of the war, 241. Visits Italy, 244. His policy on his public entry into
Barcelona, ib. Has an interview with the Pope at Bologna, 245. Motives for his
moderation in Italy, ib. His treaties with the states of, 246. Is crowned King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 247. Summons a Diet at Spires to
consider the state of religion, 249. His deliberations with the Pope,
respecting the expediency of calling a general council, 250. appoints a Diet at
Augsburgh, 251. Makes a public entry into that city, ib. His endeavors to
check the Reformation, 253. Resolute behavior of the Protestant Princes toward
him, 254. His severe decree against the Protestants, ib. Proposed his brother
Ferdinand to be elected King of the Romans, ib. Is opposed by the Protestants,
255. Obtains his election, 256. Is desirous of an accommodation with the
Protestants, 257. Concludes a treaty with them at Nuremburgh, 258. Raises an
army to oppose the Turks under Solomon, and obliges him to retire, 259. Has
another interview with the Pope, and presses him to call a general council,
260. Procures ^ league of the Italian ^^tes to secure the peace of Italy, 61.
Arrives at Barcelona, 26^ His endeavors to prevent the negociations and
meeting between the Pope and Francis, 264. Undertakes to expel Barbarossa from
Tunis, and restore Muley Hascen, 285. Lands in Africa, and besieges Goletta,
286. Takes the Goletta, and seizes Barbarossa's fleet, 288. Defeats Barbarossa
and takes Tunis, 289. Restores Muley Hascen, and the treaty between them, 290.
The glory acquired by this enterprise, and the delivery of the Christian
captives, 291. Seizes the duchy of Milan on the death of Francis Sforza, 301.
His policy with regard to it, ib. Prepares for war with Francis, 302. His
invective against Francis at Rome before the Pope in council, 303. Remarks on
this transaction, 305. Invades France, 306. Enters Provence and finds it
desolated, 310. Besieges Marseilles and Arles, 311. His miserable retreat from
Provence, 312. His invasion of Picardy defeated, 314. Is accused of poisoning
the Dauphin, 315. Improbability of its truth, ib. His conjecture concerning the
Dauphin's death, ib. Flanders invaded by Francis, 316. A suspension of arms in
Flanders, how negociated, 317. A truce in Piedmont, ib. Motives to these
truces, ib. Negotiation for peace with Francis, 320. Concludes a truce for ten
years at Nice, 321. Remarks on the war, ib. His interview with Francis, 322.
Courts the friendship of Henry VIII. of England, 327. Indulges the Protestant
Princes, ib. Quiets the apprehensions of the Catholic league, 330. His troops
mutiny, 332. Assembles the Cortes of Castile, 333. Destroys the ancient
constitution of the Cortes, 334. Instance of the haughty spirit of the Spanish
grandees, 335. Desires permission of Francis to pass through France to the
Netherlands, 341. His reception in France, 342. His rigorous treatment of
Ghent, 344. Refuses to fulfill his engagements to Francis, 345. Appoints a
friendly conference between a deputation of Catholic and Protestant divines
before the Diet at Ratisbon, 360. Result of this conference, 362. Grants a
private exemption from oppressions to the Protestants, 363. Undertakes to
reduce Algiers, 368. Is near being cast away by a violent storm, 370. Lands
near Algiers, ib. His soldiers exposed to a violent tempest and rain, 371. His
fleet shattered, ib. His fortitude under these disasters, 374. Leaves his
enterprise and embarks again, ib. Is distressed with another storm at sea, ib.
Takes advantage of the French invasion of Spain, to obtain subsidies from the
Cortes, III. 7. His treaty with Portugal, ib. Concludes a league with Henry
VIII. 8. Particulars of the treaty, 10. Over runs Cleves, and his barbarous
treatment of the town of Duren, 12. His behavior to the Duke of Cleves, ib.
Besieges Landrecy, ib. Is joined by an English detachment, 13. Is forced to
retire, 14. Courts the favor of the Protestants, 18. His negociations with the
Protestants at the Diet of Spires, 20. Procures the concurrence of the Diet in
a war against Francis, 22. Negociates a separate peace with the King of
Denmark, ib. Invades Champagne, and invades St. Disier, 27. Want of concert
between his operations and those of Henry, who now invades France, 28. Obtains
St. Disier by artifice, ib. His distresses and happy movements, 30. Concludes a
separate peace with Francis, 31. His motives to this peace, 32. His advantages
by this treaty, 34. Obliges himself by a private article to exterminate the
Protestant heresy, ib. Is cruelly afflicted with the gout, 36. Diet at Worms,
37. Arrives at Worms and alters his conduct toward the Protestants, 39. His
conduct on the death of the Duke of Orleans, 42. His dissimulation to the
Landgrave of Hesse, 55. Concludes a truce with Solomon, 58. Holds a Diet at
Ratisbon, 59. His declaration to the Protestant deputies, 61. His treaty with
the Pope concluded by the cardinal of Trent, 62. His circular letter to the
Protestant members of the Germanic body, 63. The Protestants levy an army
against him, 68. Is unprepared against them, 69. Puts them under the ban of the
empire, 70. The Protestants declare war against him, 72. Marches to join the
troops sent by the Pope, 74. Farnes^ the Pope's legate returns in disgust, 75.
His prudent declension of an action with the Protestants, 77. Is joined by his
Flemish troops, ib. Proposals of peace made by the Protestants, 85. Their army
disperse, ib. His rigorous treatment of the Protestant Princes, 86. Dismisses
part of his army, 89. The Pope recals his troops, 90. His reflection on
Fie^co's insurrection at Genoa, 100. Is alarmed at the hostile preparations of
Francis, 104. Death of Francis, 106. A parallel drawn between him and Francis,
ib. Consequences of Francis's death to him, 109. Marches against the Elector of
Saxony, ib. Passes the Elbe. 111. Defeats the Saxon army, 114. Takes the
Elector prisoner, ib. His harsh reception of him, ib. Invests Wittemberg, 115.
Condemns the Elector to death, by a court martial, 116. The Elector by treaty
surrenders the electorate, 119. The harsh terms imposed by him on the Landgrave
of Hesse, 121. His haughty reception of the Landgrave, 123. Detains him
prisoner, 124. Seizes the warlike stores of the league, 127. His cruel
exactions, 128. Assembles a Diet at Augsburgh, 130. Intimidates the Diet by his
Spanish troops, ib. Re-establishes the Romish worship in the churches of
Augsburgh, ib. Seizes Placentia, 134. Orders the Diet to petition the Pope for
the return of the council to Trent, 136. Protests against the council of
Bologna, 138. Causes a system of faith to be prepared for Germany, 139. Lays it
before the Diet, 140. The Interim opposed, 143. And rejected by the Imperial
cities, 144. Reduces the city of Augsburgh to submission, 147. Repeats the same
violence at Ulm, ib. Carries the Elector and Landgrave with him into the
Low Countries, 148. Procures his son Philip to be recognized by the states of
the Netherlands, 149. Establishes the Interim there, ib. Re-assembles the Diet
at Augsburgh, under the influence of his Spanish troops, 156. The city of
Magdeburgh refuses to admit the Interim and prepares for resistance, 161.
Appoints Maurice Elector of Saxony to reduce it, 162. Promises to protect the
Protestants at the council of Trent, 163. Arbitrarily releases Maurice and the
Elector of Brandenburgh, from their engagements to the Landgrave for the
recovery of his liberty, 164. Endeavors to secure the empire for his son
Philip, 165. His brother Ferdinand refuses to sign his pretensions, 166.
Besieges Parma, but is repulsed, 170. Proceeds rigorously against the
Protestants, 172. Endeavors to support the council of Trent, 173. Puts
Mag^eburgh, under the ban of the empire, ib. Absolves the city, 177. Is
involved in disputes between the council and the Protestant deputies,
concerning their safe conduct, 178. Begins to suspect Maurice of Saxony, 188.
Circumstances which ^^ntributed to deceive him with regard to Maurice, 189.
Maurice takes the field against him, 190. Maurice seconded by Henry II. of
France, 192. His distress and consternation, ib. An ineffectual negotiation
with Maurice, 193. Flies from Inspruck, 196. Releases the Elector of Saxony,
197. Is solicited to satisfy the demands of Maurice, 203. His present
difficulties, 204. Refuses any direct compliance with the demands of Maurice,
207. Is disposed to yield by the progress of Maurice's operations, ib. Makes a
peace with Maurice at Passau, 209. Reflections on this treaty, 210. Turns his
arms against France, 196. Lays siege to Metz, 198. Is joined by Albert of
Brandenburgh, 199. His army distressed by the vigilance of the Duke of Guise,
200. Raises the siege and retires in a shattered condition, 202. Cosmo di
Medici asserts his independency against him, 203. Siena revolts against him,
204. Is dejected at his bad success, 206. Takes Terronane and demolishes it,
212. Takes Hesdin, ib. Proposes his son Philip as a husband to Mary Queen of
England, 222. The articles of the marriage, 223. Marches to oppose the French
operations, 229. Is defeated by Henry, 230. Invades Picardy, ib. Grants Siena,
subdued by Cosmo di Medici to his son Philip, 237. A Diet at Augsburgh opened
by Ferdinand, 244. Leaves the interior administration of Germany to Ferdinand,
246. Applies again to Ferdinand to resign his pretensions of succession to
Philip, but is refused, 247. Recess of the Diet of Augsburgh, on the subject of
religion, 249. A treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV. and Henry II. of France
against him, 262. Resigns his hereditary dominions to his son Philip, 263. His
motives for retirement, 264. Had long meditated this resignation, 265. The
ceremony of this deed, 267. His speech on the occasion, ib. Resigns also the
dominions of Spain, 270. His intended retirement into Spain retarded, 271. A
truce for five years concluded with France, ib. Endeavors in vain to secure
the Imperial crown for Philip, 280. Resigns the Imperial crown to Ferdinand,
281. Sets out for Spain, ib. His arrival and reception in Spain, 282. Is
distressed by his son's ungrateful neglect in paying his pension, 283. Fixes
his retreat in the monastery of St. Justus in Plazencia, ib. The situation of
this monastery, and his apartments described, 284. Contrast between the conduct
of Charles and the Pope, ib. His manner of life in his retreat, 315. His death
precipitated by his monastic severities, 317. Celebrates his own funeral, ib.
Dies, ib. His character, 318. A review of the state of Europe during his reign,
329. His requisitions to the crown of Spain, 333. Chateau Cambresis, the
conferences for peace between Philip II. of Spain, and Henry II. of France,
removed thither from Cercamp, III. 324. The peace retarded by the demand of
Elizabeth of England for restitution of Calais, ib. Particulars of the treaty
signed there between England and France, 325. Terms of the pacification between
Philip and Henry, 327. Cheregat^, nuncio from the Pope to the Diet at
Nuremburgh, his instructions, II. 145. Opposes the assembling a general
council, 146. Chievres, William de Croy, Lord of, appointed by Maximilian to
superintend the education of his grandson Charles, I. 348. Adrian of Utrecht
made preceptor under him, 349. His direction of the studies of Charles, 350.
His avarice corrupts the Flemish court of Charles, II. 2. Negociates a peace
with France, 4. Endeavors to prevent an interview between Charles and Ximenes,
5. Attends Charles to Spain, 6. His ascendancy over Charles, 8. His extortions,
9. His death and the supposed causes of it, 82. Christians, primitive, why
averse to the principles of toleration, III. 250. Clement VII. Pope, his
election, II. 137. His character, ib. Grants Cardinal Wolsey a legantine
commission in England for life, 138. Refuses to accede to the league against
Francis, 141. Labors to accommodate the differences between the contending
parties, ib. His proceedings with regard to the Reformers, 149. Concludes a
treaty of neutrality with Francis, 158. Enters into a separate treaty with
Charles after the battle of Pavia, and the consequences of it, 167. Joins in an
alliance with Francis Sforza and the Venetians, against the Emperor, 193.
Absolves Francis from his oath to observe the treaty of Madrid, 194. Cardinal
Colonna seizes Rome, and invests him in the castle of St. Angelo, 200. Is
forced to an accommodation with the Imperialists, ib. His revenge against the
Colonna family, 202. Invades Naples, ib. His territories invaded by Bourbon,
and his perplexity on the occasion, 204. Concludes a treaty with Lannoy viceroy
of Naples, 205. His consternation on Bourbon's motions toward Rome, 207. Rome
taken, and himself besieged in the castle of St. Angelo, 209. Surrenders
himself prisoner, 210. The Florentines revolt against him, 223. Pays Charles a
ransom for his liberty, with other stipulations, 226. Makes his escape from
confinement, 227. Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec, ib. Is jealous of the
intentions of Francis, and negociates with Charles, 232. His motives and steps
toward an accommodation, 238. Concludes a separate treaty with Charles, 239.
His interview with the Emperor at Bologna, 245. Crowns Charles King of
Lombardy, and Emperor of the Romans, 247. His representations to the Emperor
against calling a general council, 251. Has another interview with Charles at
Bologna, and the difficulties raised by him to the calling a general council,
260. Agrees to a league of the Italian states for the peace of Italy, 261. His
interview and treaty with Francis, 264. Marries Catharine di Medici to the Duke
of Orleans, 265. His protraction of the affair of the divorce solicited by
Henry VIII. ib. Reverses Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, ib. Henry renounces his supremacy, ib. His death, 266.
Reflections on his pontificate, ib. Clergy, Romish, remarks on the immoral
lives of, and how they contributed to the progress of the Reformation, II. 60.
The facility with which they obtained pardons, 61. Their usurpations in
Germany, during the disputes concerning investitures, 62. Their other
opportunities of aggrandizing themselves there 63. Their personal immunities,
ib. Their encroachments on the laity, 64. The dreadful effects of spiritual
censures, 65. Their devices to secure their usurpations, ib. The united effect
of all these circumstances, 68. Oppose the advancement of learning in Germany,
71. Cleves, invaded and overrun by the Emperor Charles V. III. 12. Cruel
treatment of Duren, ib. Humiliating submission of the Duke, 13. Cnipperdoling,
a leader of the Anabaptists at Munster, an account of, II. 270, 272. See
Anabaptists. Cognac, an alliance formed there against Charles V. by the Pope,
the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, and Francis I. II. 193. Coligni, Admiral,
governor of Picardy, defends St. Quintin against the Spanish general Emanuel
Phillibert Duke of Savoy, III. 290. His brother D'Andelot defeated in an
endeavor to join the garrison, 292. But D'Andelot enters the town, ib. His
character, 295. The town taken by assault, and himself taken prisoner, 296.
Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia, brother to the Emperor Charles
V. elected King of the Romans by the college of electors there, II. 256.
Cologne, Herman, Count de Wied, Archbishop and Elector of, inclines to the
Reformation, and is opposed by his canons, who appeal to the Emperor and Pope,
III. 40. Is deprived and excommunicated, 57. Resigns, 88. Colonna, Cardinal
Pompeo, his character, and rivalship with Pope Clement VII. II. 199. Seizes
Rome, and invests the Pope in the castle of St. Angelo, ib. Is degraded, and
the rest of the family excommunicated by the Pope, 202. Is prevailed on by the
Pope when prisoner with the Imperialists, to solicit his delivery, 226.
Colonna, Prosper, the Italian general, his character, II. 91. Appointed to
command the troops in the invasion of Milan, ib. Drives the French out of
Milan, 93. His army how weakened at the death of Pope Leo X. 94. Defeats
Marechal de Lautrec at Bicocca, 97. Reduces Genoa, 99. The bad state of his
troops when the French invade Milan, 136. Is enabled to defend the city by the
ill conduct of Bonnivet the French commander, ib. Dies, and is succeeded by
Lannoy, 140. Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Ferdinand of
Aragon, to obtain Joanna's consent to his regency of Castile, I. 337. Thrown
into a dungeon by the Archduke Philip, 338. Confession of Augsburgh, drawn up
by Melancthon, II. 252. Constance, the privileges of that city taken away by
the Emperor Charles V. for disobedience to the Interim, III. 149. Corsairs of
Barbary, an account of the rise of, II. 280. See Algiers, and Barbarossa.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's title to the crown, I.
333. Not allowed to assemble in the name of Charles V. Their opposition to his
desires, ib. Is prevailed on by the Emperor to recognize his son Philip as
successor to that kingdom, III. 7. See Spain. Cortes of Castile, acknowledges
the Archduke Philip's title to the crown, I. 333. Is prevailed on to
acknowledge Ferdinand regent, according to Isabella's will, 336. Acknowledges
Philip and Joanna King and Queen of Castile, and their son Charles, Prince of
Asturias, 342. Declares Charles King, and votes him a free gift, II. 8.
Summoned by Charles to meet at Compostella, in Galicia, 26. Tumultuary
proceedings thereupon, 27. A donative voted, ib. Loses all its influence by the
dissolution of the Holy Junta, 125. Its backwardness to grant supplies for the
Emperor's wars in Italy, 201. Refuses his pressing solicitations for a supply,
226. Assembled at Toledo to grant supplies to the Emperor, 333. The
remonstrances of, 334. The ancient constitution of, subverted by Charles, ib.
See Spain. Cortes of Valencia, prevailed on by the Emperor Charles V. to
acknowledge his son Philip successor to that kingdom, III. 7. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Florence for the Pope, expelled by the
Florentines on the Pope's captivity, II. 223. C^smo di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, annals the marriage of Henry VIII. with
Catharine of Aragon, which was refused to Henry by the Pope, II. 265. His
sentence reversed by the Pope, ib. Cres^y, peace of, between the Emperor and
Francis, III, 31. Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres, made archbishop of
Toledo, by Charles V. II. 10. Dies, 124.
D
D'Albert John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre by Ferdinand of Aragon, I.
346. Invades Navarre, but is defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, II. 1. D'Al^mbert,
M. his observations on the order of Jesuits, II. 355, Note. D'Andelot, brother
to Coligni, is defeated by the Duke of Saxony, in an endeavor to succor St.
Quintin, III. 292. But enters the town with the fugitives, ib. The town taken
by assault, 295. Dauphin of France, eldest son of Francis I. is delivered up
with the Duke of Orleans, to the Emperor Charles V. in exchange for his father,
as hostage for the performance of the treaty of Madrid, II. 183. His death
imputed to poison, 314. The most probable cause of it, 315. Dauphin, late Duke
of Orleans, second son of Francis I. commands an army and invades Spain, III.
6. Is forced to abandon the siege of Perpignan, 7. Is dissatisfied at the peace
of Crespy, 35. Makes a secret protestation against it, ib. Dauphin, of France,
son of Henry II. contracted to Mary the young Queen of Scotland, III. 135. Is
married to her, 308. Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions in, during the
sixteenth century, III. 350. Denmark, King of, joins the Protestant league at
Smalkalde, II. 330. De ^etz, Cardinal, writes a history of Fiesco's conspiracy,
while a youth, III. 100, Note. Diana, of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of
France, assists the Guises in persuading Henry to an alliance with Pope Paul
IV. against the Emperor III. 260. Induces Henry to break the treaty of
Vancelles, 276. Marries her granddaughter to one of Montmorency's sons, 313.
Joins Montmorency against the Guires, ib. D^ria, Andrew, assists Lautrec in
subduing Genoa, II. 225. Conquers and kills Moncada in a sea engagement before
the harbor of Naples, 231. His character, 233. Is disgusted with the behavior
of the French, ib. Revolts to the Emperor, 234. Opens to Naples a communication
by sea, ib. Rescues Genoa, from the French, 235. Restores the government of, to
the citizens, 236. The respect paid to his memory, 237. Attends the Emperor
Charles in his disastrous expedition against Algiers, 370. His partial fondness
for his kinsman Giannetino, III. 92. His narrow escape in Lavagno's
insurrection, 98. Returns on Lavagno's death, and the dispersion of his party,
100. See Genoa and Lavagno. Doria, Giannetino, his character, III. 92. Is
murdered by Lavagno's conspirators, 98. Dover, an interview there between Henry
VIII. and the Emperor Charles V. II. 35. Dragut, a corsair, commands the
Turkish fleet which ravages the coasts of Naples, III. 205. Du Prat, chancellor
of France, his character, II. 133. Commences a law suit against Charles Duke of
Bourbon, for his estate, at the instigation of Louise the King's mother, ib.
Duelling, the custom of, how rendered general, II. 229. Its influence on
manners, 230. Duren, in Cleves, taken by the Emperor Charles V. the inhabitants
put to the sword, and the town burnt, III. 12.
E.
Eccius, an adversary of Luther's, holds a public disputation with him at
Leipsic, on the validity of the pap^l authority, II. 52. Ecclesiastical
censures of the Romish church, the dreadful effects of, II. 65. Ecclesiastical
reservation, in the recess of the Diet of Augsburgh, remarks on, II. 258.
Edinburgh, plundered and burnt by the Earl of Hertford, III. 27. Edward, VI. of
England, his character, III. 221. Egmont, Count of, commands the cavalry at the
battle of St. Quintin, and puts Montmorency's troops to flight, III. 292.
Engages Marechal de Terms, and defeats him by the casual arrival of an English
squadron, 310. Egypt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire, II. 14.
Ehrenburgh, the castle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony, III. 195. Eignotz, a
faction in Geneva so termed, an account of, II. 289. Elizabeth sister of Mary,
her accession to the crown of England, III. 321. Her character ib. Is addressed
by Philip of Spain, and Henry of France for marriage 322. Her prudent conduct
between them, ib. How determined against Henry, 323. Her motives for rejecting
Philip, ib. Returns Philip an evasive answer, ib. Demands restitution of Calais
at the conferences at Chateau Cambresis, 324. Establishes the Protestant
religion in England, ib. Treaty between her and Henry, signed at Chateau
Cambresis, 325. Emanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy. See Savoy. England, by what
means that kingdom was freed from the papal supremacy, and received the
doctrines of the Reformation, II. 265. Mary Queen of, married to Prince Philip,
son of the Emperor Charles V* contrary to the sense of the nation, III. 223.
The marriage ratified by parliament, 225. Is reluctantly engaged by Philip, now
King of Spain, in the war against France, 289. Mary levies money by her
prerogative to carry on the war, ib. Calais taken by the Duke of Guise, 304.
Guisness and Hames taken, ib. Death of Mary and accession of Elizabeth, 321.
The Protestant religion established by Elizabeth, 324. Treaty with France
signed at Chateau Cambresis, 325. Its interior strength how increased by the
conduct of Henry VIII. 337. Its power no longer fruitlessly wasted on the
continent, 339. Alteration of its conduct toward Scotland, 340. Enguien, the
Count de, besieges Carignan, III. 23. Desires of Francis, permission to engage
Guasto, 24. Defeats Guasto in a pitched battle, ib. Erard de la Mark,
ambassador of Charles V. to the Diet of Frankfort, his private motives for
thwarting the pretensions of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial crown, II.
21. Signs the capitulation of the Germanic body, on behalf of Charles, 22.
Erasmus, some account of, II. 72. Preceded Luther in his censures against the
Romish church, ib. Concurs with him in his intentions of Reformation, 73.
Motives which checked him in this, ib. Escurial, palace of, built by Philip II.
in memory of the battle of St. Quintin, III. 297. Europe, a short view of the
sta^e of, at the death of the Emperor Maximilian, II. 12. The contemporary
Monarchs of, all illustrious, at the time of Charles V. 38. The method of
carrying on war in, how improved beyond the practice of earlier ages, II. 138.
The sentiments of, on Charles's treatment of the Pope, 221. A review of the
state of, during the reign of the Emperor Charles V. III. 329. The remarkable
change in, at this period, 330. How effected by the revolt of Luther against
the church of Rome, 341. Eutemi, King of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in his
service, and is murdered by him, II. 282. Excommunication in the Romish church,
the original institution of, and the use made of it, II. 65.
F
Farnese, Alexander, his unanimous election to the papacy, II. 266. See Paul
III. Farnese, Cardinal, accompanies the troops sent by the Pope to the Emperor,
against the army of the Protestant league, III. 74. Returns disgusted, 75.
Leads the troops home again by the Pope's order, 89. Contributes to the
election of Cardinal di Monte to the papacy, 153. Farnese, Octavio, grandson of
Pope Paul III. endeavors to surprise Parma, and enters into treaty with the
Emperor, III. 151. Is confirmed in Parma, by Julius III. 168. Procures an
alliance with France, 170. Is attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully
protected by the French, ib. Placentia restored to him by Philip II. of Spain,
299. Farnese, Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope Paul III. obtains of his father
the dutchies of Parma and Placentia, III. 43. His character, 133. Is
assassinated, ib. Ferdinand, King of Aragon, how he acquired his kingdom, I.
332. Invites his daughter Joanna, and her husband, Philip Archduke of Austria,
to Spain, ib. Becomes jealous of Philip, 333. Carries on his war with France
vigorously, notwithstanding Philip's treaty with Lewis, 334. His Queen Isabella
dies, and leaves him regent of Castile, under restrictions, 335. Resigns the
kingdom of Castile, and is acknowledged regent by the Cortes, ib. His
character, 336. His maxims of government, odious to the Castillians, ib.
Required by Philip to resign his regency, 337. Joanna's letter of consent
procured by him, intercepted by Philip, and herself confined, 338. Is deserted
by the Castilian nobility, ib. Determines to exclude his daughter from the
succession by marrying, ib. Marries German de Foix, neice to Lewis XII. of
France, 339. A treaty between him and Philip at Salamanca, by which the
regency, of Castile is jointly, vested in them, and Joanna, ib. Prevails on
Henry VII. of England to detain Philip for three months, when driven on that
coast, 340. The Castilians declare against him, ib. Resigns the regency of
Castile by treaty, 341. Interview between him and Philip, ib. Is absent, at
Naples, when Philip died, 344. Returns and gains with the regency of Castile,
the good will of the natives by his prudent administration, 345. Acquires by
dishonorable means the kingdom of Navarre, 346. How he destroyed his
constitution, ib. Endeavors to excluded his grandson Charles from his Spanish
succession, 347. Alters his will in favor of Charles, ib. Dies, 348. Review of
his administration, 351. Ximenes appointed by his will, regent of Castile,
until the arrival of Charles V. ib. Ferdinand, second son of Philip Archduke of
Austria born, I. 334. Left regent of Aragon, by his grandfather Ferdinand, 347.
This, revoked by a subsequent will, by which he obtains only a pension, 348.
Discontented with his disappointment, he is taken to Madrid under the eye of
Cardinal Ximenes, 354. Sent by Charles V. to visit their grandfather
Maximilian, II. 10. Is elected King of Hungary and Bohemia, 212. Signs a deed
called the Reverse, ib. The Emperor endeavors to get him elected King of the
Romans, 254. He is opposed by the Protestants, 255. Is crowned King of the
Romans, 256. Forms a confederacy against the Anabaptists at Munster, 274.
Opposes the restoration of Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, 278. Recognizes his title
and concludes a treaty with him, ib. His kingdom of Hungary wrested from him by
John Zapol Scaepius, 363. Besieges the young King Stephen and his mother in
Buda, but is defeated by the Turks, 366. His mean offers of submission to the
Port, 366. Which are rejected, 367. Courts the favor of the Protestants, III.
18. Opens the Diet at Worms, 3^. Requires it to submit to the decisions of the
council of Trent, 38. Agrees to pay a tribute to Solomon for Hungary, 58.
Encroaches on the liberties of Bohemia, 128. His rigorous treatment of Prague,
130. Disarms the Bohemians, ib. Obtains the sovereignty of the city of
Constance, 149. Invades Transylvania by invitation of Martinuzzi, 180. Obtains
the resignation of Transylvania from Queen Isabella, 181. Ord^ Martinuzzi to be
assassinated, 183. Enters into negotiation with Maurice on behalf of the
Emperor, 202. His motives for promoting the Emperor's agreeing with Maurice,
206. Isabella and her son Stephen, recover possession of Transylvania, 214.
Opens a Diet at Augsburgh, and excites suspicions in the Protestants, 244. The
Emperor leaves the internal administration of German affairs to him, 246. Is
again applied to by the Emperor to resign his pretensions of succession to
Philip, but refuses, 247. Endeavors therefore to gain the friendship of the
Diet, ib. Again refuses the Emperor's solicitations, 281. Charles resigns the
Imperial crown to him, ib. Assembles the college of electors at Frankfort,
which acknowledges him Emperor of Germany, 306. The Pope refuses to acknowledge
him, ib. Feudal government, a view of, as it existed in Spain, II. 106. Fiesco,
Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna. Fiesco, Jerome, engages in his brother's
conspiracy, and fails in securing Andrew Doria, III. 98. His imprudent vanity
on his brother's death, 99. Shuts himself up in a fort on his estate, 100. Is
reduced and put to death, 105. Flanders. See Netherlands. Florence, the
inhabitants of, revolt against Pope Clement VII. on the news of his captivity,
and recover their liberty, II. 223. Are reduced to subjection to Alexander di
Medici, by the ^^^or, 247. Alexander di (...) Duke of, assassinated by (...)
^^nsman Lorenzo, 324. Cosmo (...) Medici, advanced to the sovereignty, 325.
Cosmo, supported by the Emperor, defeats the partisans of Lorenzo, ib. Cosmo
asserts his independency on the Emperor III. 203. Fonseca, Antonio de,
commander in chief of the forces in Spain, ordered by Cardinal Adrian to
besiege the insurgents in Segovia, II. 105. Is denied liberty of taking
military stores, by the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, ib. Attacks and almost
burns the whole town, ib. Is repulsed, ib. His house at Valladolid burnt, ib.
France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles V. III. 335. The Character of the people of, 336. The good consequences
of the civil wars in that kingdom to the rest of Europe, 337. Francis I. King
of France, concludes a peace with Charles V. and the conditions of the treaty,
II. ^. Sends a fruitless embassy to Charles for the restitution of Navarre to
the young King, II. Aspires to the Imperial crown at the death of Maximilian,
13. Reasons by which he supported his pretensions, 15. Remarks on the equipages
of his ambassadors to the German states, 16. His pretensions adopted by the
Venetians, ib. Loses the election, 21. Rise of the rivalship between him and
Charles, 21. Courts the favor of Cardinal Wolsey, 34. Promises Wolsey his
interest for the papacy, 36. Has an interview with Henry VIII. of England, ib.
Wrestles with Henry and throws him, ib. Note. His advantages over Charles, at
the commencement of hostilities between them, 80. Concludes an alliance with
the Pope, 81. Invades and reduces Navarre, in the name of Henry d'Albert, son
of John, the former King, 84. The French driven out by the imprudence of
L'Esparre their general, who is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, 85. Retakes
Mouson from the Imperalists, 86. Invades the Low Countries, but loses the
opportunities of success by imprudence, ib. Rejects the demands of Charles at
the congress at Calais, 88. A league concluded between Charles and Henry VIII.
against him, ib. His imprudent appointment of the Marechal de Foix to the
government of Milan, 90. De Foix attacks Reggio, but is repulsed by the
governor Guicciardini the historian, 91. The Pope declares against him, ib. His
embarrassments on the invasion of Milan, 92. His mother seizes the money
appointed for payment of the Milanese troops, ib. Milan taken, and the French
driven out, 93. Levies a body of Swiss, 96. Who insist on giving a precipitate
battle to the Imperialists, which is lost, ib. War declared against him by
Henry VIII. 98. His expedients to supply his treasury, ib. The plan pursued by
him to resist the incursions of the English, 100. Picardy invaded by Henry, ib.
The Venetians league with the Emperor against him, 131. To which Pope Adrian
accedes, ib. His expeditious movement against the Milanese, ib. Disconcerted by
the Duke of Bourbon's conspiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his cause, which
Bourbon denies, 134. Bourbon escapes to Italy and Francis returns, 135.
Appoints the admiral Bonnivet to command against the Milanese, ib. Picardy
invaded by the Duke of Suffolk, who is driven back, 139. Repulses the invasion
of Guienne and Burgundy by Charles, ib. His successful close of the campaign,
ib. His prudent care to disappoint the Imperialists in their invasion of
Provence, 153. Assembles an army, which causes the imperialists to retire from
Marseilles, ib. Determines to invade the Milanese, 154. Appoints his mother
Louise regent during his absence, ib. Enters Milan, and takes possession of the
city, 155. Advised by Bonnivet to besiege Pavia, 156. His vigorous attacks on
Pavia, 157. Concludes a treaty of neutrality with Pope Clement, 158. His
imprudent invasion of Naples, 159. Resolves by Bonnivet's advice to attack
Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief of Pavia, 160. Is routed at the battle
of Pavia, 161. Is taken prisoner, ib. Is sent to the castle of Pizzitchitone
under the custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, 163. Refuses the propositions made
to him by Charles, 169. Is carried to Spain on his desire of a personal
interview with Charles, 171. Is rigorously treated in Spain, 176. Falls
dangerously ill, ib. Is visited by Charles. 177. Resolves to resign his
kingdom, 179. Is delivered from his captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 180. His
secret protestations against the validity of this treaty, 182. Marries the
Queen of Portugal, ib. Recovers his liberty, and the Dauphin and the Duke of
Orleans delivered up hostages to Charles for the performance of the treaty of
Madrid, 183. Writes a letter of acknowledgment to Henry VIII. of England, 192.
His reply to the Imperial ambassadors, ib. Enters into a league with the Pope,
the Venetians and Sforza, against Charles, 193. Is absolved from his oath to
observe the treaty of Madrid, 194. His behavior to the Emperor's second
embassy, 195. Is dispirited by his former ill success, 197. Enters into a
treaty with Henry VIII. of England against the Emperor, 222. Successes of his
general Lautrec in Italy, 225. His reply to the Emperor's overtures, 228.
Declares war against him, and challenges him to single combat, 228. Treats
Andrew Doria ill, who revolts from him to the Emperor, 234. His army, under
Saluces, driven out of Italy, 235. His troops in Milan routed, 238. His
endeavors toward an accommodation, 239. Terms of the peace of Cambray,
concluded by the mediation of his mother Louise and Margaret of Austria, 240.
Remarks on the sacrifices made by him in this treaty, and on his conduct of the
war, 241. Leagues secretly with the Protestant Princes, 256. His measures to
elude the treaty of Cambray, 262. His negociations with the Pope, 263. His
interview and treaty with the Pope, 264. Gives the Duke of Orleans in marriage
to Catharine di Medici, ib. Negociates a treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke of
Milan, 293. His envoy Merveille executed at Milan for murder, ib. Is
disappointed in his endeavors to negociate alliances against the Emperor, 294.
Invites Melancthon to Paris, ib. Evidences his zeal for the Romish religion,
295. Causes of his quarrel with the Duke of Savoy, 297. Seizes the Duke's
territories, 298. His pretensions to the duchy of Milan, on the death of
Francis Sforza, 301. The Emperor's invective against him before the Pope in
council, 303. Is invaded by Charles, 306. His prudent plan of defense, 309.
Joins the army under Montmorency, 312. Death of the Dauphin, 314. Obtains a
decree of the parliament of Paris against the Emperor, 316. Invades the
Low Countries, ib. A suspension of arms in Flanders, and how negociated, 317. A
truce in Piedmont, 318. Motives to these truces, ib. Concludes an alliance with
Solomon the Magnificent, ib. Negociations for a peace with the Emperor, 320.
Concludes a truce for ten years at Nice, 321. Reflections on the war, ib. His
interview with Charles, 322. Marries Mary of Guise to James V. of Scotland,
326. Refuses the offers of the deputies of Ghent, 340. Informs Charles of the
offer made by them, ib. Grants the Emperor leave to pass through France to the
Netherlands, 342. His reception of the Emperor, 343. Is deceived by the Emperor
in respect to Milan, 345. His ambassador to the Port, Rincon, murdered by the
Imperial governor of the Milanese, III. 3. Prepares to resent the injury, 4.
Attacks the Emperor with five armies, 5. His first attempts rendered abortive,
by the imprudence of the Duke of Orleans, 6. Renews his negociations with
Sultan Solomon, 11. Invades the Low Countries, 12. Forces the Emperor to raise
the siege of Landrecy, 13. Dismisses Barbarossa, 23. Gives the Count d'Enguien
permission to engage Guasto, 25. Relieves Paris, in danger of being surprised
by the Emperor, 31. Agrees to a separate peace with Francis, ib. Henry's
haughty return to his overtures of peace, 35. Death of the Duke of Orleans, 42.
Peace of Camp, 67. Perceives a necessity of checking the Emperor's ambitious
designs, 102. Forms a general league against him, 103. Dies, 106. His life and
character summarily compared with those of Charles, ib. Consequences of his
death, 109. Francis II. his accession to the crown of France, and character,
III. 329. Frankfort, the Diet of, assembled for the choice of an Emperor at the
death of Maxmilian, II. 18. Names and views of the electors, 19. The empire
offered to Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who rejects it, with his reasons, ib.
Chooses Charles V. Emperor, 21. His confirmation of the Germanic privileges
required and agreed to, 22. City of, embraces the Reformed religion, II. 144.
The college of electors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is acknowledged
Emperor of Germany, III. 306. Frederick, Duke of Saxony, assembles with the
other electors at the Diet of Frankfort, to choose an Emperor, II. 18. The
empire offered to him, ib. Rejects it, and votes for Charles V. 19. Refuses the
presents of the Spanish ambassadors, 20. This disinterested behavior confirmed
by the testimony of historians, ib. Note. Chooses Martin Luther philosophical
Professor at his University of Wittemberg, 42. Encourages Luther in his
opposition to indulgences, 44. Protects him against Cajetan, 49. Causes Luther
to be seized at his return from the Diet of Worms, and conceals him at
Wartburgh, 77. Dies, 190. Fergos^, The French ambassador to Venice, murdered by
the Marquis del Guasto, the Imperial governor of the Milanese, III. 3.
Frondsperg, George, a German nobleman, some account of, he joins the army of
Charles V. II. 200.
G
General of the Jesuits, an inquiry into his office and despotic authority,
III. 349. Geneva, an account of its revolt against the Duke of Savoy, II. 298.
Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, II. 225. The French endeavor to
prejudice its trade in favor of Savona, 233. Is rescued from the French by
Andrew Doria, 236. The government of, settled by the disinterestedness of
Doria, 237. The honor paid to Doria's memory, ib. Is visited by the Emperor,
245. A scheme formed to overturn the constitution of, by Fiesco, Count of
Lavagna, III. 93. He assembles his adherents, 95. The conspirators sally forth
from Lavagna's palace, 96. Deputies sent to know Lavagna's terms, 98. Lavagna
drowned, ib. The insurrection ruined by the imprudence of his brother Jerome
Fiesco, 99. The conspirators disperse, ib. Jerome reduced and put to death,
105. Germanada, an association in Valencia, so termed, on what occasion formed,
II. 125. Refuse to lay down their arms, ib. Their resentment levelled at the
nobility, who raise an army against them, 126. Defeat the nobles in several
actions, ib. But are routed and dispersed by them, ib. Germany, state of, at
the death of the Emperor Maximilian, II. 12. Charles V. of Spain, and Francis
I. of France, form pretensions to the Imperial crown, 13. Their respective
reasons offered in favor of their claims, 14, 15. Views and interests of the
other European states in relation to the competitors, 16. Henry VIII. of
England, advances a claim, 17. But is discouraged from prosecuting it, ib. How
the papacy was likely to be affected in the choice of an Emperor, ib. Advice of
Pope Leo X. to the German Princes 18. Opening of the Diet at Frankfort, ib. In
whom the election of an Emperor is vested, ib. Views of the electors, ib. The
empire offered to Frederick of Saxony, 19. Who rejects it, and his reasons, ib.
Charles V. chosen, 21. The capitulation of the Germanic privileges confirmed by
him, 22. Charles sets our for, 28. Charles crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle, 37.
Commencement of the Reformation there, by Martin Luther, 38. Treatment of the
bull of excommunication published against Luther, 54. The usurpations of the
clergy there, during the disputes concerning investitures, 62. The clergy of,
mostly foreigners, 66. The benefices of, nominated by the Pope, ib. The
expedient of the Emperors for restraining this power of the Pope, ineffectual,
67. The great progress of Luther's doctrines in, 144. Grievances of the
peasants, 184. Insurrection in Suabia, 185. The memorial of their grievances
186. The insurrection quelled, 187. Another insurrection in Thuringia, ib. How
the house of Austria became so formidable in, 211. Proceedings relating to the
Reformation there, 213. Great progress of the Reformation there, 248. Ferdinand
King of Hungary and Bohemia, brother to Charles V. elected King of the Romans,
256. The Protestant religion established in Saxony, 332. The Protestant
religion established in the Palatinate, III. 44. The league of Smalkalde, raise
an army against the Emperor, 69. Are put under the ban of the empire, 71. The
Protestant army dispersed, 85. The Interim enforced by the Emperor, 145.
Maurice of Saxony raises an army, and declares in favor of the Protestants,
190. Maurice favored even by the Catholic Princes, and why, 203. Treaty of
Passau, between the Emperor and Maurice of Saxony, 209. Truce between the
Emperor and Henry of France, 271. Charles resigns the Imperial crown to his
brother Ferdinand, 281. Ghent, an insurrection there, II. 336. The pretensions
of the citizens, ib. Form a confederacy against the Queen-Dowager of Hungary,
their governess, 337. Their deputies to the Emperor, how treated by him, ib.
Offer to submit to France, 338. Is reduced by Charles, 344. Ghibeline faction,
in Italy, a view of, II. 198. Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of
the army of the Holy Junta, II. 115. Resigns his commission and Padilla
replaced, 117. Golletta, in Africa, taken by the Emperor Charles V. II. 286.
Gonzaga, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures Cardinal Farnese to be
assassinated, and takes possession of Placentia for the Emperor, III. 134.
Prepares to seize Parma, 169. Is repulsed by the French, 170. Granvelle,
Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the Count de Sancerre to surrender St.
Disier to the Emperor, III. 29. Endeavors to lull the Protestants into
security with regard to the Emperor's conduct toward them, 49. Is commissioned
by Philip to address the assembly at the Emperor's resignation of his
hereditary dominions, 269. Gravelines, an interview there between the Emperor
Charles V. and Henry VIII. of England, II. 37. Gropper, canon of Cologne, is
appointed a manager of the Protestant and Catholic conferences before the Diet
at Ratisbon, II. 360. Writes a treatise to compose the differences between
them, 361. The sentiments of both parties on this work, ib. Granada, archbishop
of, president of the council of Castile, his imprudent advice to Cardinal
Adrian, relating to the insurrection in Segovia, II. 104. Guasto, the Marquis
del, appointed governor of Milan, by the Emperor, II. 313. Procures Rincon, the
French ambassador to the Port, to be murdered on his journey thither, III. 3.
Defends Carignan against the French, 24. Defeated by d'Enguien in a pitched
battle, 25. G^icciardini, his account of the publication of indulgences
contradicted, II. 45. Defends Reggio against the French, 91. Repulses an attack
upon Parma, by the French, 94. His sentiments of the Pope's treaty with with
Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, 205. Guise, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is made
governor of Metz by Henry II. of France, III. 196. His character, ib. Prepares
to defend it against the Emperor, 197. His brother d'Aumale taken prisoner by
the Imperialists, 199. The Emperor raises the siege, 202. His humane treatment
of the distressed sick Germans left behind, 203. Persuades Henry to an alliance
with Pope Paul IV. 260. Marches with troops into Italy, 285. Is unable to
effect any thing, 287. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat of St. Quintin,
297. His reception in France, 302. Takes the field against Philip, 303. Invests
and takes Calais from the English, 304. Takes also Guisness and Hames, 305.
Takes Thionville in Luxemburgh, 309. Guise, Mary of, married to James V. of
Scotland, II. 326. Frustrates the intended marriage between her daughter Mary,
and Prince Edward, of England, III. 23. Gurk, Cardinal de, why he favored the
election of Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 21. Signs the capitulation of
the Germanic body on behalf of Charles, 22. Gusman, chancellor to the Emperor
Ferdinand, is sent to Pope Paul IV. to notify the election, who refuses to see
him III. 306.
H
Hamburgh, city of, embraces the Reformed religion, II. 144. Haro, the Conde
de, appointed to command the army of the Castilian nobles against the Holy
Junta, II. 116. Attacks Tordesillas, and gets possession of Queen Joanna, ib.
Routs the army of the Junta, and takes Padilla prisoner, who is executed, 121.
Hascen Aga, deputy governor of Algiers, his piracies against the Christian
states, II. 368. Is besieged in Algiers by the Emperor Charles V. 370. Makes a
successful sally, 371. The Emperor forced by bad weather to return back again,
373. Hayraddin, a potter's son of Lesbos commences pirate, II. 281. See
Barbarossa. Heathens, ancient, why the principles of mutual toleration were
generally admitted among them, III. 250. Heldo, vice chancellor to Charles V.
attends the Pope's nuncio to Smalkalde, II. 328. Forms a Catholic league in
opposition to the Protestant one, 330. Henry II. King of France, his motives
for declining an alliance with Pope Paul III. against the Emperor, III. 135.
Procures for Scotland a peace with England, 170. The young Queen Mary,
contracted to the Dauphin, and sent to France for education, ib. Enters into an
alliance with Octavio Farnese Duke of Parma, ib. Protests against the council
of Trent, 171. Makes alliance with Maurice Elector of Saxony, 228. Seconds the
operations of Maurice, 190. His army marches and seizes Metz, 194. Attempts to
surprise Strasburgh, 200. Is strongly solicited to spare it, 201. Returns, ib.
The Emperor prepares for war against him, 195. Instigates the Turks to invade
Naples, 205. Terrouane taken and demolished by Charles, 212. Hesdin taken, ib.
Leads an army into the Low Countries against Charles, ib. Endeavors to
obstruct the marriage of Mary of England with Philip of Spain, 227. The
progress of his arms against the Emperor, 228. Engages Charles, 230. Retires,
ib. Cosmo di Medici, Duke of Florence, makes war against him, 231. Appoints
Peter Strozzi commander of his army in Italy, 233. Strozzi defeated, 234. Siena
taken, 236. Pope Paul IV. makes overtures to an alliance with him against the
Emperor, 259. Montmorency's arguments against this alliance, ib. Is persuaded
by the Guises to accept it, 260. Sends the Cardinal of Lorrain with powers to
conclude it, ib. The Pope signs the treaty, 262. A truce for five years
concluded with the Emperor, 271. Is exhorted by Cardinal Carraffa, to break the
truce, 274. Is absolved from his oath, and concludes a new treaty with the
Pope, 276. Sends the Duke of Guise into Italy, 287. The Constable Montmorency
defeated and taken prisoner at St. Quintin, 292. Henry prepares for the defense
of Paris, 293. St. Quintin taken by assault, 296. Collects his troops and
negociates for assistance, 299. His kind reception of the Duke of Guise, 302.
Calais taken by Guise, 304. Impowers Montmorency to negociate a peace with
Philip, 313. Honors him highly on his return to France, 314. Writes to Queen
Elizabeth, with proposals of marriage, 321. How he failed in his suit, 322. His
daughter married to Philip, and his sister to the Duke of Savoy, 326. Terms of
the treaty of Chateau Cambresis, 327. The marriage of his sister and daughter
celebrated with great pomp, 328. His death, ib. Henry VII. of England, detains
the Archduke Philip and his Duchess when driven on his coast, three months, at
the instigation of Ferdinand, I. 340. Henry VIII. of England, sends an
ambassador to Germany to propose his claims to the Imperial crown, II. 17. Is
discouraged from his pretensions, and takes no part with the other competitors,
ib. His personal character and political influence in Europe, 31. Entirely
guided by Cardinal Wolsey, 33. Receives a visit from the Emperor Charles V. 35.
Goes over to France to visit Francis, 36. Wrestles with Francis, and is thrown
by him, ib. Note. Has another interview with Charles at Gravelines, 37. Charles
offers to submit his differences with Francis to his arbitration, ib. Publishes
a treatise on the seven sacraments, against Martin Luther, 78. Obtains of the
Pope the title of Defender of the Faith, ib. Takes part with Charles against
Francis, 80. Sends Wolsey to negociate an accommodation between the Emperor and
Francis, 87. Concludes a league with Charles against Francis, 88. His avowed
reasons for this treaty, ib. His private motives, 89. Declares war against
Francis, 98. Is visited by Charles, ib. Makes descents upon the coast of
France, 99. Advances with an army into Picardy, ib. Obliged to retire by the
Duke de Vendome, 100. Enters into a treaty with the Emperor and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 134. How he raised supplies for his wars, beyond the grants of his
parliament, 138. Sends the Duke of Suffolk to invade Picardy, who penetrates
almost to Paris, but is driven back, 139. Engages to assist Charles in an
invasion of Provence, 152. Causes of his not supporting the Imperialists, 153.
Effects of the battle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis on him, 165.
Particulars of his embassy to Charles, 166. Concludes a defensive alliance with
France, 171. Is declared protector of the league of Cognac against the Emperor,
194. His motives for assisting the Pope against the Emperor, 222. Enters into a
league with Francis, and renounces the English claim to the crown of France,
223. Declares war against the Emperor, 229. Concludes a truce with the
governess of the Low Countries, 232. Projects his divorce from Catharine of
Aragon, 242. Motives which withheld the Pope from granting it, 243. Acquiesces
in the peace of Cambray, 244. Sends a supply of money to the Protestant league
in Germany, 257. Procures his marriage to be annulled by Cranmer, archbishop of
Canterbury, 265. The divorce reversed by the Pope under penalty of
excommunication, 266. Renounces the papal supremacy, ib. Refuses to acknowledge
any council called by the Pope, 279. Opposes James V. of Scotland marrying Mary
of Guise, 326. His disgusts with Francis and intercourse with the Emperor, ib.
Concludes a league with Charles, III. 9. Makes war with Scotland, ib.
Particulars of his treaty with Charles, 10. Invades France and invests
Boulogne, 28. Refuses the Emperor's plan of operations, 31. Is deserted by the
Emperor, 34. Takes Boulogne, ib. His haughty proposals to Francis, ib. Peace of
Camp, 67. Is succeeded by his son Edward VI. 104. A review of his policy, 337.
Hertford, Earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, III. 27. Joins Henry after, in
his invasions of France, ib. Hesse, the Landgrave of, procures the restoration
of his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, II. 277. His views compared with
those of the Elector of Saxony, III. 48. The Emperor's deceitful professions to
him, 55. Quiets the apprehensions of the Protestant league with regard to the
Emperor, ib. Is appointed joint commander of the army of the league with the
Elector of Saxony, 73. Their characters compared, ib. Urges an attack of the
Emperor, but is opposed by the Elector, 76. His letter to Maurice Duke of
Saxony, 82. The army of the league disperse, 85. Is reduced to accept harsh
terms from Charles, 121. His humiliating reception by the Emperor, 123. Is
detained in confinement, 124. His offers of submission slighted by the Emperor,
144. Is carried by the Emperor with him into the Netherlands, 147. Renews his
endeavors for liberty, 163. Charles releases arbitrarily the Elector of
Brandenburgh and Maurice, from their engagements to him, 164. Obtains his
liberty by the treaty of Passau, 209. Is arrested by the Queen of Hungary, but
freed by the Emperor, 194. The effects of his confinement on him, ib. Heuterus,
his account of Lewis XII. shown to contradict the relations given by Bellay and
other French historians of the education of Charles V. I. 348, Note. Holy
Junta. See Junta. Holy League, against the Emperor Charles V. formed at Cognac,
under the protection of Henry VIII. of England, II. 193. Horuc, a potter's son
of Lesbos, commences pirate, with his brother Hayraddin, II. 281. See
Barbarossa. Hungary is divided by Solomon the Magnificent, and its King Lewis
II. killed, II. 211. His successes, and the number of prisoners carried away,
212. The archduke Ferdinand elected King of, together with Bohemia, ib. John
Zapol Scaepius wrests it from Ferdinand, 363. Stephen succeeds on the death of
his father John, 364. Is treacherously seized by Solomon, 366. See Isabella and
Martinuzzi.
I
James V. of Scotland, levies troops to assist Francis in Provence, but his
intention frustrated, II. 326. His negociations for marriage with Francis's
daughter, ib. Marries Mary of Guise, ib. Dies, and leaves Mary his infant
daughter to succeed him, III. 9. See Mary. Jesuits, the order of, by whom
founded, II. 84. Character of that order, ib. Character of Ignatio Loyola their
founder, 347. The order confirmed by the Pope, 348. An examination into the
constitution of the order, ib. Office and power of their general, 349. The
rapid progress of the order, 351. Engage in trade, and establish an empire in
South America, 353. B^d tendency of the order, 355. Are responsible for most of
the pernicious effects of Popery, since their institution, ib. Advantages
resulting from their institution, ib. Civilize the natives of Paraguay, 356.
Their precautions for the independency of their empire there, 357. How the
particulars of their government and institution came to be disclosed, 358.
Summary of their character, 359. Indulgences, in the Romish church, the
doctrine of, explained, II. 39. By whom first invented, ib. Martin Luther
preaches against them, 43. Writes against them to Albert Elector of Mentz, ib.
A bull issued in favor of, 51. The sale of, opposed in Switzerland by
Zuinglius, 52. Infantad^, Duke of, his haughty resentment of a casual blow on
his horse, II. 335. Is protected by the constable of Castile, ib. Innocent, a
young domestic of Cardinal di Monte, obtains his Cardinal's hat, on his
election to the papacy, III. 153. Interim, a system of theology so called,
prepared by order of the Emperor Charles V. for the use of Germany, III. 140.
Is disapproved of, both by Protestants and Papists, 142. Investitures,
usurpations of the Romish clergy in Germany, during the disputes between the
Emperors and Popes, concerning, II. 62. Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and
mother of Charles V. visits Spain with her husband Philip Archduke of Austria,
I. 332. Is slighted by her husband, 333. Her character, ib. Is abruptly left in
Spain by her husband, 334. Sinks into melancholy on the occasion, and is
delivered of her second son Ferdinand, ib. Her letter of consent to her
father's regency of Castile, intercepted, and herself confined, 338. Made joint
regent of Castile with Ferdinand and Philip by the treaty of Salamanca, 340.
Sets out for Spain with Philip, are driven on the coast of England, and
detained three months by Henry VII. ib. Acknowledged Queen by the Cortes, 341.
Her tenderness to her husband in his sickness, and extraordinary attachment to
his body when dead, 342. Is incapable of government, 343. Her son Charles
assumes the crown, 354. The Cortes acknowledge her son King, with a reservation
in her favor, II. 9. Her reception of Padilla the chief of the Spanish
malcontents, 108. The Holy Junta removed to Tordesillas the place of her
residence, ib. Relapses into her former melancholy, ib. The proceedings of the
Holy Junta carried on in her name, 109. Is seized by the Conde de Haro, 116.
Dies, after near fifty Years confinement, III. 266. John Zapol Scaepius, by the
assistance of Sultan Solomon establishes himself in the kingdom of Hungary, II.
364. Leaves the kingdom to his son Stephen, ib. See Hungary, Isabella, and
Martinuzzi. Isabella, daughter of John II. of Castile, and wife of Ferdinand
King of Aragon, her history, I. 332. Her concern at the Archduke Philip's
treatment of her daughter Joanna, 333. Her death and character, 335. Appoints
Ferdinand regent of Castile under restrictions, ib. Isabella, daughter to
Sigismund King of Poland, married to John King of Hungary, II. 364. Her
character, 365. Is treacherously carried with her infant son into Transylvania
by Sultan Solomon, 366. The government of this province and the education of
her son committed to her jointly with Martinuzzi, III. 179. Is jealous of
Martinuzzi's influence, and courts the Turks, 180. Is prevailed on to resign
Transylvania to Ferdinand, 181. Retires to Silesia, ib. Recovers possession of
Transylvania, 214. Isabella of Portugal, married to the Emperor Charles V. II.
184. Italy, consequences of the league between Pope Leo X. and the Emperor
Charles, V. to, II. 89. The characters of the Italians, Spaniards and French,
contracted, ib. State of, at the accession of Clement VII. to the papacy, 140.
Views of the Italian states with respect to the Emperor and Francis on the
expulsion of the French from Genoa, and the Milanese, 151. Their apprehensions
on the battle of Pavia and captivity of Francis, 167. The principal states,
join in the Holy league against the Emperor, 193. Are disgusted at the
tardiness of Francis, 198. A view of the Ghibeline faction, ib. Sentiments of
the states of, on the peace of Cambray, 242. Is visited by the Emperor Charles,
244. The motives of his moderation toward the states of, 245. A league among
the states of, formed by Charles, 261. Placentia granted to Octavio Farnese by
Philip II. of Spain, III. 299. The investiture of Siena given by Philip to
Cosmo di Medici, 301. The consequence of these grants, ib. Junta, Holy, a view
of the confederacy, in Spain, so termed, II. 107. The authority of Adrian
disclaimed by, ib. Removed to Tordesillas where Queen Joanna resided, 109.
Their proceedings carried on in the name of Joanna, ib. Receives letters from
Charles to lay down their arms, with promises of pardon, 110. Remonstrance of
grievances drawn up by, ib. The particulars of this remonstrance, 111. Remarks
on the spirit of it, 113. Are intimidated from presenting it to Charles, 114.
Propose to deprive Charles of his royalty during the life of Joanna, ib. Take
the field, 115. Character of their army, ib. The Queen seized by the Conde de
Haro, 116. How they obtained money to support their army, 117. Lose time in
negociating with the nobles, ^18. Propose to make their peace with Charles at
the expense of the nobles, 119. Their irresolute conduct, 120. Their army
defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken prisoner, ib. Padilla executed, 121. His
letters to his wife, and the city of Toledo, ib. The ruin of the confederacy,
123. Julius II. Pope, observations on the pontificate of, II. 59. Julius III.
Pope, his character, III. 153. Bestows his Cardinal's hat infamously, ib. Is
averse to the calling a council, 155. Summons one at Trent, ib. Asserts his
supreme authority peremptorily in the bull for it, 162. Repents confirming
Octavio Farnese in Parma, 168. Requires Octavio to relinquish his alliance with
France, 170. The manner of his death, 246.
L
La Chau, a Flemish gentleman, associated by Charles V. with Cardinal Ximenes
in the regency of Castile, I. 360. Landre^y, siege of, by the Emperor Charles
V. III. 13. Is abandoned by him, 14. Lannoy, mortgages the revenues of Naples
to supply the exigences of the Emperor, II. 156. Francis surrenders himself
prisoner to him at the battle of Pavia, 162. His cautious disposal of him, 163.
Delivers him up in pursuance of the treaty of Madrid, and receives the Duke of
Orleans and the Dauphin, as hostages in exchange, 183. Is sent ambassador to
Francis to require his fulfillment of the treaty of, 195. Concludes a treaty
with the Pope, 204. Marches to join the Imperalists at Rome, where the troops
refuse to obey him, 224. Lanuza, Don John de, made Viceroy of Aragon, on the
departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 27. Composes the disturbances there,
127. Lavagna, John Lewis Miesco, Count of, his character, III. 92. Meditates
subverting the government of Genoa, 93. His preparations, 94. His artful method
of assembling his adherents, 95. His exhortation to them, 96. His interview
with his wife, 97. Sallies forth, ib. Andrew Doria escapes, 98. Deputies sent
to know his terms, ib. Is drowned, ib. His brother's vanity ruins their design,
99. See Fiesco. Lautrec, Odet de Foix, marechal de, the French governor of
Milan, his character, II. 90. Alienates the affections of the Milanese from the
French, ib. Invests Reggio, but is repulsed by Guicciardini the historian, then
governor, 91. Is excommunicated by the Pope, ib. The money for paying his
troops, seized by Louise of Savoy, 92. Is left by his Swiss troops, 93. Is
driven out of the Milanese territories, 94. A new body of Swiss under him
insist on giving battle to the Imperialists, who defeat him, 96. The Swiss
leave him, 97. Retires into France with the residue of his troops, ib. Delivers
up the Dauphin and Duke of Orleans, in exchange for Francis I. as hostages for
the performance of the treaty of Madrid, 183. Is appointed generalissimo of the
league against the Emperor, 224. His successes in Italy, 225. Motives which
withheld him from subduing the Milanese, ib. Obliges the Prince of Orange to
retire to Naples, 231. Blockades Naples, ib. His army wasted, and himself
killed by the pestilence, 235. Learning, the revival of, favorable to the
Reformation of religion, II. 70. Leipsic, a public disputation held there by
Martin Luther, and Eccius, on the validity of the papal authority, II. 52. Leo
X. Pope of Rome, his character, II. 17. His apprehensions on the election of an
Emperor of Germany at the death of Maximilian, ib. His counsel to the German
Princes, 18. Grants Charles V. a tenth of all ecclesiastical benefices in
Castile, 24. Lays Castile under an interdict but takes it off, at the instance
of Charles, ib. His conduct on the prospect of war between Charles and Francis,
31. Situation of the papacy at his accession, and his views of policy, 39. His
inattention to Martin Luther's controversy, with the Dominicans, concerning
indulgences, 46. Is instigated against him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Desires the Elector of Saxony not to protect him, ib. Is prevailed on to permit
Luther's doctrines to be examined in Germany, 47. Cardinal Cajetan appointed to
try him, ib. Issues a bull in favor of indulgences, 51. A suspension of
proceedings against Luther, and why, 52. Publishes a bull of excommunication
against him, 53. The political views of his conduct between Charles and
Francis, 80. Concludes a treaty with Francis, 81. Concludes a treaty also with
Charles, 82. The conditions of the treaty with Charles, ib. Its consequences to
Italy, 89. Is disappointed in a scheme formed by Morone, chancellor of Milan,
for attacking that duchy, 90. Excommunicates Marechal de Foix for his attack
of Reggio, and declares against France, 91. Takes a body of Swiss into pay, ib.
The French driven out of the Milanese, 93. He dies, 94. The spirit of the
confederacy broken by his death, ib. L'Esparre, Foix de, commands the French
troops in Navarre for Henry d'Albert, II. 84. Reduces that kingdom, ib. His
imprudent progress into Castile, ib. Is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, and
the French driven out of Navarre, 85. Leonard, father, forms a scheme of
betraying Metz to the Imperialists, III. 239. Introduces soldiers clad like
friars, 240. Is detected, 241. Is murdered by his monks, 242. Levescue, Don,
his account of the motives which induced the Emperor Charles V. to resign his
hereditary dominions, III. 265, Note. Lewis II. King of Hungary and Bohemia,
his character, II. 211. Is invaded and killed by Solomon the Magnificent, ib.
Lewis XII. King of France, receives homage of the Archduke Philip, for the
earldom of Flanders, I. 333. Concludes a treaty with him while at war with
Ferdinand of Aragon, 334. Bestows his niece German de Foix, on Ferdinand, and
concludes a peace with him, 339. Loses the confidence of Philip on that
occasion, 348, Note. Bestows his eldest daughter, already betrothed to Charles
V. on account of Angouleme, ib. Leyva, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the
Emperor against Francis, II. 157. His vigorous defense, ib. Sallies out at the
battle of Pavia, and contributes to the defeat of Francis, 161. Is left
governor of Milan by the Duke of Bourbon, 203. Defeats the forces there, 237.
Is appointed generalissimo of the Italian league, 262. Directs the operations
of the invasion of France, under the Emperor, 307. Dies, 312. Literature, its
obligations to the order of Jesuits, II. 355. Lorenzo, di Medici. See Medici.
Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of France, her character, II. 92. Her
motives for seizing the money appointed for payment of Marechal Lautrec's
troops, ib. Cause of her aversion to the house of Bourbon, 132. Her advances
toward a marriage with Charles Duke of Bourbon, rejected by him, 133.
Determines to ruin him, ib. Instigates a lawsuit against him, for his estates,
ib. Goes to dissuade Francis from his intended invasion of the Milanese, who
will not wait for her, 154. Is appointed regent during his absence, 155. Her
prudent conduct on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of her son Francis, 164.
Concludes a defensive alliance with Henry VIII. 171. Ratifies the treaty of
Madrid for the recovery of her son's liberty, 182. Undertakes, with Margaret of
Savoy, to accommodate the differences between the Emperor and Francis, 240.
Articles of the peace of Cambray, ib. Loyola, Ignatio, commands the castle of
Pampeluna in Navarre, and is wounded in its defense, II. 84. His enthusiastic
turn of mind, ib. The founder of the society of Jesuits, ib. Prevails on the
Pope to establish the order, 347. An examination into the constitution of the
order, ib. Office and power of the general, 348. The rapid progress of the
order, 351. See Jesuits. Lorrain, Cardinal of, persuades Henry II. of France,
to accept the offered alliance with Pope Paul IV. and is sent to Rome to
negociate it, III. 260. His imprudent behavior toward the Duchess of
Valentinois, 313. Lunenburgh, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther, II. 144.
Luther, Martin, the happy consequences of the opinions propagated by him, II.
38. Attacks indulgences, 42. His birth and education, ib. Chosen philosophical
professor at the University of Wittemberg, ib. Inveighs against the publishers
of indulgences, 43. Writes to Albert Elector of Mentz, against them, ib.
Composes theses against indulgences, ib. Is supported by the Augustinians and
encouraged by Frederick Elector of Saxony, 44. Is summoned to Rome by Pope Leo,
46. Obtains of the Pope leave to have his doctrines examined in Germany, 47.
Appears before Cardinal Cajetan at Augsburgh, ib. His resolute reply to the
peremptory order of Cajetan to retract his principles, 48. Withdraws from
Augsburgh, and appeals from the Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when better
informed concerning him, 49. Appeals to a general council, 50. The death of
Maximilian, how of service to him, 51. Questions the papal authority in a
public disputation, 52. His opinions condemned by the Universities of Cologne
and Louvain, ib. A bull of excommunication published against him, 53.
Pronounces the Pope to be Antichrist, and burns the bull, 54. Reflections on
the conduct of the court of Rome toward him, 55. Reflections on his conduct,
56. Causes which contributed to favor his opposition to the church of Rome,
58. Particularly the art of printing, 70. And the revival of learning, ib. He
is summoned to appear at the Diet of Worms, 75. A safe conduct granted him
thither, ib. His reception there, 76. Refuses to retract his opinions, ib.
Departs, ib. An edict published against him, ib. He is seized and concealed at
Wartburgh, 77. Progress of his doctrines, ib. The University of Paris publishes
a decree against him, 78. Wrote against by Henry VIII. of England, ib. Answers
both, 79. Withdraws from his retreat to check the inconsiderate zeal of
Carlostadius, 143. Undertakes a translation of the Bible, ib. His doctrines
avowed by several of the German Princes, 144. His moderate and prudent conduct,
190. Marries Catharine a Boria, a nun, ib. The great progress of his doctrines
among the Germanic states, 248. Encourages the Protestants, dispirited by the
Emperor's decree against him, 254. His concern at the practices of the
Anabaptists at Munster, 274. Is invited to Leipsic by Henry Duke of Saxony,
332. His opinion of Gropper's treatise to unite the Protestants and Catholics,
361. Dies, III. 51. Summary of his character, 52. Extract from his last will,
58, Note. See Protestants. A view of the extraordinary effects of his revolt
from the church of Rome, on that court, and on Europe in general, 341.
Luxemburgh, invaded by Robert de la Marck, Lord of Bouillon, II. 85. Invaded
and overrun by the Duke of Orleans, III. 6. Is again invaded by Francis, 12.
M
Madrid, treaty of, between the Emperor Charles V. and his prisoner Francis I.
King of France, II. 180. Sentiments of the public with regard to this treaty,
181. Magdeburgh, the city of, refuses to admit the Interim enforced by Charles
V. and prepares for defense, III. 161. Maurice Elector of Saxony appointed to
reduce it, 162. Is put under the ban of the empire, 173. The territories of,
invaded by George of Mecklenburgh, ib. The inhabitants defeated in a sally, ib.
Maurice of Saxony arrives and besieges the city, 174. Surrenders, 175. The
senate elects Maurice their Burgrave, 176. Mahmed, King of Tunis, history of
his sons, II. 283. Majorca, an insurrection there, II. 127. Which is quelled
with difficulty, ib. The moderation of Charles toward the insurgents, on his
arrival in Spain, 128. Majesty, the appellation of, assumed by Charles V. on
his election, to the Imperial crown, and taken by all the other Monarchs of
Europe, II. 23. Malines, council of, an account of, II. 337. Malta, the island
of, granted by the Emperor Charles V. to the knights of St. John, expelled from
Rhodes by the Turks II. 101. Mamalukes, extirpated by Sultan Selim II. II. 14.
Mammelukes, a faction in Geneva, so termed, some account of, II. 299. Manuel,
Don John, Ferdinand's ambassador at the Imperial court, pays his court to the
Archduke Philip on Queen Isabella's death, I. 337. Intercepts Joanna's letter
of consent to Ferdinand's regency of Castile, 338. Negociates a treaty between
Ferdinand and Philip, 339. Declares for Maximilian's regency on Philip's death,
344. Is made Imperial ambassador at Rome, and concludes an alliance between
Charles V. and Leo X. II. 82. The conditions of the treaty, ib. Procures Adrian
of Utrecht to be elected Pope, 95. Marcellus II. Pope, his character, III. 253.
Dies, 254. Marciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi and the Marquis de
Marignano, III. 234. Margaret of Austria, and Dowager of Savoy, aunt to Charles
V. undertakes with Louise, mother of Francis I. of France, to accommodate the
differences between those two Monarchs, II. 240. Articles of the peace of
Cambray, ib. Marignano, Marquis of, appointed commander of the Florentine army,
acting against the French, III. 232. Defeats the French army under Peter
Strozzi, 234. Lays siege to Siena, ib. Converts the siege into a blockade, 235.
Siena surrenders, 236. Reduces Porto Ercole, 237. His troops ordered into
Piedmont by the Emperor, 238. Marck, Robert de la, Lord of Bouillon, declares
war against the Emperor Charles V. II. 85. Ravages Luxemburgh, with French
troops, ib. Is commanded to disband his troops by Francis, 86. His territories
reduced by the Emperor, ib. Marseilles, besieged by the Imperialists, II. 153.
Rescued by Francis, ib. Interview and treaty there between the Pope and
Francis, 264. Martinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, is appointed guardian to Stephen,
King of Hungary, II. 365. His character, ib. Solicits the assistance of Sultan
Solomon against Ferdinand, ib. Solomon seizes the kingdom, 366. Is appointed to
the government of Transylvania and the education of the young King, jointly
with the Queen, III. 179. Negociates with Ferdinand, 180. Prevails on the Queen
to resign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 181. Is appointed governor of
Transylvania, and made a Cardinal, 182. Is assassinated by Ferdinand's order,
183. Martyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the extortions of the
Flemish ministers of Charles V. II. 9. Mary of Burgundy, contracted to Lewis
XII. of France, but married to the Emperor Maximilian, I. 331. Mary of England,
her accession, III. 221. Receives proposals from the Emperor Charles V. of
marrying his son Philip, 222. The English averse to this union, ib. The house
of commons remonstrates against the match, 223. The articles of marriage, ib.
The marriage ratified by parliament, and completed, 225. Re-establishes the
Romish religion, ib. Persecutes the Reformers, 226. Invites Charles to England
on his resignation and passage to Spain, which he declines, 282. Is engaged by
Philip to assist him in his war against France, 289. Levies money by her
prerogative to carry on the war, ib. Her neglect in the security of Calais,
303. Calais invested and taken by the Duke of Guise, 304. Dies, 321. Mary,
daughter of James V. of Scotland, succeeds to the crown an infant, III. 9. Is
contracted to the Dauphin of France, 135. Is educated at the court of France,
170, 308. The marriage completed, ib. Assumes the title and arms of England on
the death of Mary, 323. Matthias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the
Anabaptists, at Munster, II. 269. Seizes the city and establishes a new form of
government there, 270. Repulses the bishop of Munster, 271. Is killed, ib. See
Bocold and Anabaptists. Maurice, Duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceding
to the Protestant league of Smalkalde, III. 16. Marches to the assistance of
Ferdinand in Hungary, ib. His difference with his uncle the Elector, ib. His
conduct at the Diet of Worms, 40. Joins the Emperor against the Protestants,
69. His motives, 79. His insidious conduct toward the Elector, 80. Seizes the
electorate of Saxony, 84. Saxony recovered by the Elector, 88. His ineffectual
endeavors to reduce Wittemberg for the Emperor, 115. Obtains possession of the
electorate 119. Is formally invested at the Diet of Augsburgh, 141. Becomes
dissatisfied with the Emperor, 156. His motives to discontent explained, 157.
His address and caution in his conduct, 158. Enforces the Interim in his
territories, 159. Makes, nevertheless professions of his attachment to the
Reformation, 160. Undertakes to reduce Magdeburgh to submit to the Interim, ib.
Protests against the council of Trent, ib. Is commissioned by the Emperor to
reduce Magdeburgh, 162. Joins George of Mecklenburgh before Magdeburgh, 174.
The city capitulates, 175. Begins to intrigue with Count Mansfeldt, ib. Is
elected Burgrave of Magdeburgh, 176. Dismisses his troops 177. His address in
amusing the Emperor, 178. Makes an alliance with Henry II. of France, to make
war on the Emperor, 184. Makes a formal requisition of the Landgrave's liberty,
186. Joins his troops, and publishes a manifesto, 191. Takes possession of
Augsburgh and other cities, 192. An ineffectual negotiation with Charles, 193.
Defeats a body of the Emperor's troops, 195. Takes the castle of Ehrenburgh,
ib. Is retarded by a mutiny in his troops. 196. Enters Inspruck, and narrowly
misses taking Charles, ib. A negotiation between him and Ferdinand, 202.
Besieges Frankfort on the Maine, 206. His inducements to an accommodation, 208.
Signs a treaty, with the Emperor at Passau, 209. Reflections on his conduct in
this war, 210. Marches into Hungary to oppose the Turks, 193. Is placed at the
head of the league against Albert of Brandenburgh, 208. Defeats Albert, but is
killed in the battle, 209. His character, ib. Is succeeded by his brother
Augustus, 201. Maximilian, Emperor of Germany, claims the regency of Castile on
his son Philip's death, I. 343. Is supported in his claim by Don John Manuel,
344. Loses it, 346. Obtains the government of the Low Countries by the death of
Philip, 348. Appoints William de Croy, Lord of Chievres, to superintend the
education of his grandson Charles, ib. Concludes a peace with France and
Venice, II. 4. Dies, 8. State of Europe at this period, ib. His endeavors to
secure the Imperial crown to his grandson Charles, 15. How obstructed, ib.
Mecklenburgh, George of, invades the territories of Magdeburgh for the Emperor,
III. 173. Defeats the Magdeburghers, who sally out on him, ib. Is joined by
Maurice of Saxony, who assumes the supreme command, ib. Medicino, John James.
See Marignano. Medici, Alexander restored to the to the dominions of Florence,
by the Emperor Charles, II. 247. Is assassinated, 323. Medici, Cardinal de,
elected Pope, and assumes the title of Clement VII. II. 137. See Clement VII.
Medici, Catharine di, is married to the Duke of Orleans, II. 264. Is
conjectured, by the Emperor Charles V. to have poisoned the Dauphin, 315.
Medici, Cosmo de, made Duke of Florence, II. 324. Is supported by the Emperor,
and defeats the partisans of Lorenzo, 325. Asserts his independency, against
the Emperor, III. 203. Offers to reduce Siena for the Emperor, 231. Enters into
a war with France, ib. See Marignano. His address in procuring the investiture
of Siena from Philip II. of Spain, 299. It is granted to him, 301. Medici,
Lorenzo de, assassinates his kinsman Alexander, II. 323. Flies, 324. Attempts
to oppose Cosmo, but is defeated, 325. Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of,
refuse to let Fonseca take the military stores there, for the siege of the
insurgents in Segovia, II. 105. The town almost burnt by Fonseca, ib. The
inhabitans repulse him, ib. Surrenders after the battle of Villalar, and
dissolution of the Holy Junta, 122. Melancthon, imbibes the opinion of Martin
Luther, II. 55. Is employed to draw up a confession of faith by the Protestant
Princes at the Diet of Augsburgh, 252. Is dejected by the Emperor's decree
against the Protestants, but comforted by Luther, 253. Is invited to Paris by
Francis, 294. His conference with Eccius, 360. Is prevailed on to favor the
Interim enforced by the Emperor, III. 159. Melito, Conde de, made viceroy of
Valencia, on the departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 28. Appointed to
command the troops of the nobles against the Germanda, 126. Defeated by them in
several actions, ib. Destroys the association, ib. Mentz, Archbishop of,
artfully declares before the Emperor, the Diet of Augsburgh's acceptance of the
Interim, without being authorized by it, III. 140. Merveille, a Milanese
gentleman employed as envoy from Francis I. to Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan,
his fate, II. 293. Metz, seized by Montmorency the French general, III. 194.
The Duke of Guise made governor of, 196. Is besieged by the Emperor, 199. The
Emperor desists and retires in a distressed condition, 202. A scheme formed by
father Leonard to betray the city to the Imperalists, 239. The conspiracy
detected by the governor, 241. Leonard murdered by his monks, and his
associates executed, 242. Mezieres, in France besieged by the Imperialists, II.
86. Gallant defense of, by the Chevalier Bayard, ib. The siege raised, 87.
Milan, Marechal de Foix, appointed to be the French governor of, II. 90. His
character, ib. The Milanese alienated from the French by his oppressions, ib.
Invaded by the ecclesiastical troops under Prosper Colonna, 91. The French
driven out, ib. Oppressed by the Imperial troops, 130. Invaded by the French,
ib. Who are driven out by Colonna, 136. The Imperial troops there mutiny for
pay, but are appeased by Morone, 141. Abandoned by the French, ib. Overrun
again by Francis, who seizes the city, 155. The French retire on news of the
battle of Pavia, 163. The investiture of, granted to Sfo^za, 172. Taken from
him and granted to the Duke of Bourbon, 178. Disorders committed by the
Imperial troops there, 193. Oppressive measures of Bourbon to supply his
mutinious troops, 201. The French forces there defeated by Antonio de Leyva,
237. Is again granted by the Emperor to Sforza, 246. Death of Sforza, 301. The
pretensions of Francis to that duchy, ib. Is seized by the Emperor, ib. The
Marquis del Guasto appointed governor, 313. Mohacz, battle of, between Solomon
the Magnificent, and the Hungarians, II. 211. Monastic orders, enquiry into the
fundamental principles of, II. 348. Peculiar constitution of the order of
Jesuits, ib. Moncada, Don Hugo di, the Imperial ambassador at Rome, his
intrigues with Cardinal Colonna against Pope Clement II. 199. Reduces the Pope
to an accommodation, 200. Is defeated and killed by Andrew Doria, in a naval
engagement before the harbor of Naples, 232. Monluc, is sent by the Count
d'Enguien to Francis for permission to give battle to the Marquis de Guasto,
III. 24. Obtains his suit by his spirited arguments, ib. Commands in Siena,
when besieged by the Marquis de Marignano, III. 235. His vigorous defense, ib.
Is reduced by famine, and capitulates, 236. Monte Alcino, numbers of the
citizens of Siena retire thither after the reduction of that city by the
Florentines, and establish a free government there, III. 237. Monte cuculi,
Count of, accused and tortured for poisoning the Dauphin, charges the Emperor
with instigating it, II. 314. Montmorency, Marechal, his character, II. 309.
Francis adopts his plan for resisting the Emperor, and commits the execution to
him, ib. His precautions, ib. His troops despise his conduct, 312. Observations
on his operations, 313. Is disgraced, III. 5. Conducts the army of Henry II. to
join Maurice of Saxony, and seizes Metz, 194. Dissuades Henry from accepting
the offered alliance with Pope Paul IV. 259. Commands the French army against
the Duke of Savoy, 291. Detaches D'Andelot to relieve St. Quintin, ib. Exposes
himself imprudently, to an action, and is defeated, 292. Is taken prisoner,
293. Negociates a peace between Philip and Henry, 314. Returns to France, and
is highly honored by Henry, ib. His assiduity in forwarding the negociations,
324. His expedient for promoting the treaty of Chateau Cambresis, 326.
Montpe^ier, a fruitless conference held there for the restitution of the
kingdom of Navarre, II. 11. Morone, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his character,
II. 90. Retires from the French exactions in Milan to Francis Sforza, ib. His
intrigues how rendered abortive, ib. Quiets the mutiny of the Imperial troops
in Milan, II. 141. Is disgusted with the behavior of Charles, 171. Intrigues
against the Emperor with Pescara, 173. Is betrayed to the Emperor by Pescara,
175. Is arrested at his visit to Pescara, ib. Is set at liberty by the Duke of
Bourbon, and becomes his confident, 201. Mouson in France, taken by the
Imperialists, II. 86. Retaken by Francis, ib. Mulhausen, battle of, between the
Emperor Charles V. and the Elector of Saxony, III. 113. Muley Hascen, King of
Tunis, his inhuman treatment of his father and brothers, II. 283. Is expelled
by Barbarossa, 285. Engages the Emperor Charles V. to restore him, ib. Is
established again by the surrender of Tunis, ib. His treaty with Charles, 290.
Muncer, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, opposes him with fanatical notions, II.
187. Heads the insurrection of the peasants in Thuringia, 188. His extravagant
schemes, ib. Is defeated and put to death, 190. Munster, the first settlement
of the Anabaptists in that city, II. 269. The city seized by them, 270. They
establish a new form of government there, ib. Is called Mount Sion, 271. The
Bishop of, repulsed by them, ib. Is blockaded by the Bishop, 274. The city
taken, 276. See Anabaptisis. Murder, the prices of composition for, by the
Romish clergy, II. 61. Mustapha, the declared heir to Sultan Solomon the
Magnificent, is invested with the administration of Diarbequir, III. 216. His
father rendered jealous of his popularity, by the arts of Roxalana, 217. Is
strangled by his father's order, 220. His only son murdered, 221.
N
Naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to supply the Emperor in his
exigencies, II. 156. Invaded by the French under the Duke of Albany, 159.
Invaded by Pope Clement VII. 197. Treaty between the Pope and Lannoy viceroy
of, 204. The Prince of Orange retreats thither before Lautrec, 231. Is
blockaded by Lautrec, ib. Sea engagement in the harbor of, between Andrew
Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which disappointed the French operations against,
232. Doria revolts, and opens the communication by sea again, 234. Oppressed by
the Spanish viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, becomes disaffected to the Emperor
Charles V. III. 204. Is harrassed by a Turkish fleet, 205. Nassau, Count of,
invades Bouillon at the head of the Imperialists, II. 86. Invades France, takes
Manson, and besieges Mezieres, but is repulsed, ib. Navarre, the kingdom of,
unjustly acquired by Ferdinand of Aragon, I. 346. D'Albert's invasion of,
defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, II. 1. Its castles dismantled except Pampeluna,
which Ximenes strengthens, 2. Invaded by Francis I. in the name of Henry
D'Albert, 8^. Reduced by L'Esparre, the French general, 84. The French driven
out by the Spaniards, and L'Esparre taken prisoner, 85. Netherlands the
government of, first assumed by Charles V. I. 350 The Flemings averse to
Charles's going to Spain, II. 5. Invaded by Francis, I. King of France, 85. A
truce concluded with, by Henry VIII. of England, 233. Invaded by Francis again,
316. A suspension of arms there, 317. An insurrection at Ghent, 336. See Ghent.
Is once more invaded by Francis, III. 12. Resigned by the Emperor to his son
Philip, 267. A review of the alterations in, during the sixteenth century, 349.
Nice, a truce for ten years concluded there between the Emperor and Francis,
II. 321. Besieged by the French and Turks, III. 14. Noyen, treaty of, between
Charles V. and Francis I. of France, II. 5. The terms of, neglected by Charles,
30. Nuremburgh, the city of, embraces the Reformed religion, II. 144. Diet of,
particulars of Pope Adrian's brief to, respecting the Reformers, 145. The reply
to, ib. Proposes a general council, 146. Presents a list of grievances to the
Pope, ib. The recess, or edict of, 147. This Diet of great advantage to the
Reformers, ib. Proceedings of a second Diet there, 149. Recess of the Diet, ib.
An accommodation agreed to there, between the Emperor Charles V. and the
Protestants, 258.
O.
Oran, and other places in Barbary annexed to the crown of Castile, by Ximenes,
I. 346. Orange, Phillibert de Chalons, Prince of, general of the Imperial army
on the death of the Duke of Bourbon, takes the castle of St. Angelo, and Pope
Clement VII. prisoner, II. 210. Retires to Naples on the approach of Lautrec,
231. Takes his successor the Marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Aversa, 235.
Orleans, Duke of, delivered up to the Emperor Charles V. with the Dauphin, as
hostages for the performance of the treaty of Madrid, H. 183. Is married to
Catharine di Medici, 264. Becomes Dauphin by the death of his brother, 315. See
Dauphin. Orleans, Duke of, brother to the former, commands the army appointed
by Francis I. for the invasion of Luxemburgh, III. 6. Is prompted by envy to
abandon his conquests, and join his brother the Dauphin in Rousillon, ib. Dies,
42.
P
Pacheco, Donna Maria, wife to Don John de Padillo, her artful scheme to raise
money to supply the army of the Holy Junta, II. 172. Her husband taken prisoner
and executed, 121. His letter to her, ib. Raises forces to revenge his death,
123. Is reduced and retires to Portugal, 124. Padilla, Don John de, his family
and character, II. 103. Heads the insurrection at Toledo, ib. Routs the troops
under Ronquillo, 104. Calls a convention of the malcontents at Avila, 107.
Forms the confederacy called the Holy Junta, ib. Disclaims Adrian's authority,
ib. Gets possession of Queen Joanna, 108. Removes the Holy Junta to
Tordesillas, the place of her residence, ib. Sent with troops to Valladolid,
and deprives Adrian of all power of government, 109. Is superseded in the
command of the army of the Junta, by Don Pedro de Giron, 115. Is appointed
commander at the resignation of Giron, 117. His army supplied with money by an
expedient of his wife, ib. Besieges Torrelobaton, 119. Takes and plunders it,
ib. Concludes a truce with the nobles, ib. Is wounded and taken prisoner in an
action with the Conde de Haro, 121. Is put to death, ib. His letter to his
wife, ib. His letter to the city of Toledo, 122. Palatinate, the Reformation
established there by the Elector Frederick, III. 45. Pallatine, Count,
ambassador from the Diet at Frankfort, brings Charles V. the offer of the
Imperial crown, which he accepts, II. 24. Pampeluna, castle of, in Navarre, its
fortifications strengthened by Cardinal Ximenes, II. 2. Taken by L'Espar^e the
French general for Henry, D'Albert, 84. Retaken by the Spaniards, 85. Papacy,
how liable, to be affected by the disposal of the Imperial crown, II. 17.
Paraguay, a sovereignty established there, by the order of Jesuits, II. 353.
The inhabitants of civilized by them, 356. Precautions used by the Jesuits, to
preserve the independency of their empire there, 357. Paris, a decree published
by the university of, against Martin Luther, the Reformer, II. 78. A decree of
the parliament of, published against the Emperor Charles V. 315. Parma, the
duchy of, confirmed to Octavio Farnese, by Pope Julius III. III. 168. Is
attacked by the Imperialists and successfully protected by the French, 170.
Passau, a treaty concluded there between the Emperor Charles V. and Maurice of
Saxony, III. 209. Reflections on this peace, and the conduct of Maurice, 210.
Pavia, besieged by Francis I. of France, II. 156. Vigorously defended by
Antonio de Leyva, 157. Battle of, between Francis and the Duke of Bourbon, 161.
The Imperial troops in that city mutiny, 168. Paul III. Pope, elected, II. 266.
His character, 267. Proposes a general council to be held at Mantua, 279.
Negociates personally between the Emperor and Francis, 320. Issues a bull for a
council at Mantua, 328. Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza, 329. A partial
Reformation of abuses by, ib Summons the council of Trent, III. ib. Prorogues
it, 18. Summons it again, 37. Grants the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to his
illegitimate son, 43. Deprives and excommunicates the electoral Bishop of
Cologne, 57. Presses the Emperor to declare against the Protestants, ib.
Concludes an alliance with him against the Protestants, 62. Indiscreetly
publishes this treaty, 64. His troops join the Emperor, 74. Recals them, 89.
Removes the council from Trent to Bologna, 132. Refuses the Emperor's request
to carry the council back to Trent, ib. His resentment against the Emperor for
the murder of his son Cardinal Farnese, 135. Is petitioned by the Diet of
Augsburgh for the return of the council to Trent, 136. Eludes the complying
with this request, 137. His sentiments of the Interim published by Charles,
142, Dismisses the council of Bologna, 147. Annexes Parma and Placentia to the
Holy See, 151. Dies, ib. The manner of his death inquired into, ib. Paul IV.
Pope, elected, III. 254. His character and history, 255. Founds the order of
Theatines, ib. Is the principal occasion of establishing the inquisition in the
papal territories, 256. Lays aside his austerity on his election, ib. His
partiality to his nephews, ib. Is alienated from the Emperor by his nephews,
255. Makes overtures to an alliance with France, 259. Is enraged by the recess
of the Diet of Augsburgh, 261. Signs a treaty with France, 262. Is included in
the truce for five years, concluded between the Emperor and Henry, 272. His
insidious artifices to defeat this truce, 273. Absolves Henry from his oath,
and concludes a new treaty with him, 276. His violent proceedings against
Philip now King of Spain, 285. The Campagna Romana seized by the Duke d'Alva,
278. Concludes a truce with Alva, 279. Contrast between his conduct and that of
Charles, 284. Renews his hostilities against Philip, 285. Is unprovided for
military operations, 287. Is reduced to make peace with Philip, by the recall of
the Duke of Guise after the defeat of St. Quintin, 298. Receives an ambassador
from the Emperor Ferdinand to notify his election, but refuses to see him or to
acknowledge the Emperor, 306. Dies, 328. Paulin, a French officer, sent
ambassador from Francis I. to Sultan Solomon, III. 11. His successful
negociations at the Port, ib. Pembroke, Earl of, sent by Queen Mary of England
with a body of men to join the Spanish army in the Low Countries, 289.
Perpig^an, the capital of Roussillon besieged by the Dauphin of France, III. 6.
The siege raised, 7. Pescara, Marquis de, takes Milan by assault, II. 94.
Drives Bonnivet back to France, 141. His generous care of the Chevalier Bayard,
ib. Commands in the invasion of Provence, 152. Besieges Marseilles, ib. His
army retires toward Italy, on the appearance of the French troops, 153.
Resigns Milan to the French, 155. Prevails on his Spanish troops, not to murmur
at present for their pay, 156. Contributes to the defeat of Francis at the
battle of Pavia, 161. Is disgusted at Francis being taken to Spain without his
concurrence, 172. His resentment inflamed by Morone, 173. Betrays Morone's
designs to the Emperor, 174. Arrests Morone, 175. Dies, 178. Philip, Archduke
of Austria, and father of Charles V. visits Spain, with his wife Joanna, I.
332. Does homage by the way to Lewis XII. of France for the earldom of
Flanders, ib. His title to the crown acknowledged by the Cortes, 333. Is
disgusted with the formality of the ^^mish court, ib. Ferdinand (...) jealous
of his power, (...) ^^ts his wife, ib. His (...) departure from Spain, (...)
P^sses through France, and enters into a treaty with Lewis, 3^4 His sentiments
on Ferdinand's obtaining the regency of Castile, 337. Requires Ferdinand, to
retire to Aragon, and resigns his regency of Castile, ib. The regency of
Castile vested jointly in him. Ferdinand and Joanna, by the treaty of
Salamanca, 340. Sets out for Spain and is driven on the coast of England, where
he is detained three months by Henry VII. ib. Arrives at Corunna, ib. The
Castilian nobility declare openly for him, ib. Ferdinand resigns the regency of
Castile to him, 341. Interview between them, ib. Acknowledged King of Castile
by the Cortes, ib. Dies, 342. Joanna's extraordinary conduct in regard to his
body, ib. See Joanna. Phili^, Prince, son to the Emperor Charles V. his right
of succession recognized by the Cortes of Aragon and Valencia, III. 7. Is
acknowledged by the states of the Netherlands, 148. His deportment disgusts the
Flemings, 149. His character, 167. Is married to Mary Queen of England, 225.
The English parliament jealous of him, 227. His father resigns his hereditary
dominions to him, 263. Is called by his father out of England, 267. The
ceremony of investing him, ib. His father's address to him, ib. Commissions
Cardinal Granville to address the assembly in his name, 269. Mary Queen Dowager
of Hungary resigns her regency, ib. The dominions of Spain resigned to him,
270. His unpoliteness to the French ambassador Colligni, 272, Note. The Pope's
violent proceedings against him, 276. His scruples concerning commencing
hostilities against the Pope, 277. His ungrateful neglect, in paying his
father's pension, 283. The Pope renews hostilities against him, 285. Assembles
an army in the Low Countries against France, 288. Goes over to England to
engage that kingdom in the war, 289. Visits the camp at St. Quintin, after the
victory, 294. Opposes the scheme of penetrating to Paris, and orders the siege
of St. Quintin to be prosecuted, 295. St. Quintin taken by assault, 296. The
small advantages he reaped by these successes, 297. Builds the Esc^^ial in
memory of the battle of St. Quintin, ib. Concludes a peace with the Pope, 298.
Restores Placentia to Octavio Farnese, 299. Grants the investiture of Siena to
Cosmo di Medici, 301. Enters into negociations for peace with his prisoner
Montmorency, 314. Death of Queen Mary, 321. Addresses her successor Elisabeth
for marriage, 322. Elisabeth's motives for rejecting him, 323. Her evasive
answer to him, ib. Supplants his son Don Carlos and marries Henry's daughter
Elisabeth, 326. Articles of the treaty of Chateau Cambresis, 327. Phillibert,
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. See Savoy. Phillipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats
Moncada, in a sea engagement before the harbor of Naples, II. 232. Piadena,
Marquis de, invades Transylvania for Ferdinand, III. 180. Misrepresents
Cardinal Martinuzzi to Ferdinand, and obtains a commission to assassinate him,
183. Is forced to abandon Transylvania, 214. Picardy, invaded by Henry VIII.
II. 99. Henry forced by the Duke de Vendome to retire, 100. Invaded again under
the Duke of Suffolk. 139. Who penetrates almost to Paris but is driven back,
ib. Ineffectual invasion by the Imperialists, 314. Placentia, the duchy of,
granted together with that of Parma by Pope Paul III. to his natural son,
Cardinal Farnese, III. 43. Farnese, assassinated there, 133. Is taken
possession of by the Imperial troops, 134. Restored to Octavio Farnese, by
Philip II. of Spain, 299. Pole, Cardinal, arrives in England with a legantine
commission, III. 226. Endeavors to mediate a peace between the Emperor and the
King of France, without success, 243. Is recalled from the court of England, by
Pope Paul IV. 285. Printing, its effects on the progress of the Reformation,
II. ^0. Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand King of Bohemia, III. 130.
Protestants, the derivation of the name, II. 250. Of whom they originally
consisted, ib. A severe decree published against them by the Emperor, 253. They
enter into a league, 254. See Smalkalde. Renew their league, and apply to
Francis King of France, and Henry VIII. of England, for protection, ib. Are
secretly encouraged by Francis, 256. Receive a supply of money from Henry, 257.
Terms of the pacification agreed to between them and the Emperor at Nuremburgh,
258. Assist the Emperor against the Turks, 259. Their negociations with the
Pope, relative to a general council, 261. Renew the league of Smalkalde for ten
years, 279. The motives for refusing to assist the King of France against the
Emperor, 296. Refuse to acknowledge the council summoned by the Pope at Mantua,
328. A conference between their principal divines and a deputation of
Catholics, at Ratisbon, 360. This conference how rendered fruitless, 362.
Obtain a private grant from Charles in their favor, 363. Drive the Duke of
Brunswick from his dominions, III. 19. All rigorous edicts against them
suspended by a recess at the Diet of Spires, 21. Their remonstrances to
Ferdinand at the Diet of Wor^s. 38. Their inflexible, adherence to the recess
of Spires, 39. Disclaim all connection with the council of Trent, ib. Are
strengthened by the accession of Frederick Elector Palatine, 44. Are alarmed at
the proceedings of the Emperor, 47, 61. The Emperor leagues with the Pope
against them, 62. Prepare to resist the Emperor, 65. Levy an army, ib. The
operations of the army distracted by the joint commanders, 72. The army
dispersed, 85. The Elector of Saxony reduced, 114. The Landgrave deceived by
treaty and confined, 125. The Emperor^s cruel treatment of them, 127. The
Interim, a system of theology recommended by the Emperor, to the Diet at
Augsburgh, 140. Are promised protection by the Emperor at the council of Trent,
162. The Emperor proceeds rigorously against them, 172. Their deputies obtain a
safe conduct from the Emperor, but are refused by the council, 178. Maurice of
Saxony raises an army in their cause, 191. See Maurice. Treaty of Passau, 209.
The Protestant Princes again unite to strengthen the Protestant interest, 247.
Recess of the Diet of Augsburgh on the subject of religion, 249. Why originally
averse to the principles of toleration, 252. Provence, is laid waste by the
Marechal Montmorency on the approach of the Emperor Charles V. II. 310. Is
entered by the Emperor, ib. The disastrous retreat of the Emperor from, 312.
Prussia, when conquered by the Te^tonic order, II. 191. Is erected into a
duchy, and finally into a kingdom, and enjoyed by the house of Brandenburgh,
192.
R
Ratisbon, a conference between a deputation of Protestants and Catholic
divines before the Emperor and Diet there, II. 360. This conference how
rendered fruitless, 361. A Diet opened there by the Emperor, III. 59. The
Catholic members of, assert the authority of the council of Trent, 60. The
Protestants present a memorial against it, 61. The Protestant deputies retire,
62. Reformation, in religion, the rise of, explaned, II. 38. The Diet at Worms,
called by Charles V. to check the progress of it, ib. Account of Martin Luther,
the Reformer, 42. Beginning of it in Switzerland by Zuinglius, 52. State of in
Germany, at the arrival of Charles V. 54. Reflection on the conduct of the
court of Rome toward Luther, 55. And on Luther's conduct, ib. Inquiry into the
causes which contributed to the progress of, 58. Observations on the
pontificate of Alexander VI. and Julius II. 59. The immoral lives of the Romish
clergy, ib. The progress of, favored by the invention of printing, 70. And the
revival of learning, ib. The great progress of, in Germany, 144. Advantages
derived to, from the Diet at Nuremburgh, 147. Its tendency in favor of civil
liberty, 187. The dissensions between the Emperor and the Pope, favorable to,
213. The great spread of, among the German Princes, 248. The confession of
Augsburgh drawn up by Melancton, 251. Causes which led to that of England, 265.
The excesses it gave rise to, 268. See Protestants, Maurice, and Smalkalde. Is
established in Saxony, 331. The great alteration occasioned by, in the court of
Rome, III. 341. Contributed to improve both the morals and learning of the
Romish church, 345. Reggio, invested by the French, who are repulsed by the
governor Guicciardini the historian, II. 90. Remonstrance of grievances drawn
up by the Holy Junta, the particulars of, II. 110. Remarks on, 113. Reverse, a
deed so called, signed by the Archduke Ferdinand on being elected King of
Bohemia, II. 212. Rheggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, III. 14. Rhodes,
the island of, besieged by Solomon the Magnificent, II. 100. Taken by him, 101.
The island of Malta granted to the knights of, by the Emperor Charles V. ib.
Richlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's history of Fiesco's conspiracy,
III. 100, Note. Rincon, the French ambassador at the Port, the motives of his
return to France, III. 2. Is murdered in his journey back to Constantinople, by
order of the Imperial governor of the Milanese, 3. Rome, reflections on the
conduct of the court of, respecting the proceedings against Martin Luther, II.
55. The exorbitant wealth of the church of, previous to the Reformation, 62.
Venality of, 68. How it drained other countries of their wealth, ib. The city
seized by Cardinal Colonna, and Pope Clement VII. besieged in the castle of St.
Angelo, 199. The city taken by the Imperialists, and Bourbon killed, 208. Is
plundered, 209. The great revolution in the court of, during the sixteenth
century, III. 340. How affected by the revolt of Luther, 341. The spirit of its
government, changed by, 343. Ronquillo, sent by Cardinal Adrian with troops to
suppress the insurrection in Segovia, II. 104. Is routed by them, ib. Rovere,
Francesco, Maria de, restored to his duchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian, II. 129.
Roxalana, a Russian captive becomes the favorite mistress of Sultan Solomon
the Magnificent, III. 214. Her only daughter married to Rustan the Grand
Vizier, 215. Procures herself to be declared a free woman by the Sultan, 216.
Is formally married to him, ib. Renders Solomon jealous of the virtues of his
son Mustapha, 217. Mustapha strangled, 220. Rustan, Grand Vizier to Solomon the
Magnificent, is married to his daughter by Roxalana, III. 215. Enters into
Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's son Mustapha, ib. Is sent with an army to
destroy him, 218. Draws Solomon to the army by false reports, 219.
S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon, and his son-in-law Philip,
I. 340. Salerno, Prince of, heads the disaffected Neapolitans against the
oppressions of the viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, III. 205. Solicits aid from
Henry II. of France, who instigates the Turks to invade Naples, ib. Saluces,
Marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in the command of the French army before Naples,
II. 235. Retires to Aversa, where he is taken prisoner by the Prince of Orange,
ib. Betrays his charge in Piedmont, 308. Sancerre, Count de, defends St.
Disier, against the Emperor Charles, III. 27, Is deceived into a surrender by
the Cardinal Granville, 29. Sauvage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Castile by
Charles, on the death of Ximenes, II. 9. His extortions, ib. Savona, is
fortified, and its harbor cleared by the French to favor its rivalship with
Genoa, II. 233. Savoy, a view of the state of, during the sixteenth century,
III. 349. Savoy, Charles Duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal, sister to the
Emperor Charles V. II. 297. The cause of Francis's displeasure against him, ib.
His territories overrun by the French troops, 298. Geneva recovers its
liberty, ib. His situation by the truce at Nice, between the Emperor and
Francis, 321. Is besieged at Nice, by the French and Turks, III. 1. Savoy,
Emanuel Phillibert Duke of, appointed by Philip of Spain to command his army in
the Low Countries, 290. Invests St. Quintin, ib. Defeats D'Andelot in an
endeavor to join the garrison, 291. But does not hinder him from entering the
town, 292. Defeats the Constable Montmorency, and takes him prisoner, 293. Is
graciously visited in the camp by Philip, 294. Takes St. Quintin by assault,
296. Assists Montmorency in negociating peace between Philip and Henry, 314.
Marries Henry's sister Margaret, 326, 328. Saxony, Elector of, appointed joint
commander of the army of the Protestant league, with the Landgrave of Hesse,
III. 73. Their characters compared, ib. Opposes the Landgrave's intention of
giving battle to the Emperor, 76. His Electorate seized by Maurice, 83. The
army of the league disperse, 85. Recovers Saxony, 88. Is amused by Maurice with
a negotiation, 89. Raises an army to defend himself against the Emperor, 109.
Is irresolute in his measures, 110. Charles passes the Elbe, 111. Is attacked
by the Imperialists, 113. Is taken prisoner and harshly received by the
Emperor, 114. Is condemned to death by a court martial, 117. His resolution on
the occasion, ib. Is induced by regard to his family to surrender his
electorate, 118. Refuses the Emperor's desire of his approving the Interim,
143. The rigor of his confinement increased, 144. Is carried by the Emperor
with him into the Netherlands, 147. Is released by the Emperor on Maurice
taking arms against him, but chooses to continue with the Emperor, 197. Obtains
his liberty after the treaty of Passau, 194. Saxony, George, Duke of, an enemy
to the Reformation, II. 331. His death an advantage to the Reformation, ib. The
Protestant religion established by Henry Duke of, 332. Henry is succeeded by
his son Maurice, III. 16. His motives for not acceding to the league of
Smalkalde, ib. Marches to the assistance of Ferdinand in Hungary, ib. Join^ the
Emperor against the Protestant, 69, 80. See Maurice. Schertel, Sebastian, a
commander in the army of the Protestant league, his vigorous commencement of
hostilities, III. 72. Is injudiciously recalled, 73. Is expelled from Augsburgh
on the dispersion of the Protestant army, 86. Scotland, James V. of, married to
Mary of Guise, Dutchess-Dowager of Longueville, II. 326. Death of James and
accession of his infant daughter Mary, III. 9. Mary contracted, to the Dauphin
of France, 135. The marriage celebrated, 308. Mary assumes the title and arms
of England on the death of Mary of England, 323. Included in the treaty of
Chateau Cambresis, 326. Alteration in the conduct of England toward, 339. Sects
in religion, reflections on the origin of, II. 268. Segovia, an insurrection
there, on account of their representative Tordesillas voting for the donative
to Charles V. II. 103. He is killed by the populace, ib. The insurgents there
defeat Ronquillo, sent to suppress them by Cardinal Adrian, 104. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, 222. Selim II. Sultan, extirpates the Mamalukes,
and adds Egypt and Syria to his empire, II. 14. Considered as formidable to the
European powers, ib. Sforza obtains of Charles V. the investiture of Milan, II.
172. Forfeits the duchy, by his intrigues with Morone, 175. Joins in a league
against Charles for the recovery of Milan, 193. Is forced to surrender Milan to
the Imperialists, 197. Obtains again of the Emperor the investiture of Milan,
246, Enters into a private treaty with Francis, 293. Merveille Francis's envoy
executed for murder, ib. Dies, 300. Siena, the inhabitants of, implore the
assistance of the Emperor Charles V. to defend them against their nobles, III.
203. The Imperial troops endeavor to enslave them, ib. Regain possession of
their city, 205, Repulse an attack of the Germans, 213. Is besieged by the
Marquis de Marignano, 234. The commander Monluc repulses the assaults
vigorously, ib. The town reduced by famine, 236. Numbers of the citizens
retire, and establish a free govenment at Monte Alcino, ib. Theremaining
citizens oppressed, ib. And flock to Monte Alcino, ib. Is granted by the
Emperor to his son Philip, 237. The investiture given by Philip to Cosmo di
Medici, ib. Sieverhausen, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony, and Albert of
Brandenburgh, III. 208. Sion, Cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French
army in the Milanese, II. 93. Leaves the Imperial army to attend the conclave
on the death of Leo X. 94. Smalkalde, the Protestants enter into a league
there, for their mutual support, II. 254. The league renewed at a second
meeting there, 256. The league of, renewed for ten years, 279. A manifesto,
refusing to acknowledge a council called by the Pope, 329. The King of Denmark
joins the league, 330. The Princes of, protest against the authority of the
Imperial chamber, and the recess of the Diet of Nuremburgh, III. 19. Publish a
manifesto against the proceedings of the council of Trent, 46. Are alarmed at
the proceedings of the Emperor, 47. A want of unity among the members, 49. The
views of the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave, explained, ib. Appear at the
Diet of Ratisbon by deputies, 59. Their deputies protest against the council of
Trent, 60. Their deputies alarmed at the Emperor's proceedings and
declarations, leave the Diet, 61. The Emperor leagues with the Pope against
them, 62. Prepare to resist the Emperor, 65. Are disappointed in their
application to the Venetians and Swiss, 66. As also with Henry VIII. and
Francis, 67. Assemble a large army, 68. Are put under the ban of the empire,
70, Declare war against the Emperor, 72. Hostilities begun by Schertel, ib.
They recall him, 73. The Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse appointed
joint commanders of their army, ib. The characters of the two commanders
compared, ib. Their operations distracted by this joint command, 74. Cannonade
the Emperor's camp, 76. Make overtures of peace to the Emperor, 85. Their army
disperse, ib. The Elector of Saxony reduced, 114. The Landgrave deceived and
confined, 124. Their warlike stores seized by the Emperor, 127. See Maurice.
Solomon the Magnificent, ascends the Ottoman throne, II. 37. Invades Hungary,
and takes Belgrade, 100. Takes the island of Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hungarians
at Mohacz, 211. His successes, and the number of prisoners he carried away,
212. Besieges Vienna, 246. Enters Hungary again with, a vast army, but is
forced to retire by the Emperor Charles, 258. Takes Barbarossa the pirate under
his protection, 282. Concludes an alliance with Francis King of France, 318.
Prepares to invade Naples, ib. Protects Stephen King of Hungary, and defeats
Ferdinand, 366. Seizes Hungary for himself, ib. Overruns Hungary again, in
fulfillment of his treaty with Francis, III. 14. Concludes a truce with the
Emperor, 58. Loses Transylvania, 181. Ravages the coasts of Italy, 205. Carries
a mighty army into Hungary, 206. Re-establishes Isabella and her son in
Transylvania, 214. His violent attachment to his concubine Roxalana, ib. Is
prevailed on to declare her a free woman, 215. Formally marries her, 216. Is
rendered jealous of the virtues of his son Mustapha, by the arts of Roxalana,
217. Orders him to be strangled, 220. Orders the murder of Mustapha's son, 221.
Spain, the state of, at the death of Ferdinand of Aragon, I. 350. Charles King
of, aspires to the Imperial crown on the death of Maximilian, II. 18. Is
elected Emperor, 21. Reflections of the Spaniards on that event, 23. Charles
appoints viceroys, and departs for Germany, 27. Insurrections there, 102. A
view of the feudal system in, 106. An account of the confederacy, termed the
Holy Junta, 107. Causes which prevented an union, of the malcontents in the
respective provinces, 127. The moderation of Charles toward them on his
arrival, 128. Instance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, 335. Is invaded
by the Dauphin, III. 6. The dominions of, resigned by Charles to his son
Philip, 270. The arrival of Charles, and his reception there, 282. The place of
his retreat described, 283. The regal power in, how enlarged by Charles, 332.
The foreign acquisitions added to, 333. See Aragon, Castile, Galicia, Valencia,
Cortes, Germanada, and Holy Junta. Spires, Diet of, its proceedings relative to
the Reformation, II. 249, Another Diet at, III. 19. Recess of, in favor of the
Protestants, 21. Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the dreadful effects
of, II. 65. St. Disier, in Champagne, invested by the Emperor, III. 27. Is
obtained by the artifice of Cardinal Granville, 29. St. Justus, monastery of,
in Plazencia, is chosen by the Emperor Charles V. for his retreat after his
resignation, III. 283. Its situation described, 284. His apartments, ib. St.
Quintin, invested by the Spanish troops, and defended by admiral Coligni, III.
290. D'Andelot defeated in an endeavor to join the garrison, 292. But enters
the town, ib. Montmorency defeated by the Duke of Savoy, 293. The town taken by
assault, 296. Strozzi, Peter, some account of, III. 233. Is entrusted with the
command of the French army in Italy, 234. Is defeated by the Marquis de
Marignano, ib. Suabia, an insurrection of the peasants against the nobles
there, II. 185. They publish a memorial of their grievances, 186. The
insurgents dispersed, ib. The Protestant religion suppressed there by the
Emperor Charles V. III. 172. Suffolk, Duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates
almost to Paris, but is driven back, II. 139. Sur^ey, Earl of, created high
admiral to the Emperor Charles V. II. 99. Obliged to retire out of Picardy by
the Duke de Vendome, 100. Sweden, a summary view of the revolutions in, during
the sixteenth century, III. 350. Switzerland, the cantons of, espouse the
pretensions of Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 16. Commencement of the
Reformation there by Zuinglius, 52. The regulation under which they hire out
their troops, 92. The precipitate battle, insisted on by their troops under
Lautrec, lost, 96. Syria, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire, II. 14.
T
Terms, Marechal de, governor of Calais, takes Dunkirk by storm, III. 309.
Engages the Count of Egmont, and is defeated by the accidental arrival of an
English squadron on the coast, 310. Is taken prisoner, ib. Terrouane, taken and
demolished by the Emperor Charles V. III. 211. Tetzel, a Dominican friar, his
shameful conduct in the sale of indulgences in Germany, II. 41. His form of
absolution, and recommendation of the virtues of indulgences in Germany, ib,
Note. His debauched course of life, ib. Publishes theses against Luther, 44.
Teutonic order, a character of, II. 191. Conquer the province of Prussia, ib.
Their grand master Albert made Duke of Prussia, 192. Theatines, the order of,
by whom founded, III. 255. Thionville, in Luxemburgh, taken by the Duke of
Guise, III. 309. Thuringia, an insurrection of the peasants there, against the
nobility, II. 187. The fanatical notions inspired in them by Thomas Muncer,
188. Their disorderly army defeated, 189. Toledo, insurrection in, at the
departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 28, 102. The cathedral of, stripped of
its riches to support the army of the Holy Junta, 117. Padilla,s letter to, at
his execution, 122. Is instigated to continue in arms by Padilla's wife, 123.
Is reduced, 124. Toledo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Medici sent by his
uncle to negociate with Philip II. of Spain for the investiture of Siena, III.
300. Toledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of of Naples, oppressed the Neapolitans,
III. 205. And occasions the Turks to ravage the coasts of Naples, ib.
Toleration, reflections on the progress of, in Germany, III. 249. Why mutually
allowed among the ancient Heathens, 250. How the primitive Christians became
averse to, ib. Tomorri, Paul, a Franciscan monk, Archbishop of Golooza, is made
general of the Hungarian army against Solomon the Magnificent and is defeated
by him, II. 211. Tordesillas, the residence of Queen Joanna, the confederacy of
malcontents, called the Holy Junta, removed thither, II. 109. The Queen taken
there by the Conde de Haro, 116. Tordesillas, one of the representatives of
Segovia, killed by the populace for voting the donative to Charles V. at the
Cortes assembled in Galicia, II. 103. Transylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand
King of the Romans, by Queen Isabella, III. 181. Tremouille, La, drives the
English, under the Duke of Suffolk, out of Picardy, II. 139. Trent, the council
of, summoned, III. 18. Prorogued, ib. Again summoned, 37. Is opened, 45.
Declares the apocryphal scriptures canonical, 56. Establishes the authority of
the church traditions, ib. The council, on rumors of an infection in the city,
is translated to Bologna, 132. Henry II. of France protests against the
council, 171. The council breaks up on the approach of Maurice of Saxony, 198.
Historical remarks on this council, ib. Characters of its historians, 199.
Trent, Cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles V. to conclude an alliance with
the Pope, III. 61. The nature of this treaty, 62. Tuais, the means of its
coming under the power of Barbarossa, traced, II. 283. The Emperor and other
Christian powers unite to expel Barbarossa, and restore Muley Hascen, 285. Is
taken by the Emperor, 289. Muley Hascen restored, and his treaty with Charles,
290. Tuscany, a review of the state of, during the sixteenth century, III. 348.
V
Valencia, an insurrection in, II. 24. The people there greatly oppressed by
the nobles, 25. The nobles refuse to assemble the Cortes except the King is
present, ib. Charles authorizes the people to continue in arms, ib. They expel
the nobles, ib. Associate under the Germanada, and appoint their own
magistrates, ib. Don Diego de Mendoza, Conde Melito, appointed regent, on the
departure of Charles for Germany, 27. The Germanada refuse to lay down their
arms, 125. Defeat the nobles in several actions, 126. Are at length routed by
the Conde de Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles toward the insurgents on his
arrival, 128. Valentinois, duchess of. See Diana of Poi^iers. Valladolid, the
first public entry of Charles V. to that city, II. 8. The inhabitants rise,
burn Fonseca's house, and fortify the town, II. 105. Surrenders after the
battle of Villalar, and dissolution of the Holy Junta, 122. Vaucel'es, treaty
of, between Charles V. and Henry II. of France, III. 271. Vendome, Duke of, his
plan of operations in opposing the progress of the invasion of Picardy by Henry
VIII. II. 100. Obliges him to retire, ib. Venice, the republic of, incline in
favor of the pretensionn of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial crown, II.
16. Their views and apprehensions on the approaching rupture between the
Emperor Charles V. and Francis, 31. Leagues with the Emperor against Francis,
131. A final accommodation between, and the Emperor, 246. Refuses to enter into
the league of the Italian states, formed by the Emperor, 262. A review of the
state of that republic during the sixteenth century, III. 347. Verrina, the
confident of the Count of Lavagna, encourages him in his scheme of overturning
the government of Genoa, III 93. Is protected by Francis on the ruin of that
conspiracy, 105. Vielleville, the French governor of Metz, detects father
Leonard's conspiracy, to betray the city, to the Imperialists, III. 241.
Executes the conspirators, 242. Vienna, is besieged by Sultan Solomon the
Magnificent, H. 246. Villalar, battle of between Padilla, and the Conde de
Haro, II. 120. Villena, Marquis de, his spirited reply to the request of the
Emperor to lodge Bourbon in his palace, II. 178. Ulm, the government of that
city violently altered, and its reformed ministers carried away in chains, by
the Emperor Charles V. III. 146. United Provinces of the Netherlands, a brief
view of their revolt against the dominion of Spain, III. 349. Urbino, restored
by Pope Adrian to Francesco, Maria de Rovere, II. 129.
W
Wallo^, Sir John, joins the Emperor Charles V. at the siege of Landrecy, with
a body of English troops, III. 13. War, the method of carrying on in Europe,
how improved at this period from the practice of earlier ages, II. 138. General
reflections on the vicissitudes of, III, 329. Wartburgh, Martin Luther
concealed there by the Elector of Saxony, II. 77. Went^worth, Lord, governor of
Calais, remonstrates in vain with the English privy council to provide for its
security, III. 304. Is attacked by the Duke of Guise, and forced to capitulate,
305. Wittemberg, invested by the Emperor Charles V. and defended by Sybilla of
Cleves, wise to the Elector of Saxony, III. 115. Wolsey, Cardinal, his rise,
character, and influence over Henry VIII of England, II. 33. Receives a pension
from Francis I. of France, 34. And from the Emperor Charles V. ib. Detached
from the French interest by the latter, 35. Inclines Henry to join the Emperor
against Francis, 80. Sent by Henry to Calais, to negociate an accommodation
between the Emperor and Francis, 87. Has an interview with Charles at Bruges,
and concludes a league with him on the part of Henry, against France, 88.
Meditates revenge against Charles on his second disappointment of the papacy by
the election of Clement VII. 138. Obtains of Clement a legantine commission in
England for life, ib. Negociates a league with Francis against the Emperor,
222. Worms, a Diet called there by Charles V. to check the progress of the
Reformers, II. 38. Proceedings of, 74. Martin Luther cited before it, ib.
Refuses to retract his opinions, 76. An edict published against him, ib. Diet
at, opened, III. 37. Wurtemberg, Ulric Duke of, why expelled his dominions, II.
277. Recovers his dominions by the assistance of Francis King of France, and
receives the Protestant religion, ib. Wyat, Sir Thomas, raises an insurrection
in Kent against Queen Mary of England, on account of the Spanish match, III.
224. Is subdued and punished, 225.
X
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute
with the Archduke Philip concerning the regency of Castile, I. 338. Espo^^es
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Castile on Philip's death, 345. Conquers
Oran, and other places in Barbary, for the crown of Castile, 346. Appointed
regent of Castile, by Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles V. in
Spain, 351. His rise and character, ib. Admits the claim to the regency of
cardinal Adrian, sent with that commission by Charles, and executes it jointly
with him, 353. Takes the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under his own eye, ib.
Procures Charles, who assumed the regal title, to be acknowledged by the
Castilian nobility, 355. Schemes to extend the regal prerogative, ib. Depresses
the nobility, 356. Frees the King from the feudal limitations, and establishes
a regal army to check the barons, 357. Suppresses a mutiny headed by the
grandees, ib. Resumes the grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 358. His prudent
application of the revenue, ib. His bold assertion of his authority to the
discontented nobles, 359. Other associates in the regency appointed at the
instigation of the Flemish courtiers, 360. Retains the superior management, ib.
Defeats John D'Albert's invasion of Navarre, II. 1. Dismantles all the castles
there, except Pampeluna, which he strengthens, 2. The troops sent by him
against Barbarossa, defeated, and his equanimity on that occasion, ib. Alarmed
at the corruption of the Flemish court, he persuades Charles to visit Spain, 3.
Falls sick on his journey to meet Charles at his arrival, 6. His letter of
counsel to Charles, 7. Requests an interview, ib. The ingratitude of Charles to
him, ib. His death, ib. His character, 8. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, ib.
Z
Zamora, Bishop of, raises a regiment of priests to defend Tordesillas, for the
Holy Junta, which is forced by the Conde de Haro, II. 116. Zuinglius, attacks
the sale of indulgences at Zurich in Switzerland, II. 52.
END OF THE INDEX TO THE AGE OF CHARLES V.

