Copy of the COMPLAINT Of the House of Representatives of Massachuset's-Bay,
against Sir Francis Bernard: WITH Sir Francis Bernard's Answer.
The Petition of the House of Representatives of Massachuset's-Bay, to the
King's most excellent Majesty, for the removal of Sir Francis Bernard, Baronet,
forever from the Government. To the King's most excellent Majesty,

To the KING's most excellent Majesty in Council.

The Answer of Sir Francis Bernard, Baronet, Governor of his Majesty's Province
of Massachuset's-Bay, to the Complaint preferred against him by the House of
Representatives of the said Province, now depending before his Majesty in
Council.

Most gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and faithful subjects the Representatives of
your ancient and loyal Colony of the Massachusett's-Bay; impressed with the
deepest gratitude to Almighty GOD, for calling to the British succession your
illustrious family; and so firmly establishing your Majesty on the throne of
your royal progenitors: And being abundantly convinced of your Majesty's grace
and clemency, most humbly implore the royal favor, while we briefly represent
our grievances which your Majesty alone under GOD can redress.

We are constrained in duty to your Majesty, and in faithfulness to our
constituents to lay before your Majesty our complaints of his Excellency Sir
Francis Bernard, Baronet, your Majesty's Governor of this Colony; whose whole
administration appears to have been repugnant not only to your Majesty's
service, and the welfare of your subjects in the Colony, but even to the first
principles of the British constitution.

THIS Respondent protesting against the uncertainty, generality, irrelevancy,
and insufficiency of the said Complaint, and against his being required to make
any unnecessary, superfluous, or impracticable proofs, particularly proofs of
the negative of such assertions in the said Complaint as are not supported by
any evidence, and by their generality and want of particular allegations are
incapable of negative proof; and also protesting against the unfair practices
used by the complainants, or at least by the Speaker and Clerk of the said
House, to deprive him of the benefit of such evidence, both written and verbal,
as was to be had only at Boston, by refusing to give him a copy of the said
Complaint, from the 27th day of June 1769, when the said Complaint passed the
House, unto the 27th day of July, being but three days before the day fixed for
his departure for England, although he frequently applied to the Speaker of the
House for such copy, of the truth of which he is ready to made oath: To the
Complaint, or to such part thereof as is material for him to answer to,
answers as follows:

And first, the Respondent begs leave to observe of the Complaint, that it had
its origination in a resentment against the Respondent, for his being charged
with certain orders of his Majesty relating to the House of Representatives,
and his declaring his intention to obey such orders. This will appear from the
Journals of the House of Representatives, where it will be seen, that on June
21st, 1768, the Respondent sent a message, enclosing an extract of a letter
from the Secretary of State to him the Respondent, signifying his Majesty's
pleasure, that he should require the House to rescind a Resolution of a former
House, and declare their disapprobation of the same. On June 23d, the House
desired the Respondent would give them a copy of the other part of the
Secretary of State's letter. On June 24th, the Respondent sent a copy of the
other part of the letter, by which he was ordered, in case of refusal, to
dissolve the Assembly; and said, that, if they obliged him to it, he must obey
his orders. On June 30th, the House passed a Vote, that they would not rescind,
etc. and passed an answer to the Respondent to that purpose, immediately after
which, they appointed a committee to prepare a petition to the King to remove
the Governor. The petition being ready prepared, was immediately reported and
read; and upon debate, it being objected that there was no proof of the facts
alleged, the petition was recommitted, and the committee was ordered to bring
evidence in support of diverse articles. Thus it rested until a new Assembly met
in May, 1769, when this Complaint was revived, with some little alteration, and
some additional articles arising from new facts; and notwithstanding it had
been before rejected for want of proof, it was now admitted without any proof,
and passed the House the 27th day of June 1769. It has been since circulated
throughout America and Great Britain, in Newspapers, Magazines and Pamphlets;
it has been commented upon, and argued from, as true, in different Papers; and
the Respondent has been called upon, by anonymous writers, to answer this
complaint before the public, whilst he was endeavoring to obtain a hearing of
it before the King in Council, and the Agent for the Complainants was doing all
he could to prevent it, under a pretense of waiting for proofs.

1. From his first arrival here, he has in his speeches and other public acts,
treated the Representative Body with contempt.

1. And the Respondent, further answering, says, That the first article is
notoriously untrue, it being well known to all who are acquainted with the
government of Massachuset's-Bay, that from the time of the present Governor's
(the Respondent's) entering upon that government, which was in August, 1760,
until the opposition made to the Stamp Act, which began in the year 1765, a
very good understanding and agreement of sentiments and actions between the
Governor and the Assembly, in both its branches, continually prevailed; of
which the Journals of the House afford many pregnant proofs. But, after the
opposition to the Parliament was adopted by the House of Representatives, it
became impossible for the Respondent, or any Governor, to do his duty and
preserve his popularity.

2. He has in his public speeches charged both Houses of the General Assembly
expressly with oppugnation against the Royal Authority; declaring that they had
left Gentlemen out of the Council, only for their fidelity to the Crown.

2. The Respondent admits, that he did declare that the General Assembly left
Gentlemen out of the Council only for their fidelity to the Crown; and if this
is to be deemed oppugnation against the royal authority, he admits this article
to be true. And to justify such declaration he observes, that, upon the
election of Counselors in May 1766, (which was about a month after they had
received advice of the repeal of the Stamp Act) the majority of the General
Assembly turned out the Lieutenant Governor (who was also Chief Justice of the
Province) the Secretary, two other Judges of the Superior Court, and the
Attorney General, all of them men of irreproachable characters, and high
estimation among the people. There was no accounting for the depriving the
government of the service of men of such high offices, and known abilities and
integrity, but from an intention to lower the King's authority in the
government, and reduce the royalty of it to mere form, and vest all the real
power in the people. That this was and is still the intention, has been since
made plain by further proceedings in subsequent elections, in which every
Counselor who has been known, believed, or even suspected to be disposed to
support the authority of the King and Parliament of Great Britain, or the royal
rights of the provincial government, has been turned out of the Council. The
Respondent begs leave to refer to a list of counselors who have been thus
turned out at the four last elections, which, by an enquiry into the characters
of the persons from those who are acquainted with the province, will fully
prove the assertions above mentioned.

3. He has from time to time indiscretely and wantonly exercised the
Prerogative of the Crown, in the repeated negative of Counselors of an
unblemished reputation, and duly elected by a great majority, some of them by
the unanimous suffrage of both Houses of Assembly.

3. The Respondent admits, that, since the exclusion of the Lieutenant
Governor, Secretary, Judges, and Attorney General, from the Council, he has
repeatedly used the right given to the Governor by the Charter, of negativing
persons elected for Counselors, and returned to him for his approbation; but
he denies that he has acted therein indiscreetly or wantonly, or upon any other
motive than that of promoting the King's service. He has, from time to time,
signified to his Majesty's ministers the principles upon which he formed his
conduct in this respect, and has had the honor to have such conduct approved of
by his Majesty, as it was signified to him by the Earl of Shelburne, at that
time one of his Majesty's principal secretaries of state, by his letter dated
Sept. 17, 1767, which was after the second time of his exercising his negative;
from which letter he begs leave to insert the following words: I have the
pleasure to signify to you his Majesty's approbation of your conduct, and to
acquaint you, that He is graciously pleased to approve of your having exerted
the power lodged in you by the constitution of the Province of
Massachuset's-Bay, of negativing Counselors in the late elections, which
appears from your several letters to have been done with due deliberation and
judgment.

4. He has declared, that certain seats at the council board shall be kept
vacant, till certain gentlemen who are his favorites shall be re-elected.

4. The Respondent denies this article to be true, so far as it relates to the
enforcing the re-election of his favorites; for he has no favorites in respect
to the government, but such as have recommended themselves by fidelity to the
King, and ability to serve him. In this light the Lieutenant Governor and the
Secretary may be considered as his favorites; and if such declaration was made,
it was in favor of them and them only: And he believes he did make such
declaration upon the following account. Upon the exclusion of these two
gentlemen from the Council (of which they had been Members for many years, and
by their particular functions, as well as their knowledge of the public
business, were become almost necessary to that body) upon enquiry into the
constitution of the present government, it appeared from the usage under the
former Charter, from considerations previous to the granting the present
Charter, from the words of the Charter itself, and from the practice of the
first year after the opening the Charter, that the Lieutenant Governor and the
Secretary had a right to seats and voices in the Council in virtue of their
offices, and without being elected thereto, and did actually enjoy such right
for one year as aforesaid. But upon the election of a new Council at the end of
the first year, the Assembly elected the Lieutenant Governor and the Secretary
among the twenty-eight elective Counselors, instead of permitting them to be
superadded to the elective Counselors, as was designed by the Charter, and
practiced the year before. The Lieutenant Governor and Secretary acquiescing in
this, probably from their unwillingness to dispute with the Assembly, upon whom
they were dependent, submitted to take their seats as elected Counselors,
instead of official members of the Council. And this method prevailing ever
after, the King has by these means been deprived of the service of his
Lieutenant Governor and Secretary, the nomination of whom he had reserved to
himself, in his Council, where it appears to have been intended they should
have seats in virtue of their offices. And great detriment has arose to his
Majesty's government by their being excluded the Council at particular times,
when they have been most wanted, as for late years has been very observable.
The Respondent therefore having discovered this usurpation, and finding it too
much confirmed by time for him of himself to undertake to restore the
Lieutenant Governor and Secretary to their rights, did transmit an account of
it to the King's ministers, and did mention the same to the Council of the
province, or some of them, at the same time declaring, that as the Lieutenant
Governor and the Secretary had an inherent right from their Offices to seats in
the Council, though they had usually been reckoned amongst the twenty-eight
elected, he should not suffer their seats among the twenty-eight to be filled
up by other persons till they were restored to their official seats without the
twenty-eight. This he did in order to leave it open to the Assembly to restore
them to their seats in the usual way at any time when they should see the
impropriety of their being included.

5. He has unconstitutionally interfered with and unduly influenced elections,
particularly in the choice of an Agent for the colony.

5. The Respondent says, that he believes there never was a Governor that less
interfered with elections than he has done; so that he knows not what to refer
this charge to, unless it is to his recommending a provincial Agent in the year
1765. This he did, and certainly had a right to do, as the provincial Agent is
the Agent of the whole General Court, of which the Governor is a part, and must
be consented to and commissioned by the Governor before his appointment is
complete. The Gentleman he recommended was accordingly chosen, and served the
province for two years, and was the most able and respectable Agent that the
province ever had.

6. He has very abruptly displaced diverse gentlemen of worth, for no apparent
reason, but because they voted in the General Assembly with freedom, and
against his measures.

6. The Governor of Massachuset's Bay has no power to displace Civil Officers
without the consent of the Council; and hence it is, that many persons hold
their Offices in that province who ought to have been displaced long ago. He
has indeed a free power over. Military Officers; but has made very little use
of it, except in superseding some few commissions of persons who professed and
abetted such principles as made them very unfit to have military commands under
the King.

7. He has in an unwarrantable manner taken upon himself the exercise of your
Majesty's royal prerogative, in granting a charter for a college, contrary to
an express vote of the House of Representatives, and without even asking the
advice of your Majesty's Council.

7. The Respondent never had any doubt but that he had a right to grant
Charters of incorporation under the King's seal, of which he is the keeper, as
is practiced by all other royal Governors in America. And he did once, some
years ago, order a Charter to be made out for establishing a collegiate School
in the extreme parts of the province, upon the petition of diverse respectable
persons inhabitants of the said parts, who were ready to endow the said School.
But understanding that the proposed Charter gave umbrage to the College at
Cambridge near Boston, he, upon that account only, and not out of any doubt of
his power to grant such a charter, or the reasonableness and propriety of the
charter prayed for, put a stop to the same being issued: And this is the only
Charter that was ever agitated before him since he has been Governor of that
province.

8. He has practiced the sending over depositions to the ministry, privately
taken, against gentlemen of character here, without giving the persons accused
the least notice of his purposes and proceedings.

8. The Respondent knows not what Depositions are here referred to, except it
be those which it may be supposed he has transmitted to his Majesty's
Ministers, in obedience to his Majesty's commands signified to him for that
purpose. And he is sorry to say, that he has not done so much in that respect
as may have been expected of him: For when he received such commands, he found
the intimidation which the faction by their former outrages had raised in
Boston so great and universal, that there was a general unwillingness in people
of all kinds, to give a formal testimony against any of the factions party,
even of facts which they made no scruple to declare their knowledge of in the
course of common conversation. And therefore having no power to oblige people
to give testimony, and finding it impracticable to procure voluntary evidence,
he could not execute the King's commands with that punctuality with which he
has always been desirous to distinguish himself in all acts of duty.

And here it may be proper to observe, that the preceding article, and all the
following articles, are charges against him for doing acts which were dictated
to him either by the duty of his office or by his Majesty's instructions given
under his Sign Manual, or by his special commands signified by his Secretary of
State. And in all cases, where the Respondent is charged with acts which were
known to be done in obedience to his Majesty's instructions, or His special
Orders, he cannot consider himself to be chargeable with such acts; but such
charge must be understood to be, and to be intended to be, directed immediately
against his Majesty's administration. Under this rule he will proceed to
consider the following articles.

9. He has very injuriously represented your Majesty's loving subjects of this
colony in general; as having an ill temper prevailing amongst them, as
disaffected to your Majesty's government, and intending to bring the authority
of parliament into contempt. And by such false representations, he has been
greatly instrumental, as this house humbly conceive, in exciting jealousies,
and disturbing that harmony and mutual affection which before happily
subsisted, and we pray God may again subsist between your Majesty's subjects in
Great Britain and America.

9. It is the duty of a Governor to report to his Majesty all transactions by
which the honor of his crown, the authority of his government, and the welfare
of the province may be affected. The Respondent has not only had this duty
prescribed to him by his general instructions, but has been often reminded of
it in the letters of his Majesty's Secretaries of State. In doing this, he has
shown a disposition the very contrary to that of misrepresenting his Majesty's
loving subjects of the colony in general, and has endeavored to apologize for
them where he could do it by drawing a line between the few who have been
auth^^^ of the present troubles, and their deluded followers, and
distinguishing between the wickedness of the one, and the credulity and
intimidation of the other. He has always had a most earnest desire to remove
jealousies, and restore that harmony and mutual affection which ought to
subsist between Great Britain and America. He used all the means in his power
to prevent a breach of a good understanding between the two countries; and for
that purpose, when the Stamp Act was first agitated, notwithstanding he had
reason to believe that the Bill was strongly adopted by the Ministry, he wrote
a Letter to the Secretary of State, urging many reasons which occurred to him,
against its passing into a law, with a freedom which nothing but a
consciousness of his integrity, a sense of his duty to both countries, and a
desire to prevent any uneasiness between them, could have supported.
Afterward, when the repealing the act was in comtemplation, he gave his
testimony for the repeal, both in his public and his private Letters. He has
been always ready to join with the Assembly in any measures for reconciling the
two countries, which were consistent with his duty. But of late he has seen no
opening for it; for, by the convulsions which happened upon account of the
StampAct, and their consequences, the management of the public affairs of the
province has got into the hands of a party whose principles and practices are
the very reverse of those of conciliation.

10. He has in his letters to one of your Majesty's ministers unjustly charged
the majority of your Majesty's faithful council in the Colony with having
avowed the principles of opposition to the authority of parliament, and acted
in concert with a party from whence such opposition originated.

10. The Respondent's report of the proceedings of the Council, from whence
their opposition to the authority of Parliament has been inferred, was folly
supported by authentic papers. And though it has been since made a subject of
argument, yet not one material fact alleged by him has been positively denied.

11. He has also in his letter to another of your Majesty's ministers falsty
declared that a plan was laid, and a number of men actually enrolled in the
town of Boston, to seize your Majesty's Castle William, in the harbor of the
same, out of your Majesty's hands.

11. The account of a design to seize Castle William is expressly mentioned,
not to be related as a certain fact, but only as reported and believed. Under
such circumstances, it would have been an inexcusable neglect of duty in the
Respondent not to have informed the Secretary of State of a credited report of
so interesting a nature. But, as he had not positive proof of the fact, he did
not accuse any person by name. The truth is, he had intelligence which he could
not make a public use of, sufficient to induce him to believe that report then,
and has since had occasion to confirm himself in such belief; but he has not
been able to obtain positive proof of the fact, for the reasons given in his
answer to the eighth article.

12. Such representations of the state and circumstances of this Colony from a
Gentleman of the highest trust in it, will of necessity, be received with full
credit, till they are made to appear false. And in consequence thereof, your
Majesty's true and loyal subjects have suffered the reproach, as well as other
hardships, of having a military force stationed here, to ssupport your
Majesty's authority, and the execution of the laws; which measure has been
approved of by your Majesty's two Houses of Parliament, as appears in their
resolutions, that the town of Boston had been in a state of disorder and
confusion, and that the circumstances of the colony were such as required a
military force for the purposes abovementioned.

12. This is one of those articles before mentioned, which passes by the
Respondent, and attacks the administration and the two Houses of Parliament;
charging the first with ordering troops to be stationed at Boston, and the two
last with passing resolutions without sufficient grounds to justify such
proceedings. Whereas it is notorious, that the sending troops to Boston, and
the resolutions of the two Houses of Parliament, were founded upon undoubted
and indisputable facts, supported by a variety of evidence, drawn for the most
part from authentic papers, and in no way depending upon the mere sayings and
opinions of the Respondent.

13. Having been a principal instrument as we apprehend, in procuring this
military force. your Majesty's said Governor, in an unprecedented manner, and
as though he had designed to irritate to the highest degree, ordered the very
room which is appropriated for the meeting of the Representatives of the
General Assembly, was never used for any other purpose, and where their records
are kept, to be employed as a barrack for the common soldiers: And the
sentinels were so posted as that your Majesty's Council and the Justices of the
Courts of Common Law were daily interrupted, and even challenged in their
proceeding to the business of their several departments.

13. The preamble of this article, whereby the Respondent is charged with being
a principal instrument in procuring the military force which was sent to
Boston, has since been falsified by the party publishing the Respondent's
letters, from some of which it appears, that he absolutely refused to apply for
troops unless the Council would join with him in it; which they refusing to do,
he never applied for troops. As for the charge itself, the fact was this:
Having received his Majesty's orders to take every necessary step for the
accommodation of his troops at Boston, he applied to the Council, to the
Select-Men of the town, and to all the justices in the town, whom he called
together for that purpose, being all the persons that could be pointed out by
the Act of Parliaments for quartering soldiers, severally and separately,
desiring them to provide quarters for the soldiers. This they all refused to
do; so that when the commanding officer found himself obliged to land two
regiments at Boston, there were no quarters for them. Whereupon the commanding
officer applying to the Respondent to provide a covering for one of the
regiments, who had no camp-equipage with them, until they could hire buildings
at the King's expense to make barracks of, the Respondent assigned to them
several rooms in the Townhouse, which were not then in use, among which was
the Representatives chamber; and there the regiment remained, without any
inconvenience to the public, or any persons whatsoever, until barracks were
provided for them. What enhances the falsity and virulence of this charge is,
that the party who has preferred it knew that the Respondent acted in this
business under the King's special orders, and that his Majesty has since been
pleased to signify his full approbation of his Conduct, under the difficulties
that were continually thrown in his way. And yet they have had the boldness in
this indirect manner to arraign his Majesty's administration for issuing
orders, with which the Respondent had nothing to do but to obey.

14. He endeavored, contrary to the express design of an act of parliament, to
quarter your Majesty's troops in the body of the town of Boston, while the
barracks provided by the Government at the castle within the town, remained
useless: And for purposes manifestly evasive of the said act, he unwarrantably
appointed an officer to provide quarters for the troops, otherwise than is
therein prescribed.

14. This article is of the same complexion with the preceding, but much more
false and prevaricating. The fact upon which it is founded is this: The King
ordered two Regiments, to be sent from Ireland, to be landed at Boston; and
also two other Regiments to be sent from Halifax to Boston. The two Regiments
from Halifax arrived first; and the commanding officer, signifying to the
Respondent that he had orders to station both those regiments at Boston,
demanded quarters. The Respondent consulted the Council, and by their advice
applied to the Select men of the town, and then to the Justices of Peace, and
last of all to the Council themselves: But they all refused to assign any
quarters to the two regiments, under different pretenses; the principal of
which was, that they ought to be quartered at the castle, upon an island,
distant from the town of Boston three miles by sea and seven miles by land,
where there were barracks that would hold only one regiment, and that but
inconveniently, as has been since proved. And though the impossibility of
quartering four regiments in barracks that could hold but one, and the
impropriety of quartering troops in an island distant from Boston, which were
expressly ordered to be stationed at Boston, were urged again and again, they
still persisted in refusing quarters: Wherefore the Commander in Chief found
himself obliged to hire buildings, and fit them up for barracks, at the King's
expense, for three of the regiments, after having assigned the barracks at the
Castle for the other regiment. And endeavors were used to defeat even this the
only method left for executing the King's commands; for it was given out by the
faction, that if any soldiers were put into such barracks, the officers
commanding such soldiers would be prosecuted for quartering soldiers without
the interposition of a magistrate, contrary to the Mutiny-Act, and, being
convicted thereof by two justices, would incur the penalty of being cashiered:
To prevent this abuse of the act, the Respondent, at the request of General
Gage, Commander in chief, granted a commission to an officer of his to place
the soldiers in the barracks, which should be provided for them at the King's
expense. And this is the fact upon which the charge against the Respondent, for
evasively appointing an officer to provide quarters for the troops otherwise
than is prescribed by the act, is founded. The Respondent is sorry that he is
obliged, by the designed generality of the charge, in his defense thereto, to
state such a detail of untruth, prevarications, and contempt of law and
authority, in the promoters of the accusation against him: But it is all to be
accounted for by the propagation of one maxim, which originated with the
faction, and has lately been adopted by the House of Representatives, That the
King has no right to order any of his troops into any of the American
provinces, without being first authorized so to do by an Act of the provincial
Assembly. And from this pretension the transition is easy to the presumption of
petitioning the King to punish an officer of his, for obeying his commands, and
assisting to carry his orders into execution.

15. After having dissolved the General Assembly at a most critical season, and
while they were employed in the most necessary and important business of the
Colony, he arbitrarily refused to call another for the space of ten months, and
until the time appointed in the royal charter for calling a General Assembly,
against the repeated and dutiful petitions of the people.

15. The facts, upon which this article is founded, are these: In June 1768,
while the assembly of the province was sitting, the Respondent received a
letter from the Secretary of State, signifying the King's pleasure, that he
should require of the House of Representatives to rescind a Resolution passed
in a former House, and to declare their disapprobation of it; and, if they
should refuse to comply, that he should immediately dissolve them. He
communicated to the House the first part of the letter, containing the
requisition; and upon their desiring a copy of the whole letter, he
communicated to them the other part of the letter, containing the provisional
order to dissolve them. The House took nine days to consider of this
requisition; and in that time passed all the necessary public bills, and
particularly the Tax-Bill, which the Governor reminded them of passing,
previously to their giving their answer; informing them, that, if he should be
obliged to dissolve them, he should not be at liberty to call another Assembly
till he received his Majesty's commands for that purpose. The House at length
giving their answer, by which they refused to comply with his Majesty's
requisition, he dissolved them, as he was in duty bound to do. And having
received his Majesty's commands not to call a new Assembly until the May
following, being the time appointed by the Charter, he obeyed that order also.
These are the true facts upon which this article is founded; and they were all
known to the Complainants at the time when they presumed to petition his
Majesty to punish a servant of his, for what he did wholly in obedience to his
Majesty's express commands.

16. It appears by his letters to the Earl of Hillsborough your Majesty's
Secretary of State that he has endeavored to overthrow the present constitution
of government in this colony, and to have the people deprived of their
invaluable charter rights, which they and their ancestors have happily enjoyed,
under your Majesty's administration, and those of your royal predecessors.

16. It is the undoubted duty of a Governor to accompany his reports of
interesting proceedings in his province with his own opinion of them; and it is
indispensable, when he is giving an account of disorders in his government, to
endeavor to trace the causes of them, and to point out the remedies. In the
province of Massachusetts Bay, when civil authority was reduced so low as to
have nothing left but the form of a government, and scarce even that, an
enquiry into the causes of so great a weakness in the governing powers was
unavoidable; and there was no entering upon such an enquiry, without observing
upon the ill effects of that part of the constitution of that government,
whereby the appointment of the Council if left to the people, to be made by
annual election; and yet the Royal Governor, in all Acts of Prerogative, is
subject to the control of the Democratical Council. This solecism in policy
has been as hurtful in practice as it is absurd in Theory, and is the true
cause of the extreme imbecility of the power of the Crown in this government,
at Times when the exertion of it is most wanted. This is not an observation of
a new date; it is of many years standing; and the avowal of the Respondent's
opinion on this occasion, is not to be reckoned from the date of his Letters to
the Earl of Hillsborough: He has made no scruple to declare his sentiments upon
this subject, ever since he has felt the effects which the popular constitution
of the Council has had upon the Royalty of the government, which as above three
years ago; within which time, he has seen the King deprived of the service of
every man at the Council Board who has had resolution enough to disapprove the
opposition to the authority of the King and the Parliament, and their supremacy
over the American colonies. This, and this only, is the foundation of the
charge of his endeavoring to overthrow the Charter; whereas his real desire
has been, that the Charter should have a more durable stability, by means of a
necessary alteration, without which, he is persuaded it cannot have a much
longer duration; as the abuse of the appointment of the Council now prevailing,
must oblige the Parliament to interfere sooner or later. And therefore he is
persuaded, that, in avowing this opinion, he has acted not only as a faithful
servant to the King, and a true subject of Great Britain, but also as a real
friend of the province of Massachuset's-Bay, whose true interest it is, to have
its government so confirmed and established, that it may not be liable to be
continually disturbed and disgraced by factions and designing men, as it is at
present.

17. By the means aforesaid, and many others that might be enumerated, he has
rendered his administration odious to the whole body of the people; and has
entirely alienated their affections from him, and thereby wholly destroyed that
confidence in a Governor, which your Majesty's service indispensably requires.

17. The Respondent denies, that by the means mentioned in the said complaint,
or by any other means, he has rendered his administration odious to the whole
body of the people. He denies, that the opinion of the whole people of that
province can now be taken and ascertained, laboring as it does at present,
under the baneful influence of a desperate faction, who, by raising groundless
fears and jealousies, by deluding one part of the people and intimidating the
other part, has destroyed all real freedom, not only of action, but even of
sentiment and opinion. But the Respondent doubts not but that his
administration has been approved of by the generality of the best and most
respectable men in the province; and assures himself, that notwithstanding
that, in the course of the late disputes, he has been obliged by his duty to
give his testimony against some popular prejudices, when the present
infatuation shall cease, and truth and reason shall be allowed to interpose, he
shall be acknowledged to have been a faithful servant of the King, and a real
friend of the people. In the mean time, having been honored with his Majesty's
approbation of his whole conduct, and that of the two Houses of Parliament of
some principal parts of it, he shall leave it to the province of
Massachuset's-Bay to do his justice at their own time; and shall commit himself
to the disposal of his Majesty, as it shall be though best for His service, in
perfect confidence, that he shall not suffer for sacrificing his interest to
his fidelity.

Wherefore we most humbly entreat your Majesty, that his Excellency Sir Francis
Bernard, Baronet, may be for ever removed from the government of this province:
And that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to place one in his stead,
worthy to serve the greatest and best Monarch on earth.

And the Representatives of the Colony of Massachuset's Bay, as in duty bound,
shall ever pray. In their name, and by their order, signed THOMAS CUSHING,
Speaker.

And the Respondent, for proof of such allegations in this answer as shall
require it, begs leave to refer to his Majesty's instructions, and the letters
of his Secretaries of State and Commissioners for Trade and Plantations
directed to him the Respondent, to the acts of the council of the province, to
the Journals of the House of Representatives, to his own Letters to his
Majesty's Secretaries of State and Commissioners for Trade and Plantations
(which Letters, being wrote without any probable view of their being used for
this purpose, he humbly submits ought to be admitted as evidence, especially of
his intention and meaning, upon which great part of the complaint against him
is made to depend,) and to such other evidence as he shall be able to procure
here, after having been, by the practices of the managers of the accusation
against him, prevented having the benefit of such evidence as was to be had in
the province of Massachuset's-Bay.

The following is the Report of the Lords of the Committee relative to the
foregoing Complaint, etc. March 7. 1770.
"THE Lords of the Committee considering, that the complainants ought to have
been prepared with evidence to support their charges, at the time of presenting
the same, or within a reasonable time after, or at least, that they might have
been sufficiently prepared since the bringing into the House of Representatives
the former petition to remove the Governor in June 1768. And further, that the
House of Representatives having omitted to send over to their Agent, the
documents necessary to make good their complaints, although it appears by the
printed journals of the aforesaid House, that they continued sitting eighteen
days after the passing of the said Order, 27th of June 1769, could only be with
a view of keeping up the spirit of clamor and discontent in the said province.
And considering likewise that the said articles of complaint against the
Governor, could not be supposed to affect the Governor; but are rather a charge
against your Majesty's government: Their Lordships are therefore of opinion,
upon the whole, that the several charges contained in the said petition of the
House of Representatives of Massachusets-Bay, are groundless, vexatious and
scandalous; and that the said petition ought to be dismissed."

March 14. 1770. PRESENT The King's Most Excellent Majesty in Council.
Earl Gower, Lord President of the Council, Earl of Halifax, Lord Privy Seal,
Duke of Queensberry, Duke of Ancaster, Duke of Newcastle, Earl Talbot, Lord
Steward, Earl of Hartford, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Denbeigh, Earl of
Litchfield, Earl of Rochford, Earl of Percey, Earl of Bristol; Earl of
Hillsborough, Viscount Weymouth, Viscount Falmouth, Lord North, Lord Le
Despencer, Lord Pelham, Sir Gilbert Elliot, Sir Edward Hawke.

HIS Majesty taking the said Report into consideration, was pleased, with the
advice of his Privy Council, to approve thereof, and to order that the said
petition of the House of Representatives of the Massachusets-Bay, be, and it is
hereby dismissed this Board, as groundless, vexatious and scandalous."




