A plain and earnest ADDRESS FROM A MINISTER TO A PARISHIONER, ON The Neglect
of the Public Worship, AND Preaching of the GOSPEL.

"Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put forth her Voice?

"Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at
the Posts of my Doors.

"For whosoever finds me, finds Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord.

"But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me,
love Death."

PROVE. viii.1, 34, 35, 36. SALEM: sold by SAMUEL HALL, near the Exchange.
MDCCLXXI.

THE principal design of the (...) is to convince and reclaim the negligent.
But it is hoped that none into whose hands it may come will find it wholly
unprofitable. -- The serious and devout may find some things suggested which
will serve to confirm and strengthen them: Formalists may (...) to attend their
duty from nobler principles, and (...) better views, than a regard to custom
and outward decency: And some that are careless and wavering may perhaps be
preserved from falling off. If either of these ends be answered upon any
persons may God have all the glory.

A Plain and earnest ADDRESS, etc.
My Dear Friend,
I HAVE observed with much sorrow and concern your neglect of the public
worship of God and preaching of the Gospel: As you thereby deprive me of the
opportunity of addressing you from the pulpit, I am obliged to follow you into
your private retirements: And I have chosen this method of application to your
conscience, because I would give you the advantage of renewing and reflecting
upon my solemn admonition, which you might be more likely to forget if I should
only discourse with you in person, and because I can in this method be quite
free from the infirmities and interruptions which often attend personal
conferences.

Let me then beg of you, the first leisure hour you have, after receiving this
small address, to set yourself seriously and impartially to weigh in your mind
the following considerations, without taking any offense at the plain and close
manner of address here used, and without blaming me for representing the truth
to you in a disagreeable light, since it is not my fault that I am obliged to
deal with you in this manner.

In love and tenderness to your soul, and under a sense of the account which I
must hereafter render to my Lord and Master, I will endeavor, in the first
place, to show you the nature of your sin -- then set forth its aggravations
(...) and the danger to which it exposes you -- then answer with excuses as you
may make in favor of it -- and lastly, give you a word of exhortation and
warning. May the divine spirit set home these things on your heart, that my
labor may not be in vain.

I. As to the nature of your sin. It is an undoubted truth of natural religion,
that there is a God, and that he ought to be worshipped and served: This is
what you will readily acknowledge, and all the heathen in the world will join
with you in it, for the invisible things of God from the creation of the world
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and godhead. The same light of nature has also taught all the
heathen nations to unite in a social manner in their homage and reverence to
the Supreme Being; even those who pay divine honors to the creatures of God
have always ten (...) or other consecrated places, where they frequently (...)
join in the exercises of religion. The ancient (...) had their tabernacle,
their temple, and their ^^^^gogues, where they met to pay their homage to God,
according to his own institutions; and Christians are formed into churches, and
have always had places of meeting for social worship, and the ordinances of the
gospel: This is the will of our great Lord, who has promised his gracious,
spiritual presence where two or three are (...) together in his name, who by
his spirit in his apostle Paul has commanded all that profess his name, not to
forsake the assembling of themselves together.

But your conduct too plainly proves, that you have no regard to the light of
nature, the dictates of your conscience, the authority of Christ, or the
example of pious men in all ages and places of the world; you (...)
contradiction to the general sense of mankind (...) must excuse me for telling
you, that you do (...) so much religion as some of the most ignorant (...)
Barbarians: God has written to you the great things of his law, and you have
accounted them as a strange thing: Hosea viii.12.
-- Christ has sent you the most glorious and important news, and you will not
hear it: The ministers of the Prince of peace are come upon the most benevol^^^
er^and to your soul, to warn you of your sin and dan^ to show you the path of
life, to beseech you in the (...) of their great Lord to be reconciled to God
through h^* But you have turned a deaf ear to God's counsels, (...) will hear
none of his reproof^; you are casting contempt on that precious Savior who
gave himself a ransom for many, and has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
having been made a curse for us; you are rejecting the counsel of God against
yourself, and despising those servants of Christ, to whom he has said, he that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. Luke* x.16.
And whosoever will not receive you, nor hear your words, shake off the dust of
your feet for a testimony against them. Matthew. x.14.


Moreover, you are acting directly contrary to your own best interest: It is
your duty and interest to seek the sal^ ^f your own precious soul; whose worth
is so in^ ^reat, that millions of worlds cannot outweigh it, (...) could redeem
it from destruction but the blood (...) of God; if it is lost after this, it is
lost forever, and there is a dreadful train of black ideas contained in this
one phrase, the loss of the soul. -- This precious soul you are now neglecting,
as if it was not worth your care; you are starving it in the midst of plenty;
the heavenly manna is rained all round your tent, and you will not take the
small pains to gather it; you l^ath this light bread, Numb. xxi.5.
like the murmuring Israelites of old, and have no relish for the food which is
sent you from heaven. -- You are robbing yourself of the most delightful
entertainment which you can enjoy on this side heaven, an entertainment at
which the saints feast with the highest pleasure. How sweet (said the Psalmist)
are thy words to my (...) ^ter than honey to my mouth! Psalm. cxix.103.
O how love I (...) my meditation all the day! Psalm. cxix.97.
As the heart pant^ (...) water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O (...)
shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. xlii.1, 2.
How amiable are thy tabernacles, Lord God of hosts; my soul longs, yea even
faints for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cry out for the
living God. Psalm. lxxxiv.1, 2.
So fond was David of the house of God, that he even envied the swallows and
sparrows their happiness in building their (...) around it; yea, he declares,
that he had rather be a (...) ^eeper in the house of his God, than to dwell in
the most (...) ^id tents of wickedness. Psalm. lxxxiv.10.
But how directly contrary to these holy desires is the temper of your soul?
You had rather indulge yourself in sin, than take the least step toward
holiness; you are content to let the precious waters of the sanctuary run to
waste, rather than stoop to drink of them as they glide along: And thus your
poor soul is making no improvement in divine knowledge; you are loving darkness
rather than light, because your deeds are evil; and if it should ever please
God to regenerate you by his holy spirit, what a small stock of knowledge will
you have to be a foundation for the exercise of grace, and the performance of
duty in your Christian course! I speak of your regeneration only as a possible
thing; but at the same time I solemnly warn you, from the word of God, that so
long as you remain negligent of the means of grace, there is not the least
probability that God will ever change your heart, nor the least encouragement
for you to hope for his mercy. Such is the nature of your sin.

II. Let me now, in the second place, represent to you the aggravations of it.
And here,

1. It is aggravated by the greatness, excellency, and importance of the
gospel. If the gospel, and the service which it requires, were things
indifferent, or of little importance, the charge against you for neglecting
them would not run so high; but they are things of the most excellent nature,
and of the highest importance to every degenerate son and daughter of Adam. The
gospel is nothing less than a revelation of mercy to apostate, rebellious,
self-destroyed sinners; yea, a revelation of the only possible way in which
mercy can be showed to them, consistent with the eternal justice, truth and
holiness of the unchangeable GOD; it teaches us the only acceptable way of
worshipping and serving him, by revealing to us a glorious Mediator, through
whom our worship is to be directed to God, and by whose precious righteousness
we and our services are rendered acceptable in his fight. And is not this a
most glorious and valuable discovery to fallen man? Consider the infinite
expense whereby Reconciliation was purchased, and the mediatorial way of access
to the mercy seat obtained: The bl^od of bull^ and goats could never have
availed; thous^nd (...) rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, would not have
been an adequate offering; Lebanon would not have been sufficient to burn, nor
all the beasts thereof for a burnt-offering; nothing less than the blood of the
Son of God could redeem us from the curse of the law, and open the way for our
restoration to the favor of an offended Deity: And this, great as it was,
Christ freely offered, for the love he bore to our guilty race; and God
mercifully accepted his sacrifice instead of our sufferings, and is upon
account thereof reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to men their
trespasses. This glorious work of redemption is a mystery which the angels
desire to look into, it is the object of their admiration; it is a work which
will engage the attention and excite the thankful praises of the redeemed
throughout eternity; yea, it is a work which seems to be the center of all God's
great designs from everlasting to everlasting. Christ, the great undertaker and
finisher of this illustrious work, commanded it to be made known to all
nations; and accordingly his apostles went into all the world, publishing the
truth, confirming their testimony with many miraculous works, and sealing it
with their blood. Innumerable is the company of martyrs, who, animated with the
true spirit of Christianity, persevered in confessing their glorious Lord, and
vindicating the divine authority of his gospel, in the midst of the sharpest
tortures which the unrelenting cruelty of the most inhuman tyrants could
invent; having come out of great tribulation, they have washed their robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb, and they are before the throne of
God, and serve him day and night in his temple. Of such importance did they
esteem the gospel of Christ, that they did not even count their lives dear to
themselves, so that they might show their love to it, and glorify their blessed
Lord. And is it not of the same importance now? How can you bear then to make
the comparison between them and yourself, while you will not pay so much
respect to that very gospel as to hear it preached?

2. Your sin is greatly aggravated by the privileges which you enjoy above
thousands of your fellow men. Vast nations of the earth live in the darkness of
heathenism; even many of those places, where the first preachers of the gospel
went and gathered churches of saints, are now overspread with idolatry or
imposture, and have lost almost the very name of Christianity. Other great
nations, who are called Christian, have the truths of the gospel wretchedly
corrupted, and mixed with error; and but few, comparatively, of the inhabitants
of the earth have the privilege of a pure, incorrupt gospel: But of this few,
you are one; you live where it is your own fault if you do not understand the
truths of the (...) ^gion; you have the scriptures in you^ (...) which you may
read at your pleasure; t^ (...) I trust, is preached with plainness and (...)
you may examine what is preached by the unerring standard, without fear of
incurring any human censure or temporal inconvenience, by rejecting what you
cannot approve, and by openly declaring against what you think erroneous. In
short, you have all the religious liberty which a reasonable creature can
desire; and therefore your neglect of the glorious gospel is base ingratitude
to that God who has placed you in a land of liberty; it looks as if you
despised and undervalued that great blessing, which many people in the world
are destitute of, and would gladly purchase at the dearest rate. Light is come
into the world, and shines clear^ (...) but you have loved darkness rather the
(...) your eyes against it. How justly then (...) you to stumble on the dark
mountain (...) hereafter look for light, turn it into (...) shadow of death?

3. Your sin is also much aggravated by the evil and pernicious example which
you set before others. Mankind are more easily led by example than by precept;
and bad examples have always the most influence, because they lead us agreeable
to the natural evil inclinations of our own hearts. Now consider, my friend,
the danger of your example being copied by those among whom you live, and those
whom divine providence has committed to your care. You are set, perhaps, at
the head of a family; and you know how apt your children are to imitate what
they see you do; you know they learn to speak, to read, to perform all the
common actions of life by imitation; and do they not learn sin the same way? Is
there not a natural, wicked disposition in them, which easily leads them to
follow whatever wicked examples are set before them? And when they see you
living in the neglect of divine worship and ordinances, will they not be led to
think them things of little or no importance? Should you take pains to teach
them the nature and advantage of public worship, and send them to the house of
God; yet will they not think you intend to deceive them, since it is plain, by
your conduct, that you do not esteem it a matter of any great importance to
yourself. But if you should in any measure withold those instructions, and be
slack about their attendance, is it at all likely that they will have any
inclination of their own to go? And would you choose that they should be brought
up in the neglect of this duty? The like may be said of servants, and all
others over whom God in his providence has placed you. And how many of your
neighbors, who are inclined to be careless in religion, will be hardened by
your example, and think the^ may as well neglect their duty as you? Think, O my
friend, on the sad consequence of this! -- Think how many souls, beside your
own, you may be instrumental of ruining forever! And what an awful aggravation
of your future misery it will be, that you have seduced others to sin, to the
loss of their souls! that those, whom you ought to have led in the way of
righteousness, are brought down with you into everlasting burnings; there to
curse and blame you forever, for being the instrument of their destruction!

4. If you have by profession entered into covenant with God, and enjoyed any
outward covenant-privileges, your sin of neglecting the worship and ordinances
of the gospel is thereby most grievously aggravated. For have you not given up
yourself to God in Christ, to love, obey, and serve him forever? Have you not
taken upon yourself an obligation to the whole duty of a Christian? How much
more guilty then are you, in the sight of God, than if you had never made such
a profession? You have increased your lead of guilt by adding falsehood and
breach of covenant to your sin of negligence; you have openly contradicted and
virtually renounced your covenant with your Maker, and cast great contempt on
Jesus the mediator of the new and everlasting covenant. It may be you have been
in time past enlightened, in some measure, by the spirit of God, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come; and so have been induced to join yourself to the Lord in an
outward manner, and make profession of the name and faith of Jesus Christ. If
this has been the case with you, then your former enlightening greatly
aggravates your present sinful negligence; for you live in disobedience to the
light and convictions of your own mind, as well as to the commands of God; you
sin wilfully against the truth, and you have great reason to fear that awful
curse, For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment, and fiery indignation to devour the adversary. Heb. x.26, 27.
What a wound and dishonor have you given to the religion of the blessed
Jesus, which you have professed! What an enemy are you to that glorious
Redeemer, into whose kingdom you have professed to enter! How basely have you
betrayed his cause, and given occasion to the enemies of the Lord, to blaspheme
that holy name by which you are called! When they see Christ's professed
disciples paying no regard to his institutions, but living in direct
contradiction to his commands, how greatly does it strengthen them in their
infidelity, and make them think religion is but an outside show, a piece of
formality and hypocrisy! O how is Christ wounded in the house of his pretended
friends! How many are the followers of Judas, who betray the Son of Man with a
kiss! -- Thus you see how greatly your sin is aggravated. I would now

III, Point out the Danger to which you have exposed yourself thereby.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is a revelation of wrath as well as mercy; it
pronounces a dreadful curse against all that despise and reject it, as well as
secures eternal happiness to those that embrace it. It is a matter of so sacred
a nature, that it must not be trifled with, nor treated as indifferent; for it
is either a savor of life unto life, or of death unto death, to all that know
it. The worship of God, through the Mediator, is so high and honorable a
privilege allowed to guilty men, and the public performance thereof is a duty
so reasonable in itself, so conducive to our own happiness, and so expressly
required by God, that the neglect thereof is highly offensive in his sight, and
merits a severe punishment at his hands. But God has so ordered the
constitution of the moral world, that sin necessarily brings on its own
punishment: Thus, the glutton, the drunkard, and the unclean, by the abuse of
their bodies, in the intemperate gratification of their appetites, bring on
themselves those pains and miseries which are a part of their punishment. And
thus, the careless gospel-sinner, by neglecting and misimproving his day of
grace, and the means of salvation which God richly bestows upon him, puts
himself out of the way of divine instruction and restraint, and naturally
brings on himself blindness of mind and hardness of heart, than which there
cannot be a more dreadful judgment. Hear what God says of his ancient people
Israel: My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me;
so I gave them up to their own hearts' lusts, and they walked in their own
counsel. Psalm. lxxxi.12.
Remember also that scripture so o^^en quoted in the new testament, and applied
to the Jews, who would not hearken to the voice of Christ and his apostles.
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and convert and be healed. Isaiah vi.10.
This is here spoken by way of command from God to the prophet; but as it is
quoted in the new testament, it is represented as their own fault that they
were brought into such an awful condition. The heart of this people is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed,
Acts. xxviii.2^.
etc. which teaches us, that though blindness and hardness be judicially
inflicted by God, yet they are the natural effects of the obstinacy and
perverseness of those unhappy persons who are the subjects of them. From hence,
I beseech you, be warned of the danger you are in, of being given up by God to
the just and necessary punishment of your wilful negligence.

But we find another kind of judgment threatened and inflicted by God upon
persons of your character. Our Savior told the Jews, who rejected his person
and ministry, that the kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to a
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Matthew. xxi.43.
And in those remarkable epistles, which he directed his apostle John to write
to the churches of Asia, among whom religion had greatly and visibly declined,
he threatens them, that he would remove their candlestick out of its place;
Rev. ii.5.
that is, would deprive them of their church privileges; yea, that he would
spue them out of his mouth, Rev. iii.16.
for their lukewarmness. This is also the natural consequence of such
carelessness and lukewarmness, as well as the punishment; for bad examples, as
I reminded you before, have a most pernicious influence, and draw away many
after them; and if such a disposition becomes general, there will be no care
taken to keep up the purity of gospel administrations: Such people will choose
teachers after their own heart, or else be content without any; and so every
thing that relates to church order and privileges will be either grossly
corrupted, or entirely banished. And is not this the natural tendency of your
present conduct, supposing it to have that influence which might justly (...)
expected? But if God should restrain others from following your evil example,
so that it should not actually produce so great mischief to the community; yet
he can find a way to put you out of all capacity, and deprive you of all
opportunity of attending the means of grace; he can confine you by sickness, or
cause your dwelling to be removed; or otherwise dispose the circumstances of
your life, so as to deprive you of the possibility of using those rich and
valuable privileges which you now despise.

But however God may deal with you in this life, yet if you continue obstinate
and impenitent until death (and you know not how soon that may overtake you)
there is a more awful judgment prepared for you in the future world; you may
depend upon it you will be numbered among those that finally reject and despise
Christ and his great salvation: How then can you escape the execution of that
dreadful curse that is written in the 10th of Hebrews, from 28th to 30th ver.
(O tremble when you read it!) He that despised Moses' law, died without mercy,
under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified [in appearance as
a professor of Christianity] an unholy thing, and has done despite to the
spirit of grace? For we know him that has said, vengeance belongs to me. I
will recompense, says the Lord. And again, the Lord shall judge his people. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. This sorer
punishment, which far exceeds the punishment of despisers of the law, is the
second death, or everlasting torment and misery of body and soul together, in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, with the Devil and his angels.
There you will meet with all your companions in sin, and all who have been
seduced by your pernicious example into the paths of destruction; there you
will be eternally blamed and reproached as the instrument of their ruin; and
there you will mourn at the last, and say, how have I hated instruction, and my
heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined mine ear to them that instructed me. Prove. v.11 -- 13.
The precious talent of the gospel being misimproved, you must expect the doom
of the unprofitable servant, to be cast into outer darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. xxv.30
-- Who can dwell with devouring fire? Who can inhabit everlasting burnings!

I hope, by this time, you are in some measure convinced, that your neglect of
the worship and ordinances of the gospel i^ sinful and dangerous: If so, I
might justly insist upon your immediate resolving to return to your duty, and
continue constantly and conscientiously in the performance of it: But I know
that the strange perverseness of corrupt nature will incline you, in spite of
rational conviction, to persist in your error, if you can find any thing like
an excuse for it. I suppose, when you first gave way to the temptation, and
suffered your present habit to prevail, there was something in your mind that
served for a reason of your conduct; and perhaps that, or something else, still
hinders you from returning to your duty. As I would leave you quite
inexcuseable, I will now go on

IV. To answer your reasons and objections, and show you the vanity and falsity
of them; for let them be what they will, I am sure they cannot be of any avail
when set in opposition to such plain and reasonable duty as that to which I am
persuading you. But as I cannot look into your heart, I must content myself
with answering such objections as I have either heard, or conceived to come
from persons of your character: some of which, perhaps, will suit your case,
whatever it be.

1. Some object, that they were brought up in another way, and are of a
different persuasion from the people among whom they live, and therefore cannot
join with them in worship. If this be your case, I beg you to take notice, that
it is not the design of this address to increase a party, nor draw you over to
any profession or practice which you cannot with a safe conscience comply with.
Religious liberty is a precious jewel, we cannot be too jealous of attempts to
deprive us of it, nor too strenuous to withstand and frustrate them, but let me
ask, is it not your duty to worship God with your follow Christians, and hear
his word preached? and are not these duties performed in the society of
Christians among whom you live? and though all the circumstances and forms of
these religious services are not exactly agreeable to your mind, yet are not
the main and essential parts of them sufficiently right? Do we not worship the
one God, through the one Mediator, Jesus Christ? Do you not think that God
accepts us so far as we are sincere, notwithstanding our disagreement in
opinion with you? If so, then is it not more bl^ble to neglect this important
duty than it would be to join with us in performing it? Did not our Lord blame
the Pharisees, who were very zealous in tything mint, annise and cummin, for
neglecting the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faithfulness!
-- So long as God in his providence deprives you of the privilege of
worshipping him in the particular manner which you judge is best, and yet gives
you opportunity of assembling with a Christian society, where you may enjoy
this benefit, though with some supposed disadvantages; so long as you are not
deprived of your Christian liberty, but may, without offense, j^in yourself to
any other body of Christians when you shall find it most convenient, why should
you wholly deprive yourself of the benefit of divine institutions, and deny
your soul the nourishment which it needs? Would you, when abroad, and thirsty,
refuse a draught of water merely because it was not presented to you in such a
cup as you drank in at home?

2. Some will plead in their excuse, that they are offended either with the
minister, or some other persons who attend the public worship, and cannot
appear with them in the house of God to hold communion with them in the
exercises of religion. To which I answer, that it must be a very extraordinary
kind of offense to justify such resentment as this. If this be your excuse, it
greatly concerns you, in the first place, to be determined, on good grounds,
whether you have any just reason to be offended: You should examine critically
and impartially, putting yourself in the place of the person with whom you are
offended, and exercising all that candor and charity which is necessary in
judging of another man's conduct: You should examine the supposed offense by
the rules of Christian equity, and the dictates of an enlightened conscience;
and perhaps you will find that what you are offended at was not really
blameable conduct, nothing more than what the person's duty and conscience
required; or perhaps only a mistake in judgment, an error in point of prudence,
a weakness and failing of human nature; which ought to be overlooked and
forgiven. You should examine yourself, whether you have not given just occasion
for the treatment which you have received, and whether you have not been too
severe and jealous, or too implacable and unforgiving. But supposing the
offense is just, and you have reason sufficient for it, ought you not (at least
so far as it concern^ yourself) to forgive it, and endeavor that there may ^e
a reconciliation? Ought you not to try your utmost to convince the offending
person of his fault, and bring him to repentance? Is there not a plain, easy
rule laid down by our blessed Savior, in the 18th of Matthew, exactly suited
to such cases? And how can you excuse yourself in taking any other method to
show your displeasure, while you have neglected this? Has not your present
conduct a tendency rather to widen than close the breach? And are you not
thereby increasing your guilt, by adding to your uncharitableness the sin of
neglecting divine institutions, and making one sin an excuse for another?

But suffer me to tell you, that there is reason to suspect you of hypocrisy
and deceit also; for allowing to your plea all the force which you yourself can
give it, it can by no means excuse you in omitting the public worship and
preaching of the gospel in some other congregation, where you might attend
without seeing the person with whom you are offended. If it is your conscience
that cannot suffer you to have communion in worship with your offending
brother, is it not very strange that the same conscience can rest satisfied
with your neglect of the mean^ of grace where you might enjoy them without any
thing to disturb your mind? or can you imagine that the offense which you have
received from a fellow mortal^is sufficient to release your obligation to the
duties which you owe your Maker? You greatly wrong your conscience to make that
the cause of your negligence, while at the same time you disobey its plainest
dictates. The true cause lies in the obstinacy of your will, and your
disinclination to duty. It is very easy for a corrupt heart and a subtle
tempter to fr^^^e an excuse for sin, when the will is so powerfully bent
toward it.

Perhaps you have made a rash promise, in consequence of some offense received,
which you imagine binds you to neglect the public worship; but in this you are
most wretchedly mistaken, unless you can prove that sin i^ a duty. It was
certainly a sin to make such a promise, but it is a greater sin to keep it; for
can you seriously conclude that a promise to commit sin is binding in the sight
of God? Suppose you had been one of those men who bound themselves with an oath
that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, Acts xxiii ^^
would you have starved yourself to death because you could not have had the
opportunity to execute your vile purpose? Or if you should demand a just debt
from any person, and he should answer, that he had made a promise that he would
not pay you; could you be satisfied with this, and think him discharged from
the debt? Of the same nature is the promise which is now the pretended bar in
the way of your attendance on duty, and it ought to be immediately repented of
and broken: Your conscience cannot be so darkened as to excuse you from duty on
this pretense, nothing but pride can influence you to persist in it; and is it
worthy your reasonable nature to be thus governed by such a corrupt principle?

3. Some will plead in their excuse, that they can spend their time as well at
home, in reading the bible, or some other good book. Is this the language of
your heart? And do you think to cheat the all-seeing God with such a miserable
shift as this? Reading is indeed a profitable way of spending holy time, and
you have the best examples of it in scripture: but what do you find to
countenance you in omitting the duty of hearing, for the sake of reading? You
might easily find time for reading on the sabbath, before and after the public
service; and you might have some reason to expect God's blessing upon your
reading, if you attended the duty of hearing also. But now you make your
compliance with one duty an excuse for your neglect of another; as if God
required more of you than he gives you time to perform. Is not this a bold
reflection upon him? Is it not as much as to call him an hard master? Perhaps
you will not own this, but yet will insist upon it, that there is as much good
to be got by reading as by hea^ing, since you read the same truths that you
should hear if you attended the public service. -- Is not this a reflection on
the wisdom of Christ, who has appointed a standing ministry in his church, and
promised his presence with them to the end of the world? Would not such
reasoning tend to set aside the gospel ministry as needless? For that do you
think this order of men was appointed and commanded to preach the word, to
reprove, rebuke and exhort, if people might lawfully neglect hearing them, and
confine themselves to reading the instructions, reproofs and exhortations
already delivered in the scripture? Are we not told that faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God? how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher? Romans x.14, 17.
Does not this convince you that the gospel ministry is an useful and necessary
establishment, calculated for your good? Is not the neglect of it then highly
criminal in the sight of Christ? And can you expect to be excused, under
pretense of getting as much good some other way? Is not Christ the best judge
of what is most adapted to do good to your soul, and ought you not to attend to
the method which he has prescribed, rather than to follow your own inventions?
If you were excuseable in this neglect, others might be so too; and so there
would be no obligation on any to attend the preaching of the word, which would
make the gospel ministry a vain and needl^ss institution. But be not deceived,
God is not mocked; he that sends forth his laborers into the vineyard will
call you to a solemn account for neglecting their labors: That testimony is
written against you; -- He that despises you, [my ministers] despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

4. Some excuse themselves by alleging, that they see others, who do attend,
live no better than their neighbors; and it is as well to stay at home as to
go, and get no good by it. Should such a thought as this enter into your heart,
I beseech you, examine it well before you suffer yourself to be influenced by
it. Consider whose fault it is, that any, who attend the means of divine
instruction, reap no benefit; is the blame to be charged on the duty itself, on
the word preached, on him that preaches it, on him that has commanded it to be
preached, or on the hearers? I suppose your modesty will fix it on the hearers;
then is it not ridiculous to argue thus, -- because some, who attend their duty
in a customary manner, are to blame for not getting that good which they might,
therefore I will not attend mine at all? With the same propriety might you
argue, Because I see my neighbor slack and lazy in his worldly business, so as
not to get a comfortable living; therefore I will entirely leave off my
business, and be idle. Would not you justly be called a fool, if you should
come to such a conclusion? And why will you not take as much care of your soul
as of your body? It Is true, if you attend the public exercises of religion with
such a careless, unprepared heart as those whom you blame, you will doubtless
be as unprofitable an hearer as they; but this is not what I am urging you to;
I would have you come with a serious mind, with a sincere desire of reaping
benefit, with a meek and teachable disposition; and when you are come, attend
with care and diligence, applying the truths of God's word to your own
conscience, and begging the influences of the divine spirit to render these
means effectual. This is the way to get good; and some such hearers there are,
I trust, in o^r congregation (would God the number was greater.) And if any are
really profited by their attendance on this divine institution, it is a far
greater argument to urge your compliance with your duty, than the contrary is
in favor of your neglect. It is much to be wished, though hardly to be expected,
that all who attend the public service of God should gain equal benefit
thereby: The word preached will be a savor of life unto life to some, and of
death unto death to others; but you are greatly mistaken if you imagine
yourself not so guilty in the sight of God, as they that outwardly attend their
duty, and yet are not benefited by it; you have the same advantages, the same
talent is committed to you both; and if you are both found to have misimproved
it, you will be reckoned with alike; nor can you expect to escape the judgment
of those that wilfully reject the salvation offered in the gospel, for you
cannot say that you do not know your Master's will, in some measure; and if you
keep yourself ignorant of any part of it, by your neglect of the means of
instruction, the fault is wholly your own: Wilful ignorance of duty is wilful
neglect of duty, and deserves the same punishment.

5. It is pleaded by some, that they have met with misfortunes, and are so
melancholy and dejected in their minds that they cannot compose themselves to
attend upon divine service, and therefore it is as well to omit it. This is a
most artful delusion of Satan's; and whoever is subject to it, is led captive
by him at his will. Let me tell you, O unhappy creature, that you are the cause
of your own misery: When God sent afflictions to you, he meant them for your
good, to make you thoughtful, ^ut not distracted; serious, but not melancholy:
Your corrupt heart has led you to counteract God's gracious designs; instead of
improving your troubles for the good of your soul, you are making them the
cause of your ruin. You should have humbled yourself under the mighty hand of
God, kissed his correcting rod, submitted to his holy will, examined your heart
and life, to see what was the cause of his contending with you; put away your
provoking sins, continued close to your duty, and patiently waited for light to
arise in darkness, and good to be brought out of evil: But, first to perplex
your mind with God's providential dealings, and then to make that perplexity an
excuse for the neglect of plain duty, is in a very high degree sinful; it shows
a prodigious enmity against God in your heart; the very thought of which ought
to strike horror into your soul, since you have joined ingratitude to
disobedience, and are opposing your best friend in his kindest designs toward
you. Can there be any thing more void of reason, more contrary to the clearest
light of nature, than your absurd plea? Because you are perplexed and dejected
in your mind, therefore you will not go where light and comfort are to be had.
Because you are unhappy, therefore you will not take the most direct way to
make yourself otherwise. Can you be so destitute of the very first principle of
human nature, self-love? o^ are you so blinded and deluded as not to believe
that the way of duty is the way to obtain peace and comfort? Where else will
you go, what else will you do, to alleviate your, misery? The pious Psalmist,
when he was perplexed with God's providential dealings, and ready to sink into
despondency, went into the house of God, Psalm. lxxiii
and there obtained light and satisfaction to his wearied mind. He made God's
word a light to his feet and a lamp to his path; and if this was your
disposition, you would doubtless find your steps guided aright thereby. For the
Lord's sake, then, do not give way any longer to such a wretched delusion; but
beg of God to recover you out of this fatal snare of the evil one, or you will
be in the greatest danger of being hurried on to utter destruction.

6. "The want of decent clothes to appear in," is sometimes made an excuse for
neglecting the public service of God. Is this your plea, my friend? then be not
offended if I should ask you, why you are not provided with such clothes as you
need? You are poor; but do you labor in any honest employment to obtain the
necessaries and conveniences of life? And do you spend what you get, in a
reputable way, without wasting it in gratifying your appetites beyond due
bounds? If so, it is strange that you cannot furnish yourself with such apparel
as is suitable to your condition; and nobody would expect to see you wear
better. But perhaps your pride keeps you at home more than your poverty; you
are reduced, it may be, from what you once was, and cannot appear in the same
manner as formerly; or, you think yourself as good as your neighbors, and
would make as good a show as they; and because you cannot, therefore you will
not venture into the public assembly for God's worship. But do you think that
he regards the dress you appear in before him? Does he look at the outward
appearance, or at the heart? Is it the opinion of your fellow men that you are
afraid of? What if any of them should make sport of, or find fault with, your
dress? So long as your conscience can witness that you are honest and
industrious, and are not to blame for your mean appearance, you have a
satisfaction within, sufficient to fortify you against the reproaches of fools.
But perhaps your suspicion is vain and groundless; your friends had rather see
you attend your duty in mean apparel, than see you neglect it: And if you are
really an object of charity, your frequent appearance in the public assembly
would put them in mind of you, and excite them to do what they can to help you.

If it is through idleness, or carelessness, or extravagance of any kind, or
pride, that you cannot appear decently in public, either of these is your sin;
and one sin cannot be an excuse for another: Therefore it is vain to make such
a Plea, for it cannot be admitted at the bar of conscience or of God. I wish it
could not justly be urged by the inferiors in some families, that they are not
able to attend, because their parents or masters neglect to furnish them with
suitable apparel, although they make a decent appearance themselves.


7. I^^o not recollect any other excuse that can be offered for the neglect of
divine service, except it may be urged by some, that they have staid away so
long that they are now ashamed to come: But this is so sorry an evasion, that
it scarce deserves an answer: I shall therefore dismiss it at once, by only
putting you in mind of our Lord's remarkable words, (Mark viii.38.) Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
generation; of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in the glory
of his Father, with his holy angels.

I have now endeavored to answer such objections and pleas as I have either
heard or conceived to be made in excuse of the neglect of public worship; and
if any of them are such as you have been influenced by, I hope you are, by this
time, convinced of their insufficiency: But whether I have exactly expressed
your mind or not, or whatever be your excuse, however weighty and important in
your mind now, yet there is a time coming when your views of things will be
greatly altered; the hour of death is an honest, undeceiving hour; things
appear then in a true light, free from that false glare with which our corrupt
passions and inclinations deceive our understandings: You will then (if
conscience be awake) judge impartially, and find, alas, to your sorrow, that
you have been led astray by your deceitful heart, and influenced by motives
unworthy your reasonable nature; you will then see the vanity and folly of the
excuses which now avail with you, and uphold you in this and other sins. But, O
that you would consider before you come to that solemn time! Imagine yourself
now laid on a bed of sickness, and your life despaired of, your soul just going
into the eternal world, to appear before the bar of God, and give up an account
of the deeds done in the body: And now ask your own conscience, whether you can
venture to stand the trial upon the same plea that has hitherto satisfied you?
Would you dare to tell the Searcher of Hearts, that you have neglected his
solemn worship, and the means of salvation, which he has graciously afforded
you, because you was of a different persuasion from your neighbors; or because
you was offended by some of them; or because you had made a promise to the
contrary; or because you thought you could spend your time as well at home; or
because you knew some that attended without receiving any benefit; or because
your mind was melancholy and dejected; or because your clothes were not good
enough; or because you was ashamed to go when you had been absent so long? How
incomparably mean and little do all these evasions appear, when viewed in this
Light; and I appeal to your conscience, whether this is not the true light that
they ought to be vie^^^^. Are you not ashamed, are you not afraid ever to urge
them again, when you consider that you must shortly give up your account to the
great Judge? You are every moment in danger of being summoned before his
tribunal, and you know not that you shall have any immediate warning; a
thousand accidents may befall you, and surprise you at once into the world of
spirits; and how awful will your case be if you perish forever, notwithstanding
your great and precious advantages! Infinitely more tolerable will it be for
Sodom and Gomorrah, for Tire and Sidon, in the day of judgment, than for you.

V. To sum up all, I earnestly beseech and exhort you, in the bowels of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by the worth of your immortal soul, by the shortness and
uncertainty of your life, by the infinite love and compassion of God, by the
bitter sufferings and death of his Son, by the greatness and excellency of the
gospel, by the everlasting joys of heaven, and the unspeakable torments of
hell, by the aggravated condemnation of gospel-sinners, by all the arguments
that can possibly work on a reasonable and immortal creature, to consider your
sin in its true nature and dreadful aggravations; to resolve immediately,
without any hesitation, that you will break it off by unfeigned repentance, and
begin steadily to pursue the path of duty, which you will certainly find a way
of pleasantness, and a pat^ of peace. Consider how many precious Sabbaths you
have trifled away, which are now past recalling, but are written down against
you in the records of heaven The pardon of your past neglects can be obtained
only through the Mediator's blood and righteousness; fly therefore to him, as
your only refuge from the wrath of God, which is revealed from heaven against
you. Acquaint now yourself with him, and be at peace; receive the good news of
pardon and salvation with an hearty welcome; learn to love his word, which
reveals the path of life; make it your daily study, and your nightly
meditation; especially let the weekly returns of holy time ^e observed in a
religious manner, by wholly abstaining from all labor and diversion, and
devoting the whole day to the service of God and the edification of your soul:
And if divine providence has committed others to your care, see that they
observe the Sabbath also, and let them have no reasonable excuse to absent
themselves from the public worship; let the duties of the sanctuary be your
delight; be glad when they say to you, let us go up to the house of the Lord:
Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your soul; let
the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, and pray for the Holy
Spirit to accompany divine truth to your heart, that it may be there as seed
sown in good ground, which shall bear fruit an hundred fold, to the glory of
God.

But if, after all, you will persist in your sinful negligence, and will not be
persuaded to appear in the worshipping assemblies of God's people here; yet
know for certain, that there is a vast assembly shortly to be summoned
together, in which you must and shall appear; an assembly consisting of all the
generations of mankind that ever have lived, or shall hereafter be born; you
shall come forth before the glorious Judge; and there your affectionate pastor,
who is now solemnly and tenderly admonishing you in the name of his divine
Lord, will (it grieves his soul to think of it) be produced as a witness
against you, that you have knowingly and wilfully rejected the gospel of the
Son of God. -- Think, O think, of the horrors of that awful day, when he shall
come in the clouds of heaven, and every eye shall see him; when he shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on them that know him not, and that OBEY NOT HIS GOSPEL; who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power! How can you possibly escape the full execution of that
sentence of eternal damnation which he will then pass on all the impenitent
rejectors of him, depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels! Beware, therefore, left you come into this
condemnation! If you should be so unhappy, I solemnly protest to you, before
God, that it is your own fault, your blood be on your own head, you have ruined
and undone yourself, and must forever be your own tormenter.

But may everlasting mercy pluck you as a brand out of the burning, and make
you a vessel of honor, prepared unto glory. This is the sincere wish and
prayer of your very affectionate friend and most unworthy

PASTOR.

FINIS.

