THE DOCTRINE OF SOVEREIGN GRACE Opened and Vindicated.

THE DOCTRINE OF SOVEREIGN GRACE Opened and Vindicated: AND ALSO The
Consistency and Duty of declaring DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY, and Men's IMPOTENCY, while
yet we address their Consciences with the Warnings of Truth, and Calls of the
Gospel.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church in Middleborough.

I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God unto
Salvation, to every one that believes.

Romans i. 16. PROVIDENCE, Rhode Island: Printed by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeare's
Head, 1771.

THE DOCTRINE OF SOVEREIGN GRACE Opened and Vindicated.
PART I.
THE chief occasion of the ensuing discourse is this: About four years ago, on
a view of the prevailing disposition in multitudes, either to pry into
futurities, to the neglect of present duty, or to contend about religion,
instead of regarding the life and practice of it, while the vanities of time
carried the world before them, I was moved to publish a discourse from James
ii. 22. with this title, True Faith will produce good Works. And through the
whole endeavored to handle the glorious truths of the gospel in a practical
way; and had as little expectation of being publicly attacked therefore as for
any thing I ever wrote: And I was not alone in this thought, for a worthy
minister in Great Britain says, in a letter, Your sermon on the Fruits of Faith
is well adapted to silence gainsayers. Yet how often are we disappointed in
this evil world!

Mr. Daniel Martin, Elder of a Baptist Church in Rehoboth, published a piece
last fall, entitled, Some Meditations on the plain Testimony of the holy
Scriptures, relating to the elect or chosen of God, etc. wherein, after
inserting as a motto our Savior's caution to take heed how and who we hear, he
begins thus: Having received the foregoing caution and instruction from the
most wonderful Counselor that ever spoke on earth. I have made the following
observations on several points of doctrine delivered by Mr. Isaac B -- s, in
his book entitled, True Faith will produce good Works, wherein he has made
many worthy observations, and given diverse good instructions; but to my sorrow
he has advanced several points of doctrine, which appear to me to be in
opposition to the sense and pure meaning of the holy scriptures. And he goes on
to bend all his force through his whole performance against the peculiar
doctrines of sovereign grace.

Several reasons were suggested, in my own mind and by others, against making
any reply to this piece at all: As that it is so plainly erroneous, that it was
not likely to do much hurt; that there is no end of controversy; and it is
peculiarly disagreeable for one Baptist to contend with another, who have so
many others against them on every side. But in answer to this, it appears, that
as plain as these errors are, yet many are carried away with them; and though
contention is disagreeable, yet if we can see the faith once delivered to the
saints betrayed, and hold our peace, how shall we answer it to him who has
required us to contend earnestly therefore? And will not a just view of the last
objection turn its weight the other way? For an engine which has been much
used, both in the past and present age, to prejudice people against the
Baptists, has been to represent them as unsound in gospel doctrine; and now
when an aged Elder of that denomination has represented to the world, that to
hold, "That faith is not of man," carries in it that He that is justified by
faith, is justified because God has given it to him; and he that believes not
is damned, because God has not given him faith; p. 15. if we let such
reproaches against sovereign grace pass unanswered, because in our
denomination, what a handle would others make of it, to represent us all either
as corrupt in principle, or else more after party than truth? Nay, if those who
met their enemies ox or ass going astray, and did not bring it back again,
broke a command of God Exodus xxiii. 4.
; how can we answer it to him, if we see our friends and fellow mortals going
in a way that we are fully convinced leads to destruction, and not attempt, as
we have opportunity, to show them their danger? Paul's earnest desire for the
salvation of his brethren and kinsfolk, moved him to take pains to convince
them, that, though they followed after the law of righteousness, yet that they
did quite miss their way, because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the deeds of the law. Romans ix. 22. And as it appears to me that Mr. M -- n
has missed the right way in the same respect, I think it a duty to attempt in a
brief and plain manner to show him wherein he has done so.

The grand point which he objects against in my book, is the manner of my
holding election: He professes to hold it; but thinks I hold it in a wrong
way. I had observed from Ephesians. i. 3 -- 7. that Paul says, He has chosen us,
that we should be holy; but the modern notions are, that he chooses us because
we are holy, making that to be the cause, which Paul viewed to be the effect:
All the controversy turns upon this point, whether the good pleasure of God's
will, or our free will, be the cause of our holiness and happiness. Mr. M -- n
mentions this, and answers, that both are the cause thereof, p. 6. To prove
which, he cites many declarations of God's good will, and then says; Since it
is the good will of God that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge
of the truth, what does hinder, or indeed what can hinder or prevent, but the
want of man's good will? p. 7. Ay sure enough, what else can hinder? But since
that is wanting, how can it be any cause of our salvation? Solomon fays, That
which is wanting cannot be numbered: Yet behold! here is one wiser than
Solomon! For he can reckon that which is wanting for a principal part of the
capital sum! Perhaps it will be said, if it is wanting in one, it may not in
another. This I suppose is the thing aimed at, for he says, By free will I
understand good will; when a man's will is to do the will of God. p. 7. And
again, We may assure ourselves, that God has not hid the light of the gospel
from any man or people, who desire and seek after the knowledge of God. p. 13.
Who pretends that he does? I was so far from doing of it, that in answer to an
objection, p. 82. I. observed, that "We may be heartily willing to do many
outward actions, which yet we cannot do, and so are excused from blame in our
not doing them; but the cause why souls cannot believe the record which God has
given of his Son, and love and obey him with all their hearts, is because they
love darkness rather than light; yea, hate the light, because the carnal mind
is enmity against God." John iii. 19, 20. Romans viii. 7. And if our advocate for
free will and good works read this and much more to the same purpose in my
book, before he wrote against it, where are his good works, while he
misrepresents my sentiments? And if he did not read it, where is his regard to
equity, to condemn a man without a hearing?

Mr. M -- n has told us, that by free will he understands a will to do the will
of God; but he has not informed us who the people are, or where they live, that
naturally have such a will: He is not so fair in this respect, as Robert
Barclay was about perfection; for though he labored much to prove that such a
state was attainable in this life, yet he says, With respect to myself, I speak
modestly, because I ingeniously confess that I have not yet attained it By the
way I would here observe, that as in my late Plea for Liberty of Conscience, I
happened to mention it as a Quaker notion, that when a person has the spirit
with him, he is then persect; I would now retract that sentence; for I am
informed by a principal leader among them, that I mistook their sentiments; and
I would always watch against misrepresenting any people, though I differ ever
so much from them. He informs me that they hold sanctification to be a
progressive work, and that a person may be under powerful influences of the
spirit, and yet have remaining corruptions, though they suppose that a perfect
victory over them is attainable in this life. Now as I willingly retract my
mistake of their sentiments, so I think it but a friendly part to let them
know, that for friend Barclay, in p. 8. of his Apology, to represent that Those
who plead for justification wholly by the imputation of a righteousness without
them, deny the necessity of being clothed with an inward righteousness, is not
just; for no men upon earth hold stronger to the necessity of regeneration and
inward sanctification, than those who trust alone on Christ's imputed
righteousness for their justification before God.
. So here I believe every one of Adam's children, who are brought to a true
sight of their case, will concur with the Apostle's confession, that all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God; and that all go on, either secretly
or openly, to serve diverse lusts and pleasures, till the kindness and love of
God our Savior appears, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy, to save us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, Romans iii. 23. Tit. iii. 3 -- 5. Our author's notion
that both God's will and ours are the cause of our salvation, runs him into the
following absurdities.

I. To exclude all those divine testimonies which prove man's universal
depravity: That both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, and none righteous,
no not one; are all gone out of the way, and none that does good, no not one;
that we are by nature children of wrath, even as others; that the scripture
has included all under sin, Romans iii. 9 -- 19. Ephesians. ii. 3. Gal. iii. 22. I say
his notion excludes all such testimonies of truth, of which the bible is full,
even so far, that though his book is filled with texts which he imagines will
prove universal redemption, yet I think he never takes notice of one that
proves our universal depravity, notwithstanding he talks so much of keeping
close to scripture.

II. As the nature of his scheme is the same of that which ensnared the
Galatians, so it is attended with the same consequence which the Apostle
mentions to them: It would frustrate the grace of God, and make Christ to die
in vain, Gal. ii. 21. For if men have a will to do the will of God, they had no
need of a Savior to die for them, and if they have it not, they are like to
perish, notwithstanding what he has done; for Mr. M -- n says, It seems by our
Lord's parable, Luke xiv. 16 -- 20. that there was nothing wanting on the part
of him that made the supper, but on the part of them that were bidden; their
good will was lacking; their will and affections were on earthly things. p. 7.
Therefore by his scheme, unless our Lord could find some of the children of men
who had not their will and affections on earthly things, his great supper will
be lost: Nay it must unavoidably be so; for if any could be found with such a
good will as our author describes, the Savior could have no right to call them
to this supper, because he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Luke v. 32. That turn which way you will, this notion of free will
frustrates the grace of God, and would make Christ to die in vain. Mr. M -- n
says, They did not improve the power he had given them. I know they did not
improve it right, for they improved it to excuse themselves from coming, and to
pursue their own ways. Again he asserts, that Faith is a work which God
requires of man, and what our Lord taught the people to labor in. p. 14. And
to prove it refers us to John vi. 27 -- 29. Though in this he discovers a
darker notion about faith than the Jews did, for it appears that they knew that
faith is giving credit to another, and not a work of our own; therefore in the
next words they ask for a sign, that they might see and believe, and they
plainly intimate, that though he had fed five thousand, yet Moses had done much
more, even fed six hundred thousand of their fathers in the wilderness, so that
they were not inclined to leave Moses for Jesus; and though he assured them
that it was not Moses who gave that bread, and that the Father had now given
the true bread from heaven, yet their disposition and conduct discovered
plainly, that it must be the work of God to make any of them believe it. Mr. M
-- n is so far from allowing this point, that he ventures to declare, that The
unbeliever is not made a believer by the mighty power of God working in him,
but by hearing and receiving the word. p. 30. And so because the word is the
instrument of faith, he denies that God by his power is the author of it; and
holds it to be "of man." p. 14. Hence,

III. His plan would make the will of the Creator dependent on the will of the
creature; for he labors much to prove that full provision is made for the
salvation of all men, while he owns that many miss of it, because their good
will is wanting, yet denies the exertion of divine power to work faith in any;
the certain consequence of which is, that it depends upon man's will whether
God shall ever have his good will in the salvation of one soul or not! This
consequence is so unanswerable, that it seems our author dare not meddle with
it; for I had mentioned it in a quotation from one of our Baptist Elders in
Carolina, at the foot of my 56th page; yet though he quotes a passage out of
the middle of that page, he never says a word upon this glaring absurdity which
attends his doctrine. For the reader's satisfaction, I will give him the
passage. It is this: Conditional election sets up an inferior cause above a
superior; making election and salvation no more than a may be, instead of a
shall be. It represents the Almighty as ever fluctuating in his councils,
taking up with new consultations dependent on the fickle will of man, and the
uncertain acts that flow therefrom; by which method he is brought in saying, O!
I will if they will, and O! that they may will to believe, become holy,
diligently and perseveringly improving their stock of free will abilities, that
they may be saved; nevertheless NOT MY WILL, but THEIR WILL be done Mr. Isaac
Chanler's Doctrines of Grace, printed at Boston, 1744, p. 208.
! Now since this lay directly in Mr. M -- n's way, what reason can be given for
his avoiding any mention of it, but because he could not answer it? I confess
it is beyond my weak capacity to conceive how it can be fairly answered, and if
others can, it would certainly be much more to the purpose to do it, than what
they on that side generally dwell upon. The sum of all our author's meditations
is, he imagines that to hold the good pleasure of God's will to be the sole
cause of our salvation, and that faith is his gift, and wrought in the soul by
his power, would carry this dreadful consequence in it, That men cannot be
judged and rewarded according to their works, but according as he has given,
or neglected to give. And he seems as much affrighted at this imagination as
ever a timorous person was at a black stump in the night: He has it over and
over from one end of his pamphlet to the other, and upon every mention of it,
he turns away to a number of scriptures, which prove that God is both just and
merciful, which we hold as fully as he does; also upon every view of my pleas
for God's sovereignty and power, that frightful image rises in view, again,
which makes such powerful impressions upon him, that he seems not to know
scripture when he runs against it. For instance, I had observed, p. 33. that
saving faith is a receiving with all the heart the witness and testimony that
God has given of eternal life in his Son, and he who believes not has made
him a liar. Is It John, v. 9 -- 12. the evidence of which truth shines so clear
as to leave all without excuse, who do not believe with all their hearts; while
every soul that is made willing by divine power to receive his testimony, and
set to his seal that God is true, knows that this faith is not of himself, it
is the gift of God. I thus marked these last words as scripture, and in the
margin referred to the text, Ephesians. ii. 8. yet Mr. M -- n, after citing this
passage, says, Is it right to say, because faith is the gift of God, that
therefore it is not of man? And after bringing many texts to try to prove that
this is not true, he says, Now let us consider a little of the consequence of
this vain notion, that faith is not of man. P. 14, 15. And so recurs to his
frightful imagination again, without being sensible that he is not here
contending with I. B. but with divine revelation. And I must confess that those
who hold to his doctrine of free will, would be more consistent to own
themselves Deists, than to act as they now do; for Dr. Young, the most open
Deist that I have heard of in this country, published a piece in his own
defense, in the Boston Evening-Post, the 27th of last August, wherein he
declares, he has as great a veneration for many glorious things in the old and
new testament as any Christian in this country; but says, there are some things
in the scriptures that he does not understand. And what are they? Why says he,
Such as how God can be said to predestinate one to everlasting life, and leave
another to inevitable and eternal perdition, and yet of a truth, be no
respecter of persons. This he thinks to be inconsistent, and therefore rejects
those parts of scripture that teach it: Mr. M -- n professes to hold all the
scripture, and yet the center of all his difficulty with me, is exactly the
same that the Deist has against the bible, because it teaches that doctrine.
And the bottom of the matter with both is, because they think they deserve
something better than to be left to perish in their sins: For if that were not
the case, any person of common sense can easily see the right the householder
had to give to some what they did not deserve, while he did not fail to let
every one have their due, and can see the iniquity of those who murmured at the
good man for so doing. Yea vulgar understandings can easily comprehend the
justice of that striking demand, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good? Our Lord tells us that the
kingdom of heaven is like this. Matt. xx. 1 -- 15. Therefore,

IV. This scheme would rob God of his essential glory. I had observed, that the
respect of persons which is condemned in scripture, is a perverting of justice,
and every pious soul detests such a thought concerning the Deity; yet we have
early notice of his respecting persons in another sense, for he had respect to
Abel and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect;
which made Cain very wroth. And I observed that God's demand on him upon that
occasion was as much as if he had said, 'Do you think I am so unjust, as not to
accept all that is well done?' Mr. M -- n takes notice, that I acknowledge that
well-doing is accepted, and yet, as if I had disowned it, he goes on and brings
many texts which prove that saints will be rewarded in the great day, and then
says I think it is plain, that for any to hold that God, without any just cause
arising from what he foresaw in one man more than another, has chosen or
elected a particular number to salvation, and left all the rest to perish in
their sins, is unjust and unequal. p. 5, 6. This is the man who has often
cautioned his readers against the slight of men, and crast of deceivers; but
what shall we call his conduct here? He heaps up texts, that the reader may
think he has proved his point well, and of course that his antagonist is very
erroneous; but what has he proved? Why he has proved that saints will be
rewarded, and who denied it? He knows I did not, yet he will have it that there
was something foreseen in them better than others, which was the cause of their
being chosen and saved: It is in plain terms as much as to say, It is unjust
and unequal for God to give salvation to some sinners, and leave the rest to
perish, unless he saw that some deserved salvation more than others; which
would make election and salvation to be of debt, and not of grace, contrary to
the whole bible.

For this writer to hold, that because God will reward the righteous, that
therefore it would be uncoual for him to choose some sinners to life, without
seeing any good in them more than others, while he left the rest to perish, is
as unreasonable as it would be to argue, that a Nobleman could not justly
bestow a free favor upon any undeserving object, because he must pay his
workmen their due; or to say, because the King must execute justice, that
therefore he has no right to show mercy! And to represent, that holding saving
faith to be not of ourselves, but the gift of God, implies, that he must Judge
and condemn some poor sinful men to eternal destruction for his own neglect, P.
15. is as false as to say, because the King pardons some criminals, therefore
the rest are executed for his neglect! when in truth the latter are executed
for their crimes, while the others are saved by the King's mercy; a just view
whereof will move them to love and obey him all their days; to illustrate which
was the main design of my book, yet our advocate for justice and equity has
picked out a few sentences, without regarding the connection of the discourse,
and exerted all his wit to cloth my doctrine with the blasphemous garb
mentioned above! If such treatment of our Creator and fellow creatures, is the
natural effect of this notion of free will instead of free grace, what cause
have we to abhor, and bear testimony against it!

I had remarked, that Jesus was so far from giving foreseen faith and good
works as the cause of babes receiving gospel grace, instead of the wise and
prudent, that he resolves it into the Father's pleasure alone, for so it seemed
good in thy sight, Matt. xi. 26. Mr. M -- n cites this passage, p. 9. and then
fills up four pages with scriptures and reasonings, to prove that grace is
proclaimed to all, and that those who perish will be justly condemned, and
reckons it strange that I or any man should think, That God did not foresee
that when this grace appeared to all men, some would believe and obey; or if it
be concluded that he did, that he should have no regard thereunto in his
choice. But what a slight of man is here? I asserted the two first of these
points as plainly as he has, and hold them as fully, yet by this method he
insinuates the contrary. I also hold as strongly as he can, that God foresaw
that a number would believe and obey; but the grand point between us is, how
they come to do it? He says, men's living in sin and not turning to the Lord, is
the cause of their destruction, and if men turn they shall live, p. 11. I say
the same with all my heart; but still the question between us is not answered,
which is, how they came to turn? How unfair is it in disputing for the opponent
to deny a proposition, and then run round and prove several other things, which
the respondent holds as much as he does, and then boast of gaining the
argument, without ever touching the point in debate? I had proved that Jesus
resolved the cause of babes receiving the gospel, into the Father's pleasure
alone: My opponent denies it, and then brings many proofs that the wicked's
destruction will be just, and that those who turn shall live, without the least
evidence that any of Adam's race have any free will power to turn themselves,
or that God had any regard to such a power in choosing one rather than another,
which is the very matter in dispute. I dare say, if Mr. M -- n should assert,
that none but believers are the proper subjects of baptism under the gospel,
and one should deny it, and then produce many proofs that children were
circumcised under the law, which he knows as well as they, he would hardly
allow that he was fairly confuted; yet that would be full as fair as his
treatment of me here.

And what shall we say, if to unfairness men border hard upon untruths? He
says, To prove this scheme, Mr. B -- s has brought out of the whole bible one
text, which is Matt. xi. 26. p. 12. as if that one text was all I had produced
to prove that grace is bestowed in a way of entire sovereignty; when in the
very page before, I brought Luke iv. 15 -- 29. where it appears that the
inhabitants of Nazareth attended with admiration to what Jesus preached
concerning grace, as long as they imagined that they had a better claim thereto
than others; but when he let them know, from the instance of favor shown to a
widow among the Sidonians, and to a leper among the Syrians, which was not
shown to any in Israel, that he had a good right to give salvation to the
heathen, and leave them to perish in their sins; -- then those who wondered at
his gracious words before, were filled with wrath, and rose up and THRUST him
out. I say I had quoted this scripture in the foregoing page, with a larger
comment upon it than I have given now, to prove the absolute sovereignty of
grace; yet Mr. M -- n skips over it without any notice, and would have the
reader believe that I could bring but one text to favor my plan in all the
bible.

Sovereignty God claims as his peculiar glory, therefore in answer to the
earnest request of Moses for a sight of his glory, he says, I will be gracious
to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show mercy,
Exodus xxxiii. 19. And the Apostle Paul cites this passage, and then concludes
thus upon it: So then it is NOT OF him that wills, NOR OF him that runs,
but OF GOD that shows mercy, Romans ix. 16. But our late reasoner says, Most
certainly BOTH the good will of God and the free will of man is the cause of
their holiness and happiness, p. 6. I leave it to the reader's consideration,
which of them is to be credited, and proceed to observe, that as this scheme
would rob God of his glory, so,

V. It would cheat men of their souls, by flattering them along in false hopes
till they sink in despair. I know my opponent calls it a dark and discouraging
scheme to hold that God has chosen only a particular number to salvation, and
that without any regard to their faith and obedience, p. 12. But let the matter
be well examined: We both profess that full provision is made in the gospel for
the salvation of sinners, and I believe that God will make his people willing
in the day of his power, to serve him in the beauty of holiness; that all who
are given by the Father to the Son, shall come to him; and that no man can come
except the Father draw him, which drawing is by the teaching and almighty
influence of the Holy Ghost, Psalm. cx. 3. John vi. 37, 44, 45, 63. and xvi. 8.
But Mr. M -- n holds, that though God's good will has made provision for us,
yet that it must be of our free will, of our good will, if we ever come to
partake of it, p. 6, 7. Therefore as long as souls conceit they have or can
work up such a good will, they go on with self-righteous hopes; but when they
find that they have not such a free will power, and cannot work it up, they
must sink in despair, notwithstanding the help this scheme can afford them. He
calls it a bold assertion for me to say, faith is wrought in the soul by the
exceeding greatness of divine power; and says, for this I quote but one text,
viz. Ephesians. i. 19. p. 27. which is not true, for in the same sentence (p. 31 of
my book) I quote another which calls Jesus the author and finisher of faith,
Heb. xii. 2. And though he imagines that the power spoken of in Ephesians. i. 19. is
only what is exerted to assist the believer in doing wonders, and not a Power
which none can hinder, working says in them who have not believed," p. 27, and
presumes to say, "The unbeliever is not made a believer by the mighty power of
God working in him, p. 30. Yet alas! what an awful case should we be in, if
this was all the hope that the gospel gave! The letter kills, but the spirit
gives life. The vail will remain upon our hearts, till the spirit of the Lord
takes it away, and gives us with open face to behold the divine glory, by which
we are changed into the same image, 2d Cor. iii. 6 -- 18. And since Mr. M -- n
denies that the power spoken of in Ephesians. i. 19. which raised Christ from the
dead, is the power that first makes a sinner a believer, I would desire him to
read on to the next chapter, where truth says, When we were dead in sins God
bath quickened us together with Christ: -- By grace are ye saved, through
faith; and that NOT OF yourselves: It is the gift of God; not of works, lest
any man should boast, for we are his workmanship, CREATED in Christ Jesus unto
good works. And if he will dare to say, that creating power, and the power that
quickens the dead, is not the power that none can hinder, I shall not think it
worth while for any man to reason farther with him; but hoping that he will not
resist the light to such a degree, I would request him to review the absurdity
of his notion, that a greater power is displayed to assist the believer than to
convert a sinner; that is, that a greater power is exerted to help Christ's
friends, than to conquer his enemies! read Psalm. xlv. 1 -- 7. compared with
Heb. i. 8, 9.

Thus I have shown, that the notion of persons being elected because of their
foreseen faith and obedience, and that God has made full provision for all, yet
does not exert his power to bring any to embrace it, but leaves that to the
creatures will, excludes all the abundant testimony that truth has given to
man's universal depravity, would frustrate the grace of God, and make Christ to
die in vain; would make the will of the Creator dependent on that of the
creature, and rob God of his essential glory, while it would embolden worms to
glory in his presence, that they were better than others, till they sink in
discouragement and despair, by finding their imaginary excellency and power
fail them. But on the other hand, that to hold forth the free proclamation of
the gospel to the chief of sinners, and that Christ died for the ungodly, and
has given the spirit to convince and change their souls, working in them all
the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power, 2d These.
i. 11. This opens a glorious door of hope to guilty sinners, and gives courage
to the believer to strive according to his working, who works in him
mightily, Col. i. 29.

Mr. M -- n, in order to make out that though faith is the gift of God, yet
that it is of man, says, Our temporal food and raiment are the gifts of God,
are they therefore not of men? Has not God ordained that man should get bread
by the sweat of his face? Genesis iii. 19 -- 23. And when he fed his people Israel
with bread from heaven, and quails in the wilderness, they had it together, and
dressed, and did not eat thereof without their labor; so then faith being the
gift of God, does not hinder its being the work and labor of men, p. 14. Upon
which I would remark,

1. That here is no distinction made betwixt natural and spiritual actions,
between which there is as great a difference as there is between soul and body.
We all grant that men have a natural power to do rational actions, but the
question is, whether any have ability to perform any spiritual or holy action,
before they are regenerated by the holy spirit or not? -- 2. It is the divine
appointment that our temporal food and raiment should be raised out of the
earth by our labor, but to hold salvation upon such a footing, would make it
of works and not of grace, contrary to the whole gospel. -- 3. We allow that
the manna that was rained round the Israelites tents, was a type of the
heavenly food which is brought near to our souls in the gospel, and as they
were to receive and eat of it freely, so the gospel calls us to a feast where
all things are now ready; but how ridiculous would a messenger appear, that
should come and call the poor and needy to a free entertainment, upon condition
they will first work hard for it! None expect that persons will enjoy the
benefit of food, though ever so choice and free, if they do not receive it; but
who ever thought that eating food was working for it, or performing a condition
to obtain it? However, as coming and eating imply local motion and bodily
exercise, we are in danger of having our minds somewhat darkened by this
similitude, if we do not correct it by others; therefore our Lord, in his
discourse to Nicodemus, compares believing to Israel's looking to the brazen
serpent, which was not a local motion nor long exercise; but as quick as sight;
neither had they any thing to recommend them, for they were poisoned in a
deadly manner, and that as the fruit of their sin; but they were called to look
off from themselves to the remedy which God had freely provided, and as many as
did so received immediate healing. So do all those who behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the world. The very notion of faith carries us off
from ourselves, for it is admitting the testimony of another, and not any work
of ours; our character has no concern in the affair, as whether we are poor or
rich, worthy or unworthy, for it depends entirely upon the evidence that we
have of the credibility of the speaker: And though we often strive against, or
try to avoid the light, because our deeds are evil, yet when our souls are
brought to receive divine truth, it is no more of our work than it is to see
and enjoy the light when the sun shines, Psalm. lxxxiv. 11. John iii. 14 -- 20.
-- 4. The light directs our way, and we are influenced by the objects which we
view, to avoid what appears odious or dangerous, and to pursue what we think is
agreeable with all our might. So by faith the soul flies to Christ to supply
all its wants, and cleaves to him in the way of holiness, and is moved to watch
against all iniquity, and to crucify the flesh, with its affections and lusts:
This was the whole tenor of my book, which therefore I entitled, True Faith
will produce good Works; but this title Mr. M -- n denies, and attempts to
prove the contrary, though before he proceeds to any proof, he again brings up
his frightful imagination, if possible to prepossess the reader's mind. But
hoping that the reader will not be guilty of the folly of judging a matter
before he hears it, I would desire him to take notice what it is that is now to
be proved. It is, that " True faith does sometimes fail of producing good
works," p. 25. True faith, which I described to be A receiving with all the
heart the witness and testimony that God has given us. Faith, by which the
soul views The precept to be true and excellent, therefore to be obeyed; the
promise to be sure and sufficient, therefore he shall be supported, and
presents eternal things as near and real, therefore to be regarded without
delay, p. 33, 35. of my book. This is the constant idea that I gave of true
faith; yet the first text that my opponent brings to prove that it sometimes
fails of producing good works, is John xii. 42, 43. which inform us of some
rulers who believed on Jesus, but did not confess him, because they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God. His second is John viii. 30 -- 32.
where we find some Jews who had a sort of belief on Jesus, but he signified to
them that a continuance in his word would discover whether they were his
disciples indeed or not; and that discovery was soon made, for his only telling
of them that they should know the truth, and the truth should make them free,
raised their resentment. Now if men can believe the gospel with all their
hearts, and yet love the praise of men more than the praise of God, if they can
be true believers, and yet not know the truth, nor be made free by it, then he
has proved his point; if not, he has done nothing toward it.

To introduce his next proof he tells us, that love is a labor, and we may be
sure that it is a work which God will not forget, Heb. vi. 10. and then turns
us to 1st Cor. xiii. 2. in order to prove that true faith may be without love,
p. 26. But it is pity the man had not read on to the next verse, which contains
as much of a proof that giving all our goods to feed the poor may be without
love, as the other does that a faith of miracles may be without it; and both
prove that all external works or gifts will not avail us, without they are done
from right principles; but how does that prove that true faith will not produce
love and good works? In the last verse of that chapter the Apostle sets faith
before charity, and in Gal. v. 6. he says, Faith works by love, and I wonder
how Mr. M -- n thinks any can love and serve God here but only by faith, since
those objects are invisible to sense. Peter shows, that the way in which saints
love and rejoice in an unseen Christ, is by believing, 1st Pet. i. 8. and Paul
shows faith unfeigned, as well as charity, to be so essential to true
obedience, that all teaching that swerves therefrom he calls vain jangling, 1st
Tim. i. 5 -- 7. and I leave others to judge, who are now guilty of such
ignorant jangling.

To finish his proofs, our author turns us to the many nominal believers in our
land, whose faith does not produce good works; to which he might have seen an
answer in my 57th page, where I observed, that the Apostle James compares such
a faith to a dead body; but who would reject all bodies, because there are some
dead stinking ones? We read of the spirit of faith, and of living by faith; and
those pretenders to faith and grace who do not live so, Jude calls them filthy
dreamers; but who will argue that our waking views do not govern our conduct,
because dreams do not commonly bring men off from their sluggish beds! Paul
says to some bad professors among the Christians, Awake to righteousness and
sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame! It
is a shame to any church to suffer such members among them, 1st Cor. xv. 34.
Again, to the saints at Rome he says, It is high time to awake out of sleep;
and whenever they are awaked to the exercise of true faith, it will as
certainly produce good works in every soul, as it moved Abraham to give up his
darling at the divine command, or Moses to count reproaches for Christ, greater
riches than all the treasures in Egypt, and enabled him to endure, as seeing
him that is invisible.

Before Mr. M -- n began his remarks upon my piece, he entered a caution
against being deceived by the power or tradition, p. 4. but he is not the first
man who has been ensnared in the very thing he cautioned others against.
Tradition has taught him to hold the six principles in Heb. vi. 1. as a summary
of Christian doctrine and practice, instead of viewing them as so many articles
of the Jewish creed; and this has not a little influence in leading him into
mistakes about faith; for though he allows that faith sometimes comprehends the
whole counsel of God, yet he says, Faith sometimes comprehends only one of the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, as in Heb. vi. 1. And after saying much
upon it, he declares, that God has not promised eternal life upon that single
grace of faith, as it is the belief of the truth, and one of the principles of
the doctrine of Christ, p. 18, 19. as if faith was but the sixth part of
religion; which is so far from truth, that the sacred writer goes on, in the
eleventh chapter of this same epistle, to show that all the good which was ever
done by ancient saints, was done by faith. One of those principles, viz. laying
on of hands, has caused a great deal of controversy, both formerly and
latterly; and we are informed by one who was no enemy to the practice, that it
came among the Baptists from the Established church, who use it under the name
of confirmation Mr. Crosby's History of the English Baptists, vol. IV. page 291.
I do not mention this, as though I thought their holding it as a tradition, or
the Romanists holding it as one of the seven sacraments, was a sufficient
evidence against the practice, but only to put each one upon examination,
whether they stand upon any thing better than tradition or not; neither shall I
meddle here with that controversy, farther than it concerns this text, for many
things may be contained elsewhere, which are not in such a particular text;
though since such great mistakes concerning faith and salvation are drawn from
this, I think it is a loud call to examine, whether we have not mistaken its
true meaning. The general rule given us to go by, is to compare spiritual
things with spiritual. Now an evident design of the epistle to the Hebrews, was
to explain to them the types of the ceremonial law, and show their perfect
fulfillment in Jesus Christ; but the sacred writer complains in the fifth
chapter, that they were dull of hearing, and were like babes that had need of
one to teach them again, which were the first principles of the oracles of God;
and having observed that those who are of full age, have their senses exercised
to discern both good and evil, he begins the sixth chapter with calling them to
leave the principles of the doctrine of Christ, and go on to perfection. Dr.
Gill on the place says, the word translated first principles, is the same word
that in Gal. iv. 3, 9. is rendered elements, by which it is very evident that
the ceremonies of the law are intended; and both there and here, Christians are
reproved for their childish fondness for them.

Letters are the elements, or first principles of learning, which we teach
children; but we expect them afterward to leave their spelling, and go on to a
more perfect manner of reading: So the first principles of the doctrine of
Christ were taught by the letters of that law, which are all now clearly to be
read in him who is the glorious WORD. Under the law they were to spell out the
doctrine of repentance from dead works, by slain beasts, and confessing their
sins over them; of faith toward God, as the God of Israel, in covenant with
them; of cleansing from pollution, by the diverse baptisms or bathings, which
were commanded; of the laying our sins upon Jesus, by the laying on of hands on
the sacrifice, which was enjoined not less than a dozen times in Leveticus; the
resurrection from the dead was shadowed out by the two goats for a
sin-offering, one of which was to die, and the other be let go alive; some
intimations also were then given of eternal judgment, but since the
new testament has taught us repentance, by looking on him whom we have pierced,
to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ for salvation, who saves by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; has taught us that our sins were
laid on Christ, who bore them in his own body on the tree, died for our
offenses, and rose again for our justification, and will come again to judge
the world in righteousness. Since these things are clearly opened in the
gospel, shall we still be fond of the elements of the law? No, let us leave
them, and go on to perfection; with which compare chap. ix. 9 -- 12. which show
that the service of the tabernacle was a figure for the time then present, in
which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did
the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, which stood only in meats
and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until
the time of reformation; but Christ being come an high priest of good things to
come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, etc. the words perfect and
perfection appear constantly to be used in this epistle, to distinguish the
substantial blessings of the gospel from the shadows of the law, as in chap.
vii. 11, 19. and x. 1, 14. I find also, that the word in chap. ix. 10. which is
rendered washings, is baptisms See Dr. Gill, and other expositors on the place.
Mr. Purver, in his late translation of the bible, translates the word baptisms
here as he does in the sixth chapter.
, in the plural number, as it is here in the sixth chapter; but the singular,
baptism, is used about twenty times for an ordinance of the gospel, and never
once in the plural, as I can find, in all the new testament; which is a further
evidence, that these six principles are not a summary of the gospel, but of the
ceremonies of the law: And if it is not so, how can we account for it, that
repentance and faith should be named, and not hope and love? Or that baptism
should be expressed, and not a word of the Lord's supper, which is equally an
ordinance of the gospel?

If then repentance and faith are held in the language of Moses, rather than
Paul, no wonder if the vail remains upon such hearts, so that they cannot with
open face behold the glories of divine grace in Jesus Christ; and is not this
the cause of our author's saying, Shall we live by faith without works, or
shall we build our hope upon faith and obedience, and not on faith only? p. 20.
Answer, he that builds his hope either upon faith or obedience, or upon both
together, considered as our acts, builds upon the sand; for other foundation
can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus; and if we are enabled
to build upon him, still the whole weight of all that is built must rest upon
that eternal rock. Mr. M -- n proceeds to cite a large number of scriptures,
which prove that all men will finally partake of the fruit of their doings, and
then says, I have been the more particular upon this great duty of good works,
because there are many in these latter days, that seem to have little or no
dependence upon good works in order to salvation. It is true, they will allow
that good works are necessary to adorn a disciple, but not to make a disciple
of Christ, though our Lord says, so shall ye be my disciples, that is in
bearing much fruit, p. 23. This is too plain to require much answer, though if
the old gentleman should live till next fall, I should be glad if he would go
into a good orchard, and examine carefully among all the trees, adorned with
good fruit, whether he can find any fruit that made the tree good which it
grows upon, or whether the tree does not evidence by this fruit, that it was a
good tree before? And also to consider well, whether the way to promote its
future fruitfulness would be to turn up its roots, that it might now stand upon
its lovely fruit! If he will then be pleased to read the following texts, I
suppose he will have a sufficient answer: Matt. xii. 33. Romans xi. 18.

However, since he holds that good works make disciples, and represents that we
hold otherwise, because we would obtain eternal life in a way Easier than to
cut off the right hand, or pluck out the right eye, or to deny self, and take
up our cross, and follow Christ in the strait and narrow way, p. 21. I shall
bring things a little nearer home; for if I am not much mistaken, this very man
holds the external acts of baptism, and laying on of hands, which are done but
once in a person's life, to be so essential to make disciples, that he will
have no sort of religious fellowship with any without them, while those who
have them are freely received to his communion, though they have no visible
worship daily in their families, nor weekly regard to the Lord's day, only in
time of worship; notwithstanding the same sacred writer who calls us to leave
Jewish principles concerning Christ, tells us that there remains a rest (or
sabbath, as the margin has it) to the people of God, chap. iv. 9. Now observe,
1. his naming the seventh day, and then speaking of another day which
remains, and giving a like reason to enforce the latter, as was given to
enforce the former, plainly implies that a particular day of the week is
referred to in both; for in verse 4 he recites the reason by which the seventh
day was enforced, and then to enforce this rest that remains, says in ver.
10. For HE that is entered into his rest, HE also has ceased from his own
works, As GOD did from his. And as it is certain that the Son rested from the
work of redemption on the first day, as the Father did from the work of
creation on the seventh, who will dare to say that He, He also, that rested AS
GOD did, can mean any other than the Son, whom all men are required to honor,
even AS they honor the Father? John v. 23.

2. It is readily granted, that the Apostle's aim is to engage souls to hear
and believe the gospel, whereby they enter into spiritual rest here, and
eternal rest hereafter, which as much exceeds the rest which Jesus, i. e.
Joshua, gave Israel in Canaan, as heaven exceeds earth; the gospel which first
gives rest to heavy laden souls, in order that they might take Christ's yoke,
and work for him Matt. xi. 28.
; while the law enjoined six days work before their rest on the seventh, and
the long fatigues of the wilderness, before their rest in Canaan: But how can
the gospel be heard without a preacher Romans x. 14.
, and without a time to meet for that purpose? Hence after our apostle had
shown, that the worship instituted by Christ was as much superior to that
appointed by Moses, as the Son is superior to a servant, and that Christ's
house is his church, he immediately began his comment upon David's words, which
reach down to the place we are now upon; the tenor of all which is, to show the
importance of hearing and regarding the voice of Christ in his gospel, and
which is preached in his church, in this language, Today, if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. And though this should be the preacher's
language in season and out of season 2d Tim. iv. 2.
, yet that is so far from disproving the appointment of a stated season for
worship under the gospel, that it strongly implies such an appointment. For as
our apostle began this subject, with observing the superiority of the worship
appointed in the Christian church, to that of the Jews; so he calls us in v. 14
to hold fast our profession; not only our faith, but also our profession of it;
which call is renewed in chap. x. 23 -- 25, with a further explanation of how
it is to be done, namely, by considering one another, to provoke unto love and
good works; not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner
of some is; but exhorting one another, etc. Neither meetings, days, nor
ordinances, can be observed aright without faith; and if we are true believers,
we are come to the General Assembly, and church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, chap. xii. 22, 23. And in the same chapter we are commanded
to make strait paths for our feet; but what crooked work do men make, if they
take internals to exclude externals, or externals to exclude internals, or put
one for the other, to suit their own turn? And may we not as justly say,
because we are come by faith to the general assembly of the church, that
therefore we have no warrant for external church assemblies, as to argue,
because we which have believed do enter into rest, that therefore no particular
day now remains for Christians to rest in from all worldly affairs,
notwithstanding the text expressly speaks of another day which remains to the
people of God, distinct from the seventh, enforced with a like reason as that
was?

Again, though some make much use of Paul's caution against letting any man
judge us in respect of an holy day, new mood, sabbath days, or ordinances; yet
how plain is it, that he is there speaking of the handwriting of ordinances,
which Christ took out of the way, nailing it to his cross, and so could not be
retained in Christian worship, only by the traditions and commandments of men?
Col. ii. 14 -- 22. But how crooked is it, to take what was spoken against
Jewish ceremonies, to exclude gospel ordinances, or the observation of the
Lord's day? In the same chapter the apostle says, Though I be absent in the
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order; and
another apostle says, Ye need not that any man teech you, but as the some
anointing teaches you of all things; what warrant then have men or women to
meet externally, to teach others, or hear others teach them? Let this be fairly
answered, and we do not fear having as good an answer in the case before us.

Jewish ordinances were types of things to come, but Christian ordinances are
memorials of what is already done, and to stir us up to a right behavior
toward God, and toward each other; therefore let us never take what was
written against the ceremonies of the law, to exclude any appointment of the
gospel: And since the Son of God rested from the work of purchasing our
redemption, on the first day of the week, and we have the example of his
disciples meeting on that day, for worship, and to break bread, John xx. 19,
26. Acts xx. 7. Since the saints liberality, which is an odor of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God, was commanded to be
offered on that day, Phil. iv. 18. 1st Cor. xvi. 2. and as a table and supper,
set apart from a common to a sacred use, is called the Lord's table, and the
Lord's supper, so we have a day called the Lord's day, Rev. i. 10. therefore
let us all regard the day to him.

Again our apostle says, We have an altar (by which he evidently means Christ)
by him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God CONTINUALLY, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb. xiii. 10, 15. and as
this was written to the Hebrews, who can doubt of his having reserence here to
their morning and evening sacrifice, which they were commanded to offer upon
the altar, day by day continually -- a continual burnt offering thoughout their
generations, Exodus xxix. 38, 42 which is afterward called the continual burnt
offering, not less than ten times in two chapters Levit. xxviii. and xxix. See
more of this in my sermon on Family Prayer.
? And take notice, this spiritual sacrifice is required to be offered
continually with our lips; and what can that mean less than vocal addresses to
the throne of grace, as often as their morning and evening offerings were?
especially when we remember that our Lord has taught his disciples to pray
after this manner, Our Father, -- give us this day our daily bread; not this
week, this month, or this year, but this day; how plainly does it imply our
duty to come, not only personally in secret, but also unitedly in our families,
to our Father, every day? We are also commanded to pray always with all prayer,
Ephesians. vi. 18. and surely, all prayer includes family prayer as well as other.

Having given a little sketch of the scripture authority for these duties, I
can freely leave it with every conscience to judge, whether it looks more like
denying self, and taking up our cross daily, to rise from our beds in the
morning, and return to them again at night; to go to, and return from, our
food, with no more visible acknowledgent of our great preserver and benefactor
than the ox that eats grass; than it does to realize how dependent we are
upon him continually, so as to have our prayer daily come up before him as
incense, and the lifting up of our hands as the evening sacrifice, and whenever
we eat, to give God thanks, Romans xiv. 6. And whether it looks more like
plucking out a right eye, or cutting off a right hand, to make God's house so
much a house of merchandise, as to carry our worldly schemes even into the
intermission of worship on the Lord's day, and not wait till the day is over,
before we begin to sell corn, and set forth wheat, than it does to regard the
whole day as holy to the Lord, and honorable, and honor him, not doing our
own ways, nor finding our own pleasure, nor speaking our own words. And though
many are hypocritical while they pretend to these duties, yet may it not well
appear surprising, to see any professed Christians make that an excuse for
their own neglect, which is the same excuse that infidels make for their
neglect of all religion! as if others wrongs would excuse us from doing right!

How far tradition may have ensnared and blinded good men, with respect to
these things, I do not pretend to say: I have experienced enough in other
traditions, to teach me the importance of treating all men with candor and
charity, and yet to abhor the lukewarmness which many would cover under those
lovely names, whereby religion is treated as if it was only a piece of state
policy, that might be turned into any shape, as occasion or interest suited.
Charity is love to God and man, which moves the soul to reverence our Creator,
and to regard our fellow creatures in their several stations and relations; and
all dispositions and actions contrary thereto are sin, let men call them what
they will. Charity rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, and
therefore moves those who are under its influence to exert themselves in their
several stations, to promote the cause of truth in the world. And since the
custom of casting off fear, and restraining prayer before God, greatly prevails
in our nation and land, and also of profaning the Lord's day with carnal
schemes, ease or diversions; and many strengthen themselves therein, by the
loose principles and conduct of some teachers and professors, surely it is high
time for us all to awake, and bear a more bold testimony against such ways than
has yet been done. What! shall we, under a pretense of owning every day to be
the Lord's, rob him of a great part, or the whole, of the one day that is
consecrated for his worship! What! under a pretense of spiritual worship, shall
we indulge our carnal ease and inclinations, till some awakening providence, or
powerful influence, pulls us from our sluggish beds! Shall a pretense of
heart-worship any more be brought to excuse the neglect of confessing with our
mouths, and daily offering to God the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his
name! The apostle James's language to the pretenders to faith and invisible
religion in his day was, Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show
thee my faith by my works. So now, show to thy family, if thou can, that thou
do believe all good things come from God, while they rarely, if ever, hear
thee worship him, or give him thanks therefore! Show to any man, if you can,
that you believe every day to be the Lord's, while you don't keep one day to
him, without filling a great part of it with your own ways, and your own
pleasures!

The great point which brought ruin upon the Jews, was their refusing to render
to God the fruits of his vineyard in their seasons; but instead of it, abusing
his servants, and then killing his Son, with this aim, -- The inberitance shall
be ours, Matt. xxi. 33 -- 41. Mark xii. 1 -- 9. And alas! how much of the same
disposition is working at this day, to try to get time, and all its advantages,
to be ours! Surely their desolate land, which enjoys her sabbaths, Levit. xxvi.
34, 43. calls like thunder to us, to beware of such ways, lest, as we have
greater light, we bring on ourselves, and our land, a greater vengeance than
they did. Indeed it is common for persons now to exclaim against the old
Pharisees, for their hypocrisy, selfishness and cruelty (just as they did
against others, Matt. xxiii. 29 -- 31) while they discover sad tokens of their
going in the same way, be seeking life, not by faith, but as it were by the
deeds of the law; which deeds yet are only some lesser matters, while justice,
mercy and faithfulness, are neglected.

How far our author, or any of his admirers, are guilty in any of these
respects, I don't pretend to determine, but leave that to God and their own
consciences; and am far from thinking myself better by nature that they: Yet
who can hear men tell of building their hope upon their faith and obedience;"
of " Dependence upon good works in order to salvation, and that our good works
not only adorn, but also Make disciples of Christ, and not warn them of their
danger! This is so far from the good old way to heaven, that Job, who was a
perfect and upright walker, yet upon a near view of the divine Being, cried
out, Behold I am vile! and again, I abhor myself! so far was he from trusting
to himself or his doings, Job i. 1. xl. 4. and xlii. 6. The man after God's own
heart was so far from building his hope upon his faith, or his works, that he
says, Thou art my hope, O Lord; thou art my trust from my youth; and when he
was old and grey-headed, his language was, I will go in the strength of the
Lord God; I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine ONLY, Psalm.
lxxi. 5, 16. A near view of a holy God, caused that eminent saint, the prophet
Isaiah, to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips! and nothing could relieve him but a living application from, God's altar,
by which his iniquity was taken away, and his sin purged; which moved him to
ready obedience, saying, Here am I, send me. He would not go of his own head,
but was ready to obey the divine call, Isa. vi. 5 -- 8. So now, we must all
have our conscience purged from dead works, by Christ's blood, in order to
serve the living God, Heb. ix. 14. The character of gospel believers is, they
worship God in the spirit, rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have NO confidence in
the flesh; that is, in their own doings: And they are warned to beware of all
that teach otherwise, as creatures that are both odious and dangerous, Phil.
iii. 2, 3.

PART II. Wherein is opened the Consistency and Duty of holding forth Divine
Sovereignty, and Man's Impotency, while yet we address their Consciences with
the Warnings of Truth, and Calls of the Gospel.
AFTER I had written the principal part of that discourse upon faith, which I
have now been vindicating, Mr. Sandeman's letters were put into my hands, with
a request that I would carefully examine them, and remark on what I discovered
to be amiss; in doing of which, some things appeared to me to be of so
dangerous a nature, that I thought it a duty to expose them publicly; and
accordingly inserted a few remarks in my introduction, referring to the body of
the discourse for a positive opening of my views of the right way. But a number
of people, not observing that in a note, page 25, I had thus referred them
forward, and supposing that the grand design of my writing was against him,
have accused me of the same crime I charge upon him, viz. of only picking out
what was wrong in writers, and passing over what was right. Whereas my first
and main design had no concern with him, and as he owns that he has adopted the
good sentiments of others, Without quoting them, or mentioning their names, how
could I do justice in reciting them as his, when I knew not whose they were?
Therefore I cited one excellent passage, and then endeavored to point out some
of the most dangerous snares that I discovered in his writings, referring to
the following discourse to explain my views of the truth. Nevertheless I freely
acknowledge, that my love of brevity left some things in too much obscurity,
especially upon the distinction between doctrinal and experimental knowledge.
My idea of the difference is, that a person may truly be slain by the law, and
made alive by the gospel, and yet not know, perhaps not have a thought, that
what he has experienced is the change called conversion; but doctrinal teaching
may be a means of opening clearly to him, that it is the very change described
in scripture by that name. Christ's disciples had experienced the way of access
to the Father, yet they denied that they knew it, when he mentioned it under
that name, John xiv. 4, 5. On the other hand, men may learn to talk orthodoxly
or critically concerning these things, while they do not truly know them. This
is the distinction I meant, and the occasion of mentioning it was, his
representing that a man could not have Known and preached, trusted, and loved
the Lord Jesus Christ for many years, if now his mind was relieved and his
views more cleared by his writings; and I still think that representation to be
false; But I used one expression that I now utterly retract, viz. right notions
in the head, without knowing the truth in the heart; for I believe right ideas
will always produce right effects upon our hearts and lives, and that all men's
notions about truth, which do not produce such effects, are not right notions;
but a holding the truth in unrighteousness, and changing truth into a lie; and
those who receive not the love of the truth will be damned, because they
believe not the truth; but believe a lie, Romans i. 18, 25. 2d These. ii. 10 --
12. and one well observes, that perhaps the lie they believed was, That if they
did penance, and performed a number of good duties, they should by that means
procure an interest in the justifying righteousness of Christ. And how much has
this strong delusion spread through the world! Indeed the modes of doing are
very different, some placing it more in external forms, others in internal
exercises; and though they seem to differ greatly, yet how many agree in doing
for life, instead of receiving all by faith, that they may live unto God!
Probably some will say, these are Mr. S -- u's sentiments: I know he suggests
many such things in his writings, and I would never oppose truth there any more
than elsewhere; but I have seen as good wheat laid to bait a net, as that which
is laid up in the garner; and an apprehension of a snare for souls, baited with
choice truths and keen turns of wit, was the only occasion of my writing
against him; which snare appears in such terms as these Assurance of hope is
enjoyed only by those who give all diligence to obtain it, in the self-denied
works of obedience; and he says, No man can be charged with the sin of
disbelieving the gospel, for doubting if he be a good Christian; his chief
hazard lies on the other side; yet in answer to his friend's request of a
clearer explanation of this point, he says, We must not consider the person
advancing to the assurance of hope, as engaged in a certain round of duties, so
as his comfort should arise from a consciousness of his performing, or
designing to perform, them from right motives, let them be called motives
arising from the faith, or by any other name: Thus the Christian profession
would become a Pharisaical scheme Epistolary Correspondence, Glasgow edition,
page 86.
This is so far from truth, that if we could speak with the tongues of men and
angels, if we could understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and perform the
self-denied works of giving all our goods to feed the poor, and our bodies to
the flames, yet unless these were performed from a good principle, and right
motives, we should still be nothing, and all our doings profit us nothing, 1st
Cor. xiii. 1 -- 3. And though he asserts, that A person by being brought to the
knowledge of the truth, is not thereby led to think himself possessed of some
good principle, by which he stands more nearly related to God than he was, or
than other men; his comfort does not lie in thinking on any thing about
himself, or any change he has undergone; but he is comforted in thinking on
what is without him, on what is absent from him, even on what is in heaven
Ibid. page 82, 83.
Yet Paul shows that the good principle of charity out of a pure heart, good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, is so essential to obedience, that he who
swerves therefrom understands neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms; and
that the saint is comforted in his near relation to God, by having the spirit
of adoption sent into his heart; and also by beholding the divine glories,
whereby he is changed into the same image; and he calls professors to examine
themselves, for they ought to know that Christ is IN them, except they are
reprobates, 1st Tim. i. 5 -- 7. Romans viii. 15. 2d Cor. iii. 18. and xiii. 5.
This is so far from a Pharisaical scheme, that the very nature of the Pharisees
scheme was, to make a great pretense of self-denial and outward obedience,
without any regard to an inward change, or acting from right motives.

And though the plan now before us talks much of the cross and self-denial, yet
it is so much more flesh-pleasing than the carnal ordinances of the law, that
the law appointed but three ^^^sts in a year for all that the church to meet
at; but this plan appoints fifty-two, and Cannot allow any member to be absent
from the feast, either through indifference, or mere inconvenience: And it
tacitly brands all with the name of Pharisees, who are against encouraging all
diversions public or private, which are not connected with circumstances really
sinful: Which by the way would brand Solomon with that odious epithet, who
after a thorough experience of such diversions says, It is better to go to the
house of mourning than to the house of feasting; for the heart of the wise is
in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth: And
it would condemn Paul, who was in fasting often, and says, Let your moderation
be known to all men; and let us, who are of the day, be sober, Eccl. vii. 2 --
4. 2d Cor. xi. 27. Phil. iv. 5. 1st These. v. 8. Again Mr. S -- n represents,
that our writers in general upon the steps of the spirit's work in conviction
and conversion, are Much more hurtful to mankind, than writers of romances; and
that the pulpit at present does more hurt than the stage; and spends eighteen
pages artfully to represent, that the Deity makes little account of our
thoughts through all the busy scenes of life;" but will likely receive
Condemned felons, at the end of it; into his kingdom Letters on Thereon, etc.
vol. II. page 40, etc. also page 61.103.
These are the dangerous snares laid for souls, that occasioned my writing
against him, and not from any delight in controversy with him or others; nor
from any apprehension that his form of a church could greatly prevail, which
casts out every member that does not concur with the church (...) ^^ery
circumstance; for as an excellent author observes, It is hardly conceivable,
that a great number of men should exactly agree upon a great number of
different points, without any variation, unless they contrive to agree together
for the sake of carrying on some particular scheme Thoughts on Education, by
the author of Britain's Remembrancer, page 16.


How far his scheme has had an influence on many to neglect all
church fellowship, because they cannot find a perfect church in this
wilderness; and how far it has emboldened sinners to treat all awakening
preaching and writings with scorn and neglect, rather following stage plays,
romances, or other devices of their own hearts, with hopes still of being
received into the kingdom of heaven at last; and if conscience galls them, to
try to ease it with some critical speculations, or outward forms, stifling
convictions of their hypocrisy, with the conceit that doubting is a good sign,
and that to be concerned to know whether we have experienced a saving change,
so as to act from good principles, is Pharisaical! I say, how far his scheme
has influenced these things, I leave with the Judge before whom we must all
soon appear; but as legalists and libertines both charge those with
inconsistency, who hold forth the doctrine of man's impotency and divine
sovereignty, and yet earnestly address their consciences with the warnings of
truth, and calls of the gospel; and as false imaginations concerning this
matter are the strongest hold that Satan has left, to keep his g^o^ in peace, I
shall a little further offer my mite toward pulling it down: In order to
which, it is needful to take a brief survey of the nature both of the law and
gospel.

As to the law, our Lord has given us a summary of it, in as clear terms as can
be used: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as
thyself. -- This do and thou shall live, Luke x. 27, 28. Love is the temper of
happiness, and without it there can be none, and the nobler its object the
greater the happiness, and the easier to obey the precept; how holy, just, and
good, then is this law, which requires our highest love to the supreme fountain
of being and excellency, and our subordinate love to all other beings,
according to their relation and connection to him and to us? This law then
constituted an union of heart between the whole system of rational beings,
which influenced to all right behavior toward each other, according to their
several stations and relations; and the fruit of such behavior is, This do and
thou shall live. Hence learn,

I. That the nature of this law is immutable and perpetual, and it is as vain
for any one soul to think of ever being exempted for one moment from obligation
to love God with all the heart, and our neighbor as ourselves, as to think of
dethroning him, or annihilating our own souls; for as long as we remain his
creatures, it is impossible but that we must remain under obligation to love and
obey him.

II. Here we may learn the true nature of sin; it is the transgression of this
law; it is a revolt from the Creator, and setting up the creature in his stead,
Romans 1.25. Hence we are told, that of the three Hebrew words ordinarily used
for it, transgression signifies rebellion; iniquity, crookedness, perverseness;
and sin, a missing the mark Dr. Gill's Exposition on Psalm. li. 1, 2.
And surely the source of all our woes was a rebellion against our rightful
king and lawgiver, and turning aside to our own crooked, perverse ways, whereby
we miss the mark both of our duty and happiness; and the immediate consequence
was loss of union and communion with God, which is spiritual death; innumerable
evils in this world, that at length dissolve the union between soul and body,
which is natural death; and finally will be the casting of soul and body into
the burning lake, which is eternal death; all which are the just wages of sin.
And mark it, death is to be always viewed according to its nature; the death of
a rational soul is as different from that of the body, as spirit is from clay;
the body without union with the soul can do nothing at all; the soul without
union with God can do nothing right; but a soul dead in sin still walks, and is
sometimes more active than a saint, and for this plain reason, the sinner's
powers are all bent one way, while the saint has in him, as it were, the
company of two armies, so that the children of this world are in their
generation wiser than the children of light, Luke xvi. 8. Ephesians. ii. 1, 2. Hence
all attempts to represent addresses to sinners consciences, to be like
addresses to senseless carcases, are attempts to darken counsel, and belong to
the kingdom of darkness.

III. How vain are men's hopes of getting life by their own doings, in any shape
whatever? Christ says, THIS DO and thou shall live; it is not wouldings,
promises or endeavors, that will avail without doing, doing this; this
perfect, this universal, this immutable law of love; love to God and man, love
with all our soul and mind, as well as strength. Therefore the law is
spiritual, but we are carnal; all inclinations as well as actions that are
contrary, or that do not come up to this law of love, are sin; hence our Lord,
upon occasion of a lovely youth who had shown an outward regard to the law all
his days, and yet had such a love to this world, that he would not part with it
for Christ, declared to his disciples, that it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for such a man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but they being astonished, he adds, with man it is impossible, but not
with God, Mark x. 17 -- 27. Two things make it impossible with man, one is, he
cannot make up his past breach of the law, and the other is, he cannot now turn
his heart from earth to heaven, though God can do both; which brings us,

IV. To the nature and design of the gospel. Man was become a rebel against the
eternal King, by breaking the best of all laws, by which he had forfeited life,
and was neither able to satisfy for his crime, nor to change his heart;
therefore the King's Son engaged to do the one, and the holy spirit to effect
the other; not by abating the law, as some vainly dream; no, Jesus warns us
against such a thought, and declares, that Till heaven and earth pass, one JOT
or one TITTLE shall in no wise pass from the law, till ALL be fulfilled, Matt.
v. 18. He fulfilled it by taking the rebels place, and obeying and suffering
for our sins, The just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; that God might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus; might justify the ungodly, Romans iii.
26. and iv. 5. 2d Cor. v. 18 -- 20. 1st Pet. iii. 18. In consequence of which,
the gospel Proclaims liberty to prisoners and captives, Isa. lxi. 1. Luke iv.
18. Surely not an exemption from the King's authority and government! No; but
liberty from the just sentence of death, from Satan's tyranny, and from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; liberty to
serve him in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter, Romans vii.
6. The oldness of the letter was, The man that does them shall live in them;
this do and thou shall live; but cursed is every one that continues not to do
all. The newness of the spirit is, Christ delivers from the curse, and gives
the blessing; gives the covenant blessing of the spirit to write the law in our
hearts, with this tenor, I will, and they shall, Gal. iii. 10 -- 14. Heb. viii.
10. The oldness of the letter promised life upon doing, but gave no strength to
do; the newness of the spirit says, As thy days, so shall thy strength be; my
grace is sufficient for thee; I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: It
calls us to come boldly to the throne of grace for all the help we need. The
oldness of the letter gives no encouragement to come only upon our own doings,
and sets a flaming sword in the way of the guilty; but the newness of the
spirit directs us to take all our encouragement to come, from the merits,
intercession and promise of our great High Priest, who has engaged justice and
faithfulness to forgive the guilty, and to cleanse the filthy, Heb. iv. 14 --
16. 1st John, i. 9. As the strength of sin is the law, the letter arms the
accuser against the soul that daily breaks it; but the spirit enables the
believer to overcome him, by the blood of the Lamb, and by such a view of
heavenly glories, as to carry their love even above life itself, Rev. xii. 11.
In a word, the letter kills, but the spirit gives life, 2d Cor. iii. 6.

Yet notwithstanding this distinction is written so plain that he may run that
reads it, many still dwell upon the oldness of the letter, and reckon it
Strange and unaccountable, that any should assert that there is nothing to be
done by sinners in order to their salvation, beside believing Dr. Mayhew's
sermons on striving to enter the strait gate, page 31, 32.
! as if they had never read Romans iii. 28, and iv. 5.

I suppose this author has stated this point as fairly as any have done on that
side of the question. He says, The question is, whether unregenerate sinners,
under the dispensation of the gospel, have any day of grace and salvation
afforded to them, in such a sense, that they shall certainly obtain eternal
life, provided they heartily desire it, and strive to that end? And he asserts,
that There is a certain connection between sinners striving to obtain the
salvation which God has revealed, and their actually obtaining it Ibid. page 46.
.

But what is the salvation which God has revealed? It is from enemies to be
reconciled and saved by his Son, Romans v. 10. And what is there to be done by
sinners, in order to this salvation? Their rebellion is atoned for by the
King's Son, and he beseeches and prays them to be reconciled; how then can the
sinner heartily desire this salvation, and yet have something to do, before he
obtains it? 2d Cor. v. 20. And what do men mean by a day of grace, if it is the
day in which the King proclaims the gospel way of reconciliation, and sends his
servants to preach to sinners, and his spirit to strive with them, while his
long-suffering waits; yet ever with this language, Behold, NOW is the accepted
time, behold, NOW is the day of salvation! Come, for all things are now ready,
1st Pet. iii. 18 -- 20. 2d Cor. vi. 2. Luke xiv. 17. Such a day of grace we
readily grant all sinners under the light of the gospel have. But if the gospel
says, Come, all things are now ready, and the spirit strives to convince the
sinner of the truth of it; I desire to know what the sinner's striving is
before he comes? We all know, that striving implies resistance of one against
another; and those who in ancient time enquired so often what they should do,
Stephen plainly told them to their heads what they did do: -- Ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost, Acts vii. 51.

There can be no halfway; the instant we believe the gospel, we are reconciled
to God, and unite in striving against all his and our enemies, striving
according to his working in and by us, Col. i. 29. Phil. iii. 14. And if we are
not united with him, we believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, let us talk of speculative faith, or good desires, what we
will, 2d These. ii. 12. And to talk of repentance before faith, is more absurd
still; for who ever was sorry for any action, before he believed it to be some
way disagreeable! It is conviction of the truth of the law that causes legal
repentance, and looking by faith on him whom we have pierced, produces
evangelical repentance: Hence Paul's constant testimony both to Jews and Greeks
was, Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts xx.
21. He first taught them their case before God, as breakers of his law, and
then the way of reconciliation, by faith in Christ, who has fulfilled it; with
which compare Mark i. 15. The Psalmist, when his heart was inditing good matter
concerning Zion's King, describes this work in a very elegant manner, which is,
that being armed with truth, meekness and righteousness, he in his majesty
rides forth prosperously, and darts his arrows into his enemies hearts; and all
know that a wound there is death; accordingly they fall under him; but how
stout is the rebel that will fight till he dies! Paul can tell experimentally
the nature of this death; it was death to his own doings, and the hope he built
upon them, and he was slain thereto by the light of this holy law, which
discovered to him the deceit of his heart, which had operated in all his
doings, Romans vii. 9 -- 14. Phil. iii. 4 -- 9. These appear to the sinner
terrible things; but how is the scene changed, when he sees the scepter of
righteousness presented from the throne, which gains the enemy to become the
Queen, most gloriously adorned! Thus are God's people made willing in the day
of his power, to serve him in the beauty of holiness, Psalm. xlv. and cx. Heb.
i. 8, 9.

I have been the more particular here to detect the deceit and blindness of the
attempts that are often made, to represent irresistible grace to be
inconsistent with the soul's liberty of choice; for here are descriptions of
the work of grace that are absolutely irresistible, if any thing can be so; and
yet there is not the least violence used with man's will, for the enemy is
conquered with the full consent of all his heart: He is slain and made alive by
the power of truth. And further to detect the delusion of many, and the false
reasonings that are often used concerning sinners impotency, we will take a
plain instance.

In the late rebellion in our nation, a hope of being able to usurp the throne,
moved the rebels to invade England; but when they had marched within a hundred
miles of London, that hope failed them, the effect of which was a hasty retreat
back to Scotland; though by the way a hope of being able to keep the strong
city of Carlisle against their Sovereign, caused them to leave a party in it
for that purpose; but the Duke of Cumberland soon convinced them of their
mistake, and then they hung out a sign; and upon his demanding its meaning,
they said they wanted to capitulate. He replied, that he should enter into no
capitulation with rebels! they should surrender to the King's mercy: They did
accordingly. Now let us see where we are; it has been sufficiently proved that
sinners are rebels against heaven, and that they will stand out in their
rebellion till they are conquered; and if it would have been dishonorable to
the King of England to have capitulated with these rebels, which yet were his
fellow-men; what madness must it be to attempt to capitulate with rebels
against the eternal God! What can all the noise mean concerning a day of grace,
and good works for sinners to do before they are reconciled to the King of
heaven, but only inventions of men to keep off from surrendering to
Sovereignty, in hopes by and by to come in upon better terms! in hopes at last
to be received, not as rebels, but subjects, who all along had a good regard
for their King, and only happened to be imposed upon in some things. But be not
deceived, God is not mocked; and all things are naked and opened to his eyes;
all men's buildings which are not laid upon his precious corner stone, are
nothing but refuges of lies, and God says, the Hail shall sweep them away,
Psalm. xxviii. 15 -- 17.

As to power or ability, who need be told, that in nations, and between
nations, the way to keep enemies from doing mischief, is to keep them sensible
of their inability to do it? Even captives in the hands of savages whom they
hate mortally, yet if they find they are unable to escape or to withstand them,
they will be careful not to offend their cruel masters; how much more then will
conviction, even in a carnal mind, that it cannot escape from, nor withstand a
holy God, restrain it and regulate its conduct? It is to this that we are
indebted for much of the order and regulation in the world, which many falsely
ascribe to men's good nature, and then turn it as an argument against the truth!

A sense of impotency has like effect upon the principle of hope as it has upon
fear; as long as persons can hope to shift along themselves, they do not love
to be dependent and beholden to others, but the clearer their sense is of being
unable to do without others help, the more earnest will be their cries
therefore. The poor uses entreaties, but the rich answers roughly. The wicked
through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, Prove. xviii. 23.
Psalm. x. 4. How pernicious then are all those teachings that statter the
sinner's pride, by telling him of a great deal that he can do, and must do, in
order to his coming to Christ! And as false and murderous to souls are all
pretenses that impotency can excuse any from their obligation this moment to
receive God's testimony, and set to their seal that he is true. Many plead
impotency, and pretend honesty in their restraining prayer before God; but they
prove themselves liars in these very pretenses; for profane mariners, who often
pretend honesty in not seeking to God, because they cannot do it aright, yet
when once they are brought to their wits end, and find they cannot deliver
themselves, Then they cry unto him, Psalm. cvii. 27, 28. Even an heathen
ship-master could with astonishment ask Jonah What he meant to neglect it at
such a time! Jonah i. 6. Could they be honest in neglecting such things, when
they saw no danger, and yet be constrained to practice them when eternity
appeared near! No; a deceived heart, and a deceiving devil, has turned them
aside, to hold the truth in unrighteousness.

A rational soul is always governed in its choice, by the present ideas it has
of what is best, let those ideas be true or delusive. Those who fall into the
hands of savages, if they judge it best not to submit, they will choose to sell
their lives as dear as they can; but if they judge it best to submit, then they
will choose to be on as good terms with them as they can: And says Dr. Owen, To
suppose that in all things of a spiritual and eternal concernment, that men are
not determined and actuated every one by his own judgment, is an imagination of
men who think but little of what they are, or do, or say, or write. Even those
who shut their eyes against the light, and follow in the herd, resolving not to
enquire into any of these things, do it, because they judge it best for them so
to do Dr. Owen's Guide to Fellowship, page 74.
Hence sin is called the works of darkness; and Satan's kingdom, the kingdom of
darkness; and the way he has to keep any rational souls therein is, by blinding
the minds of them that Believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel
should shine unto them: Yea, and they concur with him, for their Ears are dull
of hearing, and their eyes have THEY CLOSED, lest they should see, hear,
understand, and be converted, 2d Cor. iv. 4. Acts xxviii. 27. It was only by
this ignorance that the murderous Jews could get along in their actings against
Jesus; for had they Known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory,
1st Cor. ii. 8.

One grand scheme of the learned free-willers of our day, to blind their own
and others minds against these truths, is, to assert a self-determining power
in the will, a power to act with motive, or against motive, just as the will
pleases; but how little are such men aware, that they in this point approve of
the deed of father Adam, at the same time that they deny their concern in it?
The serpent proposed it as a grand enlargement of our first parents liberty,
that they should Know both good and evil; should be free to both; and he
pretended that this was to be as Gods; they ventured to try the experiment,
ventured to act against a good motive, in order to be free to act either way as
they pleased afterward; but they found by sad experience that the serpent lied
in this proposal.

With reverence be it spoken, the eternal God never had, nor never can have,
such a liberty as these men tell of; for it is impossible for him to lie, and
he cannot be so much as tempted with evil, Heb. vi. 18. Jam. i. 13. These men's
learned master Lock tells them plainly what they are doing: Says he, Is it
worth the name of freedom to be at liberty to play the fool, and draw shame and
misery upon a man's self? If to break loose from the conduct of reason, and to
want examination and judgment, which keep us from choosing or doing the worse,
be true liberty, madmen and fools are the only freemen; but yet I think nobody
would choose to be mad for the sake of such liberty, but he that is mad already
Essay upon Understanding, B. ii. Chap. 21. 50.
. And he goes on to observe, that, As the highest perfection of intellectual
nature, lies in a careful and constant pursuit of true and solid happiness; so
the care of ourselves, that we mistake not imaginary for real happiness, is the
necessary foundation of our liberty, and the stronger ties we have to an
unalterable pursuit of happiness in general, which is our greatest good, and
which as such our desires always follow, the more are we free from any
necessary determination of our will to any particular action, or from a
necessary compliance with our desire, set upon any particular, and then
appearing greater good, till we have duly examined whether it has a tendency
to, or be inconsistent with our real happiness. -- I desire it may be well
considered, whether the great inlet, and exercise of all the liberty men have,
are capable of, or can be useful to them, and that whereupon depends the turn
of their actions, does not lie in this, that they can suspend their desires,
and stop them from determining their wills to any action, till they have duly
and fairly examined the good and evil of it, as far forth as the weight of the
thing requires Ibid. 51, 52.
.

Thus far this great reasoner has followed the clear line of truth, yet in the
next words he turns into the dark way, by saying, "This we can do." If he had
said, we can do it when we are assisted with divine light and truth, he had
said well; but without such a proviso the matter is left in the dark, because
evil imaginations and desires have already got the start of reason, so that it
can never bring them back to a fair examination without divine influence. Who
is there that need be told, that if the judge is previously biased, we are not
like to have a fair trial before him? Yet we are all so in this case; for a
fair examination will certainly show that self is guilty; and if only a gift
from another will blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
righteous; how much more will the honor, ease, yea life of self, blind the
eyes of sinners, and hold them from a fair consideration of this case? For as
God is the only fountain of all good, unbiased reason cannot but determine that
every rational soul who loves and pursues any thing whatsoever as good,
separate from, and in neglect of him, is certainly guilty; yet that is what we
have all done, though all do not pursue it in the same course, for we have
turned every one to His own way, Isa. liii. 6. But who ever heard adjudge give
in a sentence, the immediate effect of which would bring himself from the bench
to the bar, as a guilty prisoner? Since therefore reason is already biased,
divine revelation is erected as the tribunal to decide this controversy: And
wherever it truly takes place, it produces the effect just now mentioned; a
notable instance of which we have recorded, Acts xxiv. 24, 25. A Roman governor
and judge had the curiosity to send for his prisoner to hear him concerning the
faith in Christ; but as the prisoner addressed the reason of the judge,
concerning righteousness, temperance, and a judgment to come, the scene was
remarkably changed; for the Roman judge instantly becomes a trembling prisoner,
while the prisoner is the King's officer to summon him to answer for his
conduct at the awful bar. This was so disagreeable that he put-off any further
hearing for that time, and we have no grounds to think that the convenient
season he flattered himself with ever came; and if not, then he is now a spirit
in prison; while the record of his case stands for a warning to all others
against the like disobedience, while the long-suffering of God waits with them,
1st Pet. iii. 19, 20.

But alas! instead of taking warning, we all naturally have the lawyer's
disposition, who was willing to justify himself; his mind was biased that way:
But how could he do it? Why he leaves God out of the question, and says, Who is
my neighbor? This is a notable way to try rebels! for the judge to leave the
King out of the question, and only examine their behavior to each other! Yet
how poorly does he make out even in this way? For though they esteemed
themselves so much better than the Samaritans, that they would have no dealings
with them, yet our Lord sets before him a case in their own country, between
Jerusalem and Jericho, which Jewish writers say, was then a station for priests
and Levites See Dr. Gill on the place.
, of one of each of those high characters who could look upon one whose case
loudly called for their compassion, without being moved with it; but a
Samaritan really acted the neighbor in the case, as the lawyer was forced to
acknowledge: Jesus says, Go and do thou likewise, Luke x. 29 -- 37. Note by the
way, he does not say of this branch as he does of the whole law, This do and
thou shall live; no, yet he expressly shows, that this is binding on us all to
be done, while the other is not to be left undone. This condemns all those who
would either abate the law to bring it down to our ability, or in the least
turn off its authority, and their obligation always to obey it, because of
their inability.

However, though the attempt has often been made to justify self by leaving God
out of the question, yet no rational person could ever entirely erase out of
his mind an apprehension of a deity; therefore the common way, ever since man
contracted a dislike to the true God, has been to make false ones to suit their
own turn. When Israel rejected their true King, they made them Idols according
to their own understanding, Hos. xiii. 2, 10. and so it is now. Some make up a
deity in their minds, so fond of devotion, as to accept them for good
worshipers, although they secretly grind the faces of the poor, and shut their
hearts and hands against the needy. Others, viewing that way to be odious,
frame an imagination of one who cares little for devotion, if men are but
honest and kind to their neighbors. Though a third sort, not choosing to be
under either of these restraints, frame a god that loves liberty, and their
tongues would set him so high as not to concern himself with the conduct of
worms, but leave them to gratify their own inclinations, provided they do but
act as good fellows with each other; yet after all their great swelling words,
they make their airy deity to be such an one as they scorn to be themselves,
even such a jack at a pinch, that whenever they find that they cannot indulge
themselves any longer here, he shall be ready at their call, and take them
directly to Paradise!

Oh! when will brutish and foolish man be wise! He that planted the ear, shall
he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the
heathen, shall not he correct? Yes verily, for he knows that the thoughts of
man are vanity, Psalm. xciv. 1 -- 11.

From what has been proved, I appeal to every conscience whether the following
conclusions are not certain truth.

I. That all the love and good behavior that we can possibly have to our
fellow creatures, while our hearts are not truly united to our Creator, want
the nature of true obedience, as much as the love and good order that may be in
an army of rebels, wants of true obedience to their lawful Sovereign; when they
are not reconciled to him.

II. The reason why all men do not judge it to be so, is, because their
understandings are darkened by an alienation and bias the other way, Ephesians. iv.
18. Therefore,

III. For them to set up their reason against divine revelation, either to
exclude any part of it, or to turn it aside from its plain genuine meaning, is
as criminal as it can be for a blased judge to assume a power to dispense with
any of the King's laws, or by false glosses and false evidences to pervert them
from their just design, in order to acquit the guilty, or to condemn the
innocent.

IV. All reasonings for an abatement of the law, or for the neglect of present
obedience to it, because of our impotency, are pleas for the worst kind of
treason and robbery; for God is infinitely lovely, and deserving of all our
love, worship and obedience, and the only reason why we cannot yield him all,
is, because we do not Like to retain him in our knowledge, but love and serve
the creature instead of the Creator; one setting up gain, and another his
belly, in God's place, thus robbing him of his right, Romans i. 24, 27. Tim. vi.
5. Phil. iii. 19. Matt. iii. 7 -- 9.

V. All pleas against surrendering this moment to divine sovereignty, and
receiving his proclamation of mercy in the gospel with all our hearts, are
nothing but pleas still to adhere to the devil against the eternal God! They
often say they cannot believe; but the only way that they have to keep from
believing, is to shut their eyes and ears against the light and evidence of
truth, and to join with the prince of darkness and his instruments to try to
set up falsehood in its stead. They pretend to enquire for evidence of the truth
of God's promise, while they are willingly ignorant that all things in heaven
and earth have evidenced the power and truth of his word from the beginning,
and will do so to the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, 2d Pet.
iii. 4 -- 7. All pleas for not believing the gospel, are pleas to make God a
liar, and to adhere to the father of lies instead of him, 1st John, iii. 8. and
v. 10.

VI. Therefore it is perfectly consistent for him plainly to set life and death
before all men by the ministry of his word, and call them all to turn and live;
although he does not intend to exert his almighty power to save any others but
those that he has given to his Son, John vi. 37. and xvii. 2.

VII. To make the doctrine of God's secret decrees any objection or excuse
against a present and constant regard to his revealed will, is nothing less
than to deny either his ability or his right to govern us; for it is essential
to good government, to have a plan laid by the ruler, as well as rules given to
the subject, to which each should adhere in its place; and must not unbiased
reason give in, that the more complete the plan is, and the less need of
alteration, the better? And should you hear a person say, If I thought it was
not in my power to penetrate into the King's secrets, or to alter his counsels,
I would never pretend to obey his laws, would you think him to be a subject or
a rebel! Yet what can men's objections against the unalterable nature of the
divine decrees, mean less than this? It is essential to moral government, that
laws and rules should be given to men in a conditional form, enforced with the
consideration of the rewards of obedience, and punishments of disobedience: And
the just ruler will ever keep thereto in his administrations; but that is so
far from excluding a secret plan, that it necessarily implies such an one; it
implies, that as far as the ruler's wisdom and power can reach, he will be
provided for all that shall happen, so as to be ready to do himself and his
subjects justice, and not to be disappointed, nor lose his or their rights in
any instance.

I suppose the art of man cannot set the Arminian notion of grace in a fairer
light than this, viz. our late King, after the most criminal rebels were
executed, pardoned others, and yet put them upon the trial of some difficult
service for a time, before he confirmed their estates and privileges to them;
so that their future welfare was suspended upon their doings. But then you must
know, that as he had neither atonement for their crimes, nor power to change
their hearts, if he had pardoned the chief rebels, it would have endangered the
peace of the kingdom, if not his own crown, and there was reason for holding
others in suspense, because he did not know their hearts, nor what their future
conduct would be; and do men worship such a God as that! Again, law and justice
require that each one has his due, but many involve themselves so as not to be
able to pay their debts, and rather than lose all, many creditors will take up
with a little part of their just due, and forgive the rest; and some, in hope
of future gain, will trust the same persons again. This agrees with Arminian
notions. But a few years ago there was an act made which emboldened a number of
villains to launch out and get as much as they could of others estates into
their hands, in hopes of being rescued from justice by this pretended act of
grace. This is like the Antinomians: Both of them would set up mercy to the
injury of justice and truth, instead of meeting God at the true mercy-seat,
where they agree and kiss each other. Both are for keeping off, one in hopes of
compounding, or else of paying his debts with counterfeit money; the other to
indulge himself as long as he can, with hopes at last to escape justice by
pleading the bankrupt-act.

But let not men thus delude themselves, our eternal King is a just God, as
well as a Savior, Isa. xlv. 21. and he will see that justice is done through
the universe, and every soul shall be either brought to a reckoning here, and
receive a clear discharge by our glorious surety, yea and quickly too; or else
be cast into that prison from whence they can by no means come out till they
have paid the uttermost farthing, Matt. v. 25, 26. And there is not a sinner
upon earth that believes his debts to be so great as they are, nor that they
are strictly just, till they are brought to a fair reckoning by the spirit of
truth; and it is well known, that if a creditor should cancel a debt, and the
debtor still thought that it was unjustly charged, he could not heartily love
him for it; therefore God brings every debtor, let him owe five hundred pence,
or but fifty, to know that he is just, and that they have nothing to pay, when
he frankly forgives them, Luke vii. 42. And those who are forgiven, are so far
from desiring to be trusted again with a stock in their own hands, that they
durst not trust themselves; they desire ever to trust in the Lord with all
their hearts, and not so much as lean to their own understandings, Prove. iii.
5, 6.

And now, kind reader, where is the absurdity and inconsistency of this plan?
to hold that we have destroyed ourselves, and that all our help is in a
sovereign God, who of his own will begets souls with the word of truth, and
therefore calls us to lay apart every thing that tends to hinder our receiving
it understandingly and heartily, and to watch against the devil's arts to catch
it away, Jam. i. 18 -- 21. Matt. xiii. 19 -- 23. And are not those Satan's
instruments, who use their art either to keep people from coming to hear the
word, or to arm them against regarding it when they do come! Surely they are,
therefore beware of them, as you regard your immortal souls. One of their most
artful snares is to insinuate, that earnest addresses to men's minds betoken
pride in the speaker; but though pride often operates in teachers as well as
hearers, yet as it is exalting self, two of its never-failing fruits are deceit
and bitterness; a deceitful handling of the word to suit their own ends, and
bitterness if they are crossed therein, Prove. xiii. 10. Mic. iii. 5. while
humility, which exalts the Savior, and abases self, ever produces faithfulness
and love, and moves the preacher to renounce dishonesty, and a deceitful
handling of the word, and by manifestation of the truth to commend himself to
every man's conscience in the sight of God, 2d Cor. iv. 2. But Ahab owned
plainly that he hated such a preacher, and would allow him no better lodgings
than a prison, nor better fare than bread and water of affliction, while he was
willing delicately to maintain four hundred flatterers, though they soon lead
him on to ruin, 1st Kings, xxii. 6 -- 35. And alas! how much is there at this
day of the same temper in the world, that had rather maintain four hundred
flatterers than one faithful dealer!

The apostle Jude, in describing those who turn grace into lasciviousness,
says, Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain. who because his
doings were not accepted, was very wroth, and turned away to the noisy world;
after which, like Balaam, they run greedily, who counseled Balak to lay a
snare to draw Israel into sin; and to guard against conviction, they, like
Core, accuse God's faithful servants with taking too much upon them, and with
listing up themselves. And even in what they know naturally, as brute beasts,
they corrupt themselves; for who ever knew a beast take pains to blind his
eyes, that he might not see a pit till he got into it! Who ever knew a bird
labor hard to ^over a net, so that she and her companions might not see their
danger till they were taken and (...)! Yet such is these men's conduct! Prove. i.
17. 18 Jude x. 11.

To conclude, since precept and promise are united and ever go together in the
gospel plan, in vain do men attempt to separate them: Every soul that truly
believes the gospel, has with Jacob got what God has said, both to direct his
conduct and to support him therein; and as truth declares, that If any man will
do, he shall know, John vii. 17. therefore all the attempts that are made by
those who would be accounted believers, to excuse themselves from openly
professing Christ, or to excuse their neglect of a faithful discharge of the
duties of a member of his church, either from the plea of ignorance or
inability, are nothing better than attempts to justify self, at the expense of
God's honor! For as surely as he is true, he will never fail both to direct
and support every one who trusts in him, and is willing to obey him. Then let
none deceive themselves with the notion of being saints, if their hearts and
lives are not governed and supported by truth; and if we are so, it will move
us to a conscientious use of all the means which God has appointed, both of a
public and private nature, to learn, and to promote truth in the world, and to
avoid and watch against all that is contrary thereto.

APPENDIX, Containing a brief Account of the Sentiments of the first Baptist
Churches in New England.
IT is a just observation of an excellent writer, that ancient custom and
modern fashion are two tyrants, which share the empire of the world between
them; the truth of which often appears, both in civil and religious affairs.
The name of the good old way, seems enough to prejudice many against the least
variation from the customs of their fathers, and so against reformation; while
others are so fond of novelties, as to be easily carried about with every wind
of doctrine, that comes under a new and specious name, with exclamations
against old traditions. And though believers will regard the truth when they
find it, for its own sake, yet it adds to their comfort to meet with others who
know the same, which comfort is increased when they can commune with those who
have lived long before them: Therefore having lately met with some things
concerning the fathers of this country, which may serve to confirm the
foregoing discourse, and also to correct the mistakes of many, both in our
denomination, and that are opposite thereto, who imagine that this doctrine was
in ancient days peculiar to the Pedobaptists, I think it proper to insert a
sketch thereof here.

The oldest Baptist church in this land is at Providence, which was planted
under the conduct of Mr. Roger Williams; and we may well conclude, that those
who followed him into the great dangers and hardships of his exile, had a good
liking to the doctrines which he taught, and what they were we may gather from
the various accounts we have of him.

He came first to this country on February 5, 1631, being in his youth, and he
preached a while at Salem, but the Court of Assistants at Boston wrote to that
church against him the 12th of April following, which prevented their calling
him to office then, and he went to Plymouth, where he preached about three
years; and Governor Winthrop, and Mr. Wilson, of Boston, upon a visit there,
communed with him at the Lord's supper, on October 28, 1632 Mr. Prince's
Annals, vol. 2. p. 26, 47, 70.
. He removed back again to Salem, and taught them there in the time of Mr.
Skelton's sickness, and after his death, which happened August 2, 1634
Magnalia, b. 3, p. 76.
, Mr. Williams was ordained over that church; but such difference arose, that
he was banished out of the colony the same year, and he and a few friends that
followed him settled at Providence, where they soon after embraced the Baptist
principles. And though to justify or excuse the severity that was used against
him, a great deal has been written to render him odious and ridiculous, yet Dr.
Mather, after much of that nature, says, It was more than forty years after his
exile that he lived here (at Providence) and in many things acquitted himself
so laudably, that many judicious persons judged him to have had the root of the
matter in him. -- He used many commendable endeavors to christianize the
Indians in his neighborhood, of whose language, tempers and manners, he has
printed a little relation. -- There was also a good correspondence always held
between him and many worthy and pious people in the colony from whence he had
been banished. -- Against the Quakers, he afterward maintained the main
principles of the Protestant religion with much vigor Magnalia, b. 3. p. 9.
. His endeavors to christianize the Indians appear to be the first that were
used by any in this country, for we are told that the famous Mr. Eliot preached
his first sermon to them in the year 1646 Ibid. p. 196.
; whereas Mr. Williams went to England in 1642, and obtained a charter from the
ruling powers there, which is dated March 14, 1643 See a copy of the charter in
the Providence Gazette, No. 121, February 9, 1765.
, and with it a letter to the authority in the Massachusetts, wherein they
begin thus: Taking notice some of us of long time of Roger Williams, his good
affections and conscience, and of his sufferings by our common enemy, and
oppressors of God's people, the prelates, as also of his great industry and
travels in his printed Indian labors in your parts (the like whereof we have
not seen extant from any part of America) and in which respect it has pleased
both Houses of Parliament to grant unto him, and friends with him, a free and
absolute charter of civil government Massachusetts History, vol. 1, p. 39.
, etc. from whence we may well conclude that he was early in his endeavors,
since he had got furnished so as to print a relation of their language and
manners before that time. And though after gathering a Baptist church at
Providence, Mr. Williams's mind got so blundered, with the notion that many try
to propagate to this day, of the necessity of a local succession from the
apostles to empower persons to administer ordinances, and not being able to
give in to the absurdity of deriving this power through the long scene of
antichristian corruption, that he desisted from traveling with that church, yet
the church has continued to this day; and Mr. Williams always discovered a
respect for them, and sundry times expresses the same in his book concerning
the Quakers, wherein he at one time mentions Thomas Olney, at another time,
Pardon Tillinghast, whom he styles Able and leading men among the people called
Baptists in Providence, p. 142, and 208. And even in the midst of Dr. Mather's
talk of their dissolution, he says they kept to this one principle, That every
one should have liberty to worship God according to the light of his own
conscience Magnalia, b. 3. p. 9.
which implies a continuance of worship among them; and they appear to be the
first civil government that ever allowed and acted upon this principle in all
the protestant world; and whether they deserve reproach for it, and others
honor for denying them that liberty, let the reader judge!

A late historian of high rank, speaking of Mr. Williams, says, After all that
has been said of the actions or tenets of this person while he was in the
Massachusetts, it ought for ever to be remembered to his honor, that for forty
years after, instead of showing any revengeful resentment against the colony,
from which he had been banished, he seems to have been constantly employed in
acts of kindness and benevolence, giving them notice from time to time, not
only of every motion of the Indians, over whom he had a very great influence,
but also of the unjust designs of the English within the new colony, of which
he himself had been the founder and Governor, and continued the patron
Massachusetts History, vol. 1. p. 38.
. And as to his teaching, Governor Bradford, one or the most eminent fathers of
Plymouth, writes thus: Mr. Roger Williams (a man godly and zealous, having many
precious parts, but very unsettled in judgment) came over first to the
Massachusetts; but upon some discontent left the place and came hither, where
he was freely entertained, according to our poor ability, and exercised his
gifts, and after some time was admitted a member of the church, and his
teaching well approved; for the benefit whereof I still bless God, and am
thankful to him even for his sharpest admonitions and reproofs, so far as they
agreed with truth Prince's Annals, vol. 2. p. 48.
. Now it is well known, that those fathers of Plymouth, who well approved of
Mr. Williams's teaching, held fully to the absolute sovereignty of grace; and
Mr. Callender, after informing us of a division which arose in the church at
Providence about the year 1653, concerning laying on of hands, says, That
church which was distinguished by holding laying on of hands, necessary to all
baptized persons, came in time generally to hold universal redemption; which he
observes, was a departing from some of Mr. Williams's "Darling opinions Mr.
Callender's century sermon, p. 61.
." This alteration from their first principles, it seems, came in gradually
about twenty years after their first settlement at Providence.

The second Baptist church in New England was gathered at Newport, under the
care of Mr. John Clark, about the year 1644; and what their faith was you may
see a little of in the following extracts: The decree of God is that whereby
God has from eternity set down with himself whatsoever shall come to pass in
time, Ephesians. i. 11. All things with their causes, effects, circumstances, and
manner of being, are decreed by God, Acts ii. 23. Him being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, etc. Acts iv. 28. This decree is
most wise, Romans xi. 33. -- Most just, Romans ix. 13, 14. -- Eternal, Ephesians. i. 4,
5. 2d These. ii. 13. -- Necessary, Psalm. xxxiii. 11. Prove. xix. 21. --
Unchangeable, Heb. vi. 17. -- Most free, Romans ix. 18. -- And the cause of all
good, James i. 17. -- But not of any sin, 1st John, i. 5. The special decree of
God concerning angels and men is called predestination, Romans viii. 30. of the
former, viz. angels, little is spoken in the holy scripture; of the latter more
is revealed, not unprofitable to be known. It may be defined, The wise, free,
just, eternal, and unchangeable sentence, or decree of God, Ephesians. i. 11.
determining to create and govern man for his special glory, viz. the praise of
his glorious mercy and justice, Romans ix. 17, 18, and xi. 36. Election is the
decree of God, of his free love, grace and mercy, choosing some men to faith,
holiness, and eternal life, for the praise of his glorious mercy, 1st These. i.
4. 2d These. ii. 13. Romans viii. 29, 30. The cause which moved the Lord to elect
them who are chosen, was none other but his mere good will and pleasure, Luke
xii. 32. Romans xi. 5, 9, 11, 16. Ephesians. i. 5. 2d Tim. i. 9. The end is the
manifestation of the riches of his grace and mercy, Romans ix. 23. Ephesians. 1.6. The
sending of Christ, faith, holiness and eternal life, are the effects of his
love, by which he manifests the infinite riches of his grace, John iii. 16.
Acts xiii. 48. Romans vi. 23. in the same order God does execute this decree in
time, he did decree it in his eternal counsel, 1st These. v. 9. 2d These. ii. 13.
Sin is the effect of man's free will, and condemnation is an effect of justice
inflicted upon man for sin and disobedience, John iii. 18. and xii. 37. A man
in this. life may be sure of this election, 2d Pet. i. 10. 1st These. i. 4. Yea
of his eternal happiness, Matt. xxiv. 24. John x. 28, 29. But not of his
eternal reprobation, for he that is now profane, may be called hereafter, Matt.
xx. 5, 6. These extracts I carefully took from what Mr. John Comer recorded
with his own hand, while he was pastor of that church, which he prefaced with
these words; viz. Having found in the hands of brother Edward Smith a small
book, written by Mr. John Clark, the first pastor of this church, containing
his judgment, and the judgment of the church, respecting that soul-supporting
doctrine of personal election, which is at this day so much contemned; for the
establishing the church under its present constitution in this glorious truth,
I think it not improper to transcribe it, this 31st day of July, 1727.

Here note, these were both the sentiments of Mr. Clark and of his church, of
which he continued the pastor till his death, which happened on April 20, 1675;
only as his sufferings in the Massachusetts occasioned his going to England,
where he procured the present Rhode Island charter.

Therefore since Mr. Williams, who procured their first charter from the
Parliament, and Mr. Clark, who obtained their present charter from the King,
and the two first churches in the colony, were so full in this doctrine of
sovereign grace, how illy does it become any inhabitant of that colony now to
exclaim against the doctrine as an old notion of other sects, but as what was
new among them? And how unjust has it been in many others, to represent the
contrary doctrine as peculiarly belonging to the Baptists Mr. Callender informs
us, that the doctrine of free will and laying on of hands caused a separation
in the church at Newport, about the same time of that at Providence, Century
sermon, p. 65. And Governor Joseph Jenches, speaking in a letter to a friend,
dated March 19, 1730, of the opinion that laying on of hands ought not to be
any bar of communion with those who have been rightly baptized, says, I have
been informed by one, or more, of the ancient members of our church at
Providence, that such was the opinion of the Baptists in he first constitution
of their churches throughout this colony.
?

For as that was not the case in the two first of their churches in this
country, so neither was it with the third, which is the first in the
Massachusetts province, namely that of Swanzey. I find by the records of that
church, that it was constituted in the year 1649. at Ilston, in Glamorganshire,
South Wales, where it prospered under the ministry of Mr. John Miles, till he
was ejected from thence by the act of uniformity, which turned so many godly
men out of their places in 1662 Dr. Calamy's account of ejected ministers, vol.
2. p. 731.
; after which, he and a considerable part of his church came over and settled
at Swanzey, which was then in Plymouth colony, who were more moderate toward
dissenters than some were; hence in Dr. Mather's account of that colony he
says, There has been among them one church, that questioned and omitted the use
of infant baptism; nevertheless, there being many good men among those of that
persuasion, I do not know that they have been persecuted, with any harder
means, than those of kind conferences to reclaim them Magnalia, b. 1. p. 14.
. And speaking of ministers that he could not tell how to put among their
worthies, he says, I confess, there were some of those persons, whose names
deserve to live in our book for their piety, although their peculiar opinions
were such, as to be disserviceable unto the declared and supposed interests of
our churches. Of these there were some godly Annabaptists; as namely, Mr.
Hansard Knollys, of Dover, who afterward removing back to London, died there,
a good man, in a good old age. And Mr. Miles, of Swanzey, who afterward came
to Boston Though he might labor a while at Boston, yet I am told that he died
among his own people of Swanzey.
, and is now gone to his rest. Both of these have a respectful character in the
churches of this wilderness Book 3. p. 7.
." And Mr. Hutchinson says, I have seen a letter from Mr. Miles, the Baptist
minister at Swanzey, to one of the congregational ministers at Boston, which
breaths the true spirit of the gospel, and urges Christian concord, charity and
love, although they did not agree in every point Massachuseit. History, vol. 1.
p. 228.
Once more, as Mr. Clark and his church held election to be God's choosing some
men TO faith, holiness, and eternal life, for the praise of his glorious mercy,
and that, The cause which moved the Lord to elect them who are chosen, was none
other but his mere good will and pleasure, which he executes in the same order
in time; and as Mr. Comer calls this a glorious truth, and a soul-supporting
doctrine; so his preaching this gospel at Reboboth, in the year 1731, was the
powerful means of converting many souls, whom Mr. Comer baptized, and so
gathered the first Baptist church there, of which the late Elder Richard Round
was one, who with others held this doctrine to the last. Therefore as I think I
have proved that Mr. Martin, (who belongs to another society in that town) has
acted against scripture and reason, in denying this doctrine; so he also has
against the testimony of his pious fathers; yea I may add, of his fathers in
the other England as well as this; for the first confession of faith which was
published by the English Baptists, was published by seven churches in London,
in 1643 This was some years before the Westminster confession or catechism.
, wherein they as fully express their belief of absolute sovereignty in
election, as Messieurs Clark or Comer do, and they say, Faith is the gift of
God, wrought in the hearts of the elect by the spirit of God; by which faith
they come to know and believe the truth of the scriptures, and the excellency
of them, above all other writings, and all things in the world, as they hold
forth the glory of God in his attributes, the excellency of Christ in his
nature and offices, and of the power and fullness of the spirit in its workings
and operations, and so are enabled to cast their souls upon this truth thus
believed. -- Faith is ordinarily begotten by the preaching of the gospel, or
word of Christ, without respect to any power or agency in the creature; but it
being wholly passive, and dead in trespasses and sins, does believe and is
converted by no less power than that which raised Christ from the dead Crosby's
History of English Baptists, vol. 1. appendix, p. 15, 16.
Two of the many texts which they cite to prove these articles, are John vi.
63. and Ephesians. i. 19.

I am far from desiring any to follow the most eminent fathers any further than
they followed Christ; but as I fully believe that these fathers did so, in the
doctrine of sovereign grace, in overcoming evil with good, and in maintaining a
friendly correspondence with pious people of other denominations, while they
still kept to this one principle, for each one to worship God according to the
light of his own conscience; who can justly blame this attempt to promote these
generous principles, which I would thankfully acknowledge are of late, in a
considerable measure, revived in their children?

FINIS.

