The Nature of Saving Conversion, and the Way wherein it is Wrought.

By the Rev'd. Learned, and eminently Pious, Mr. SOLOMON STODDARD of
NORTHAMPTON, New England, First Published A. D. 1719. And now a Second-Edition,
with a PREFACE.

BOSTON: Printed for and Sold by Edmund Sawyer, at his House in Newbury.

PREFACE.
THE Subject matter of this little tract, are confessedly momentous and very
interesting. Some things in it, we must acknowledge, are but little esteemed in
this degenerate age; and some things are exploded by several late writers in
Divinity. But Mr. Stoddard was so well known, as a wise, judicious and very
successful minister in his life time, that his praise was in all the churches
of New England. And several of his printed pieces, particularly his safety of
appearing in the righteousness of Christ, and the following Tract have been
found so very servicable to souls, in times when God has remarkably poured out
his spirit, that God thereby has manifestly declared his approbation of them.
Many serious christians have often requested that this should have a second
impression. And considering how well it is adapted to the lowest capacity, and
how entertaining and instructive it may be to the more capacious, it has been
thought proper to republish it. And now, a well-wisher to the souls of men, and
a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, does earnestly recommend it to Ministers and
People, high and low, as one of the most familiar and useful pieces extent; and
prays the Lord to send a blessing with it to every serious reader.

May 23d 1770.
THE Nature of Saving CONVERSION, AND THE Way wherein it is wrought.
CHAP. I. Saving Conversion is wrought at once.
PEOPLE are said in Scripture to be converted, when they are turned from
Heathenism to the Profession of the Truth; so they are said to be turned when
there is some notable Reformation made among them. But then Persons are said to
be savingly converted, when they are turned from the power of Satan unto God;
when they have a work of Regeneration wro't in them; when they are made holy,
and so are justified and made heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven; and this change
is made at once in the Soul; it is wrought in the twinkling of an eye There is
wont ordinarily to be a great deal of time spent in way of Preparation for this
change: In order to this change there is wont to be a work of Contrition and
Humiliation; and though in the primitive times we read of men passing through the
work in a very little time, yet ordinarily we find that much time is consumed
in the work of Preparation: There be many temptations to be overcome,
flatteries and discouragements to be removed; men lose a great deal of time by
falling into slumbers, by backwardness to reform some evils, by trying to
establish their own righteousness by fearing that they are not elected, or that
God has given them up to hardness of heart, by imagining their hearts to be
better than they be, by unwillingness to own the Justice and Sovereignty of
God, so that commonly several months are spent, and sometimes some years,
before they get through the work of Preparation; yet Conversion it self is
wrought at once, in the hearing of one passage in a Sermon, by the remembering
of one Scripture. As it will be in the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.52. In a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump* for the trumpet shall sound and
the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed: So it is in
this first Resurrection: John 5.25. The hour is coming and now is, when the
dead shall near the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. For
the clearing of this, Consider

1. THAT Preparatory Work is no part of Conversion. It is an Antecedent to
Conversion, but no part of Conversion. Sometimes under the work of Preparation,
persons are so exact in their Conversation, have such affections and Comforts
that not only others, but themselves also think that they are converted; they
have very great resemblances of Grace, they have many meltings of heart,
delight in Sabbaths, zeal against sin, as do carry a great appearance of a
gracious Spirit; but all that they attain unto is no part of the work of
Conversion, they remain still in a natural Condition, and their religious
affections are but counterfeit Graces. Paul seemed to himself as if he was
alive, but afterward he found himself to be dead, Romans 7 9. I was alive
without the law once, but when the commandment came, Sin revived and I died.
Men under the work of Preparation are under the dominion and government of Sin,
their corruptions are stunded but not mortifyed, they are restrained but not
killed, they are like Vermin in the Winter, stupifyed but not dead; and
whatever show they make, they are destitute of Holiness, in all their
affections there is no love to God, in all their lamentations for Sin, there is
no Godly Sorrow; their religion proceeds only from Natural Conscience and
Self-Love: The men are afraid of Hell, that makes them walk orderly, resist
Temptations and be sorrowful for Sin; they hope that God is not so angry as he
was, that makes them forward in duties of religion; they consider the moral
evil of many sinful practices, and that begets some kind of loathing of them;
they hope in such and such ways to will the favor of God, that makes them
forward in duties of Religion and charity; they hope sometimes that God has
pardoned them, that makes them have strong affections; but all these things are
no part of Conversion: it may be said to them as Christ said to the Jews, Joh.
15.42. You have not the love of God in you. There is not one spark of Grace in
them: Grace and Holiness is quite of another kind: When they have gone through
Preparation Work, Conversion remains wholly to be wrought.

2 When the Soul has performed one holy Action it is converted. One holy action
may be performed in the twinkling of an eye: An act of Faith in Jesus Christ,
is done at once: And when the Soul has performed one holy Action it is
converted: If one holy action be performed, there is a principle of Grace in
the heart, there is a spirit of love, and faith, and humility; and such a
person is in an estate of Justification. There is a very great difference
between Morality and Piety on this account. A man may carry temperately,
chastely or justly, a day or two, yet not be a temperate, chaste or just man: but
if he carries holily one day, or one minute, he is an holy man. If he performs
one act of Faith, he is a Believer; if he performs one act of humility, he is a
humble man. One act of Grace is an evidence that the man's heart is changed, and
that he has a principle of Grace: Men become morally temporate and chaste by
degrees, but they are not made Converts by degrees. The least degree of Grace
makes a man a Convert, or a Saint. Conversion may increase by degrees, men grow
more and more holy by degrees, but Conversion is wrought at once; the first act
of Grace makes a man a Convert.

3 Every man is under the Dominion of sin, or delivered from the dominion of
sin. Those that are not converted, are under the dominion of sin, enemies to
God, spiritually dead; but they that are converted, and delivered from the
dominion of sin, subject to God, and spiritually alive; therefore conversion
must be in the twinkling of an eye: If there were any considerable time wherein
this work were a doing, then at that time the man would neither be under the
dominion of sin, nor delivered from the dominion of sin; there would be a
considerable time wherein he would be neither dead nor alive, and so neither in
an estate of condemnation nor justification: But surely, the next moment after
his being freed from the dominion of sin, he is subject to God. The same moment
wherein he is delivered from sin, he is an holy man.

CHAP. II. That Grace given in Saving Conversion differs in Kind from all that
went before.
SOme have been of opinion that saving Grace and common Grace differ only in
degree, that Sorrow for Sin increases till it becomes saving, and love to God
increases till it becomes saving: But certainly, saving Grace does differ
specifically from all that went before: Gracious Actions are of another nature
than the Religious Actions of natural men. The acts of common Grace may be very
strong and powerful: The affections of the Children of Israel were very strong
when they sang God's praise, Psalm. 106.12. The affections of the Jews to Christ
were very strong, when they cried, Hosanna to the Son of David: The affections
of the Galatians were strong, when if it had been possible they would have
plucked out their eyes, and have given them to Paul: And sometimes the acts of
saving Grace are very weak; there may be Godly Sorrow in a low degree; there
may be an act of Faith with a great mixture of Unbelief; there may be true love
to God where there is but little love to him: Grace is low and weak at first,
yea, after thirty years growth it is exceeding defective: Indeed true love to
God prizes God above all the world, but that does not prove that it is in a
great degree; there may be a spirit to prize God before all the world, yet but
a small degree of that spirit* Inordinate love to the world is an affecting of
that as the chief Good; when it is in the lowest degree, it is so; that is the
nature of it. So love to God whether in a greater degree or a less degree, is
an affection to God as the chief good: The difference between saving and common
Grace don't lie in the degree, but in the nature of them. This may aapear,

1. Because saving Grace acts from other Motives and for another end than
common Grace does. The difference in motives and end, makes a spiritual
difference in actions: If men do not act from gracious motives and for gracious
ends, they do not the thing that God commands; there is no obedience to God in
what they do; they don't attend the will of God: When men depend on Christ to
save them, from the encouragement of their own goodness, and merely that they
may be delivered from Hell, they act quite after another manner than the man
does that depends on Christ only from the encouragement of his Excellency, and
that he may be delivered from Sin as well as from Damnation: When a man mourns
for Sin because it exposes him to contempt among men, or wrath from God, or
because of the moral evil of it, he does quite another thing from that man, who
mourns for it because it is a wrong to a God of infinite Glory: If his Sorrow
were in the highest degree that his nature is capable of, it would not be
gracious.

2. If the difference between saving Grace and common Grace lay in the degree,
no man could judge that his Grace is saving. Men may know that they have saving
Grace, 1 John 3.13. 2 Cor. 7.10. But if the difference lay in the degree, how
should men go about to determine that their Grace was saving? The man may know
that he has a greater degree of confidence, and sorrow, and zeal, than formerly
he had; he may have reason to think that he goes beyond some other Professors
in these things; but upon what foundation can he determine that he has them in
such a degree as to secure Salvation? Where has God revealed what degree is
saving and what is not saving? What warrant has any man to judge himself in a
safe condition, if there be several degrees of Grace that are not saving? What
rule can any Minister lay down to guide men in this matter? Men must needs be
left in a perpetual uncertainty, and remain in the dark about their eternal
estate. If a man saw that he believed in Christ, that he repented of his Sins,
that he aimed at the glory of God, it would be little comfort to him, because
he could not tell that it was in such a degree as to secure his Salvation.

3 The Gaace that is given in Conversion is new. When a man is converted it is
wholly new; when God converts a man he gives him a new heart, and puts a new
spirit within him. 2 Cor. 5.17. He is a new Creature; not in respect of his
Soul or the Faculties of it, but in respect of the inclinations of it But if
common and saving Grace differ only in degree, then his Grace is not wholly
new, for he has had religious Joys and Sorrows, and a Zeal a long while; before
he had saving Grace he had the same inclinations and spirit, only now it is
heightened and increased; some degrees are new, but the inclinations themselves
are not new; so that Conversion would be not the giving a new heart, but only
an augmenting such inclinations as were there before.

4 There is an opposition between saving Grace and common Grace: If one be
opposite to the other, then they differ specifically: Those dispositions that
have contrariety one to the other, that are at war one with the other, and
would destroy one another, are not of the same kind; and truly these are so:
Common Graces are Lusts, and do oppose saving Grace: Making his own Salvation
his last end, is contrary to making the glory of God his last end: Hating Sin,
not because it wrongs God, but because it exposes him, is resisting the command
of God: Bringing every thing into subserviency to his own ends, is opposite to
the bringing every thing into a subserviency to God's Glory: The man that has
but common Grace goes quite in another path than that which God directs unto:
When he goes about to establish his own Righteousness, he sets himself against
that way of salvation God prescribes, Romans 10.3. There is an enmity in the ways
of such men as have but common Grace, to the ways that godly men take.

CHAP. III. Habitual and Actual Conversion are wrought together.
THose holy Habits and Inclinations that God puts into the hearts of his People
are not visible in themselves; men cannot discern them but by their actings* As
men are not able to see their own Souls, so they are not able to see those
habits that are in them, but only by their actings: They have a power to
reflect on the operations of their hearts, and so come to the knowledge of
those habits that are in them; but they cannot see those habits immediately:
Hence no man is able upon his experience to tell the very minute when the
habits of Grace were put into him: And generally men have thought that the
babits of Grace are put into men before their closing with Christ; and they
have been wont to argue in that manner, that there must be holy principles
before holy actions, there must be life before there be life acts: But there is
no necessity of this; the faculty of acting, must be before the action, the
cause must be before the effect; the man must have a being before he can have
any operation; but it does not follow from thence, that there must be a
gracious habit before there be any gracious action: There is no necessity that
there be an antecedent habit, it is sufficient if there be a concomitant habit
and inclination. There was no necessity that Jacob should have an habit of Love
to Rachel before he actually loved her; that Michal should have an habit of
loving David before she actually loved him; there was no necessity that Adam
and Eve should have an habitual inclination to Sin before they did sin: So,
there is no necessity that men should have an inclination to believe in Christ
and love God, before they do actually believe in Christ and love God; it is
sufficient that there be a concomitant inclination that way: And thus it is
from time to time; wherever there is an act of Faith and Love, there is a
disposition to act so for the time to come; but there is no necessity in nature
that the inclination should be antecedent.

And this supposition of an antecedent gracious inclination before actual
Conversion, is attended with this insuperable difficulty; that a man may have
gracious habits, and yet be in a state of condemnation; that he may have a
sanctified heart, yet be for a time under the Curse; that his heart may be
changed, and yet abide for a time under the Curse. That he may be sanctified
yet not justified; for there is no Justification till there is actual Faith.
When it is said in scripture that we are justified by Faith, the meaning is not
that we are justified by an habit of Faith, but actual Faith; for that Faith is
set forth by words signifying Action; by believing on Christ, receiving Christ,
coming to Christ, opening to him: It is said of Abraham, he believed in the
Lord, and it was counted to him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. The condition of
Justification must be wrought by us; thence it is actual Faith that is
intended: A disposition to yield perfect obedience was not the fulfilling the
condition of the Covenant of works; if that would have done, Adam and Eve would
have been justified as soon as they were made. So a disposition to believe is
not a fulfilling the condition of the Covenant of Grace; but actual believing.

Moreover, it is evident that habitual and actual Conversion are together,
because both of them are effected by the same divine act, viz. The discovery of
the truth and glory of the Gospel. I am far from thinking that God is tied up
unto this way; or that he cannot give the habits of Grace without such a
discovery; but it is evident from the word of God that he does work the habit
of Grace, and draws forth the act of Grace in this way: That he does give this
principle and gracious inclination in this way is plainly taught; 2 Cor. 3 18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changeed into the same image from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.
Changing into the image of God is by giving the habits of Grace unto them;
beholding the glory of God as in a Glass is the discerning the glory of God in
the Gospel. We are taught the same also in 1 Cor. 4.15. I have begotten you
through the Gospel. In Regeneration men do receive the habits of Grace, the
heart is renewed, and the man is made a new man; and this is wrought through the
Gospel, by the Gospel, as understood; for it is in this way and no other that
the Gospel has any gracious Efficacy on the heart: If a man hears the Gospel
twenty years, and has not the spiritual understanding of it, it will have no
gracious effect upon him; but he discovers what a glorious way of Salvation God
has prepared, and that works a great change in his heart: The same is taught,
Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth: that is by the
Gospel, which he calls the word of truth by way of excellency, and because the
truth of it was questioned by the Jews and Heathens.

And by this discovery God draws forth the exercise of Faith at the same time;
that discovery makes men immediately to receive the Gospel. When men have a
spiritual sight of Christ, they will believe on him; if they withstood the
calls before and objected, they will be prevailed on by that sight; Joh. 1.40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son and
believes on him may have everlasting life. And v. 45. Every man that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.

It is also impossible in Nature but that men when they do believe in Christ
should have an inclination or disposition to come to him. Men may do some
things out of a kind of compulsion, and do them upon some accidental, by
consideration, and yet hate to do them at the same time: But the accepting of
Christ is always an act of great freedom; when they do it, they do it out of
choice, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. They
do it from conviction of the preciousness of Christ and benefit of coming to
him; they love to come, and have a disposition to do so for the future.

CHAP. IV. Believing in Christ is the first Act of Conversion,
MEN that are converted do exercise all manner of Grace; they perform acts of
Love and Fear, and Submission, and godly Sorrow, and Patience, and Humility;
but the first act of Conversion is to believe in Jesus Christ. There is no
other gracious act that goes before Faith. In this respect Conversion is
wrought after the same manner in all that are converted: After the first act of
Grace there is no certain order in the exercise of Graces, but this act of
believing in Christ has the proceeding in all. Some men do not make a beginning
in godliness in loving God, and others in sorrow for Sin, and others in
patience, and others in humility; but they all begin by receiving Christ as
offered in the Gospel: False Conversions begin some in one way and some in
another, but saving Conversion always begins with believing in Christ. The man
did a great deal in Religion before he believed in Christ, but he had no true
love, nor godly Sorrow, nor Humility before: True Holiness takes its rise here,
this is their entrance in at the strait gate: There is no sure sign of Election
before this, therefore we are advised to make our election sure by our calling,
2 Pet. 1.10. This is that which brings men into an estate of Justification: He
that believes on him has everlasting Life, Joh. 3.36. Whatever went before
gave the Man no title to Life eternal: There is no need of Holiness to go
before Faith: If there were need of Holiness before Faith, either it would be
to encourage men to believe; but there is encouragement enough without that,
the Grace of God offered in the Gospel and the Righteousness of Christ, are
sufficient encouragement, though men never did one good deed; for God justifies
the ungodly, Romans 4.5. That is those who have lived an ungodly life, 'till the
very minute of their closing with Christ: Or else, if there were need of
preceding Holiness, it would be to incline the heart to come to Christ, but
there must be some first act of Holiness, and there is no necessity of any
preceding Holiness to incline men to do the first act of Holiness. When God
discovers Christ, that inclines the heart to come unto him. Besides, We may
consider,

1. That sinners at their first coming to Christ, see nothing in themselves to
encourage them to come. When sinners come at first to Christ they are weary and
heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. They are athirst, Rev. 22.17. They are convinced that
their hearts are full of enmity to God: That they are empty of good, that they
are wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. Though
formerly they thought themselves alive, yet they are convinced that they are
dead: They take encouragement from Christ, and the Grace and Faithfulness of
God; but they see no good in themselves to be an encouragement to them:
Afterward, godly men see somewhat in themselves that is an encouragement to
them; they can say sometimes as David, I love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1. And as
Job, Thou know that I am not wicked, Job. 10.7. And though they depend on
Christ and the Grace of God alone; yet it is an encouragement to them to see
the Grace of the Spirit in themselves. But sinners at their first coming to
Christ, see nothing in themselves to be an encouragement to them.

2. That men are sanctified by faith. Act. 26.18. Sanctified by faith in me.
Act. 15.9. Purifying their hearts by faith. Their Love and Repentance are the
fruit of Faith; and therefore no other holy carriages are antecedent to Faith.
All that are unbelievers are destitute of other Graces: If there be appearances
of Repentance and love to God's glory, they are but delusions: If other
gracious carriages depend on Faith, they do not preceed Faith; for the effect
is not before the cause. If Faith have no being it can have no operation: If
there were any Holiness that went before Faith, that Sanctification is not
through Faith in Christ, then their hearts were purified without Faith.

3 The Gospel is the means of Conversion. It is by the Gospel that the hearts
of men are made holy: 1 Cor. 4.15. I have begotten you through the Gospel. The
works of Creation and common Providence teach men to be holy, but do not make
men holy: So the Law or Covenant of Works teaches men that they should be
holy, but that does not make men holy; but it is the Gospel that makes men
holy: When Paul was sent to preach the Gospel, the design was to turn men from
the power of Satan unto God; and if the Gospel be the instrument of Conversion,
men have no Holiness 'till they do receive the Gospel. So long as the offers of
the Gospel are rejected or neglected, it can have no sanctifying efficacy on
them: it may work some common affections, but it does not change their hearts.
If men are not wrought upon by the Gospel to give entertainment to Christ, it
has no other gracious effect on them. The first gracious effect of the Gospel
is to make men come to Christ, other gracious effects are consequential to this.

CHAP. V. This Act of Faith does include all other Graces.
THE act of Faith in accepting Jesus Christ is the Conversion of the whole Soul
unto God: for it is vertually all Grace, it includes in it somewhat of the
Spirit of all other Graces: There is a distinction in the exercise of several
Graces; there is a difference between the acts of Faith, and Love, and
Repentance, and Humility; yet there is somewhat of the spirit of every Grace
working in the Soul's first closing with Christ. As,

1. There is a believing of the Word of God. God speaks a great deal in the
Gospel to encourage Sinners to come to Christ. He tells us, that he calls us,
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that he is appointed to be a Prince and a
Savior, that he died for our Sins, that he has satisfied the Justice of God,
that he is risen from the dead, and sits at the right hand of God, that he will
of his free Grace pardon all the Sins of those that come to him; and the man
when he comes to Christ receives the whole Doctrine of the Gospel as the true
sayings of God: He rejects all carnal reasons, and sets his seal that God is
true. He made a Profession before, but now he does not stagger at the promise
of God through unbelief; he is satisfied that the Gospel is no cunningly
devised fable* but the very Word of God; 1 These. 2, ^3, Ye received the word
not as the word of man, but as it is in truth the word of God, which
effectually works in you that believe: They do not look upon it as probable
as they did before, but have the assurance of the truth of it.

2. There is Love to God and Christ. When the Soul marries to Christ, he does
it with a spirit of Love: He takes God as his Portion, he takes his
satisfaction in God; he comes to God not for some Convenience but for
Blessedness, he takes him as one that is sufficient to make him happy; he
despises all the world in comparison of God: He takes a complacency in God, and
sees the gloriousness and amiableness of God: The love of God appearing in the
Gospel draws his heart. He loves to depend on Jesus Christ, and to put honor
upon him. This way of Salvation pleases him, he looks upon Christ excellent and
glorious, he extols Christ: Cant. 5.11. My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousands. and v. 16. He is altogether lovely. His coming to
Christ is not a forced thing; but he esteems him fairer than the children of
men, Psalm. 45.2.

3. There is a Spirit of repentance. He has stood out a long while against the
Calls of God, but now he repents, he changes his mind; therefore we have that
expression, Mat. 9.13. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. The heart is not affected with grief just at that time only, but he
dislikes his former course, persists no longer in a way of opposition, but
yields himself to Christ; he says as Isa 21.13. Other Lords besides thee have
had dominion over me, but by thee only will I make mention of thy name. He
gives up himself to live after another manner than he has done formerly: He
has been obstinate a great while, but he stands out no longer, he relinquishes
his former way, and comes over to Christ: His heart is changed, he is
translated from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of Christ.

4 There is Humility. All Believers are poor in spirit; they are so called,
Mat. 5.3. The Believer is poor in spirit when he comes under the sense of his
unworthiness: the Prodigal when he returns, says, I am no more worthy to be
called thy son, Luke 15.19. The man is sensible that nothing but free Grace
will help him, he depends on the mere mercy of God: Ephesians. 2.8. We are saved by
Grace. He challenges nothing, he is sensible that he has deserved Damnation, he
counts that God might fairly destroy him: He does not magnify himself; if he be
a man of understanding, if he be wealthy, if he make a figure in the world, if
he has been useful and servicable to others, and to the Church of God, yet he
looks upon himself less than the least of all God's Mercies; he takes no
encouragement from any excellency in himself, he comes as a poor beggar, he
wants pardon and blessedness, but he has nothing to offer to God: The
invitation is to such; Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat* yea, come buy wine and
milk without money and without price. And when the man comes to Christ he comes
empty, willing to be beholding to Christ for all: He desires Salvation, and is
willing that God and Christ should have the Glory of it. He comes for free
Grace; his languague is as Psalm. 135. With the Lord there is mercy, and with
him is plenteous redemption.

5 There is Self-denial. Under the work of Humiliation he was forced out of
himself, he saw his own righteousness was as filthy rags; he saw there was
nothing in it to depend upon, he saw his best works were just ground of
condemnation; but when he sees the preciousness of Christ's Righteousness, that
mortifies a self righteous spirit. He sees there is no comparison between them,
he sees his own Righteousness is but dross compared with that Gold tried in the
fire: He is willing for the sake of Christ's Righteousness to part with his
own: Phil. 3.7. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.
Formerly, when he was invited to come to Christ, he had many reasonings in his
own heart against that way; but now he is satisfied in the Wisdom of God, and
denies his own Wisdom, will not listen to any cavils, but says of Christ, that
he is the power of God and the wisdom of God, 2. Cor. 1.24. And that in him are
hid all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge: So he denies his own power; and
rests upon the power of Christ, to deliver him from temptation, and to keep him
from Sin and preserve him to Salvation.

6 There is a Spirit of Thankfulness. When the man sees Christ offered to him,
and pardon and salvation upon his account, he looks upon it as an unspeakable
Mercy, and receives it as a great gift of Grace: He was wont formerly to slight
the offer, and cast contempt upon it, and neglected to receive it; but now he
looks upon it as a wonderful offer. He has honorable thoughts of the Grace of
God. His heart is affected with God's Mercy, and comes gladly to Christ. He
counts the Gospel good news, and is sensible that God therein shows great
kindness: He counts it a great opportunity: He looks upon himself greatly
beholden to God: His heart is ready to leap for joy, he accepts the invitation,
and blesses the name of God: He says of it, that it is a faithful saying and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, 1. Tim. 1.16.

7 There is a Spirit of universal Obedience. When God opens the eyes to see the
call of the Gospel, men are sensible that it is the will of God that they
should come to Christ; that is God's great command, 1 John 3.23. And in
obedience to God they do come. They dare not rebel against God's call. Besides,
there is a spirit of obedience in receiving Christ as their King; they accept
of Christ as he is offered. God has made Christ the King of his church, and
offers him as such; and when the man accepts him, he takes him as his Lord as
well as Savior; he knows that Christ requires universal Holiness, Religion,
and Truth, and Justice, and Chastity, and Temperance, and Charity, and he
accepts of Christ as his Lord, is willing to be subject to his laws and
government. Their voice is, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our lawgiver,
and he will save us: Isa. 33.22. The men receive Christ in all his Offices,
they come with a spirit of obedience. Besides, when they come to Christ, they
come to him to enable them to lead holy lives, they depend on him for strength
to overcome their temptations, that he may be made sanctification unto them, 1
Cor. 1.31. They depend upon his help, that they may live holy lives. Gal. 2.20.
I live by Faith in the Son of God.

CHAP. VI. The Infusion of Grace does mortify Corruption.
BY putting Grace into the heart God does destroy the power of Sin. Natural men
are not able to mortify their own corruptions: Whatever improvement they make
of their natural abilities and outward opportunities, they will fall short of
mortifying their corruptions: They may do several things in order to the
mortifying their Sins, but they cannot effect it: They may restrain themselves
much from the acts of Sin, but the lopping of the tree does not kill the root*
If they do not make provision for the flesh, yet they cannot starve it: If they
bewail their Sins, and cry out against them, and call themselves madmen, that
will not do. Pharaoh bewailed his Sin, Exodus 9.27. And Judas his, Mat. 27.3. Yet
both of them were far from mortification. Yea, if they study the danger and
evil of their Sins, that will not serve the turn. Such men may consider, that
if their Sins don't die, their Souls must die* according to that, Romans 8.13. If
ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. They may think that Sin is dishonorable and
unprofitable; that there is ingratitude, injustice and impudence in it: If we
consider such things a thousand times over, that will not mortify their
corruptions; but it is God that does it, and the way wherein he does it, is by
infusing a principle of Grace into the heart. The infusion of Grace and the
mortification of corruption* are at the same instant. Mortification of
corruption don't follow after the infusion of Grace, but is contemporary with
it. 2. Cor. 5 17. Old things are passed away, and all things are made new.
These two works are done by the same operation. God does not put forth two
operations, one to make men gracious, the other to kill their corruptions; but
the same divine act has these two effects, to give new inclinations, and
destroy the old. God restrains the corruptions of men before he puts Grace into
them; and takes away much of those evil habits that men had contracted by a
course of Sin: He does that by terrifying the Conscience, giving some common
encouragements, and by human restraints, and education; but it is by giving
Grace to the Soul that corruption is morttifyed. Corruption is not mortifyed
before the infusion of Grace, neither is the infusion of Grace before
mortification; but they are wrought at once by the same act.

Arg. 1. The same light that works gracious inclinations, does destroy Sin. The
way wherein God communicates Grace is by teaching men how glorious he is. He
lets in Gospel light, and so works gracious inclinations. Men see the reason
why they should love God, trust in Christ, and be humble, and this inclines the
heart that way. God deals with men as with rational creatures; he discovers to
them the Reason and Foundation of holy carriages, and so disposes the heart to
them, 2 Cor. 4.18. We all beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image. He makes them know himself, and so makes them
sincere. Psalm. 36.10. Stretch forth thy loving kindness to them that know thee,
and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. He teaches them, and so they
come to Christ, Joh. 6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me. And it is the same way that he mortifies their corruption. This
light weans them from the world, kills the pride of their hearts. This light
makes them hate the ways of Sin. At the same time that they see reason to exalt
God, they see the evil of pride. When they see reason to love God, they see
that there is no reason to dote on the world, Act. 26.18. To turn them from
darkness to light and from the power of Satan to-God.

Arg. 2 Natural Corruption is nothing else but the privation of Holiness*
Contracted habits have something positive in them, but natural corruption is
only the privation of Holiness. When man lost the image of God, there was
nothing positive put into him. The condition of man by nature is, that he is
destitute of Love, and Faith, and Humility; and thence he runs into evil, and
is disposed to love the world, and set up himself above God. This shows that
the very giving of Grace mortifies corruption. When the (...) is given, the
privation is expelled. When light comes into the eye, the darkness is gone:
When sight is given to men, blindness is taken away: When life came into
Lazarus, he was delivered from death: When love to God is put into the Soul,
inordinate self-love is mortifyed. When Faith is wrought in the heart, Unbelief
is mortifyed. When men are made humble, their Price is mortifyed. When God
conveys spiritual Life to men, without any more to do, they are delivered from
spiritual Death: Rom 8.2 The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
made me free from the law of sin and of death.

Arg. 3 Holiness does imply in it a hatred to Sin. Where Sin is hated it is
mortifyed; that was Paul's spirit, Rom 7.15. What I hate, that I do. When Sin
is hated, then the strength of it is abated. The strength of Sin lies in men's
love to Sin. Wherever Sin is hated as the greatest evil it is mortifyed: As it
loses the love of men, so it loses it is strength. That was a sign of David's
mortification, that he hated vain thoughts, Psalm. 119.113. And wherever there
is Holiness there is an hatred of Sin. If the heart of a man be inclined to
believe, he hates unbelief; unbelief is contrary to that inclination: So, if a
man have an inclination to love God as his chief Good, he will hate the
workings of pride and worldliness, the setting up any other thing above God.
Sinful inclinations are enemies to Holiness, and holy inclinations are enemies
to Sin. They have a tendency in themselves to destroy one another: Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other. There is a warfare between Grace and
Corruption, they seek the destruction of one another.

Arg. 4. The more degrees of Grace men get, the more Sin is mortifyed. The more
men put on the new man, the more they put off the old man. Holiness and
Mortification hold an exact proportion one to the other. As one Scale rises,
the other falls: As water comes into the vessel, the air is expelled: The more
light is in the air, the less darkness: 2 Samuel 3 1. David waxed stronger and
stronger, and the house of Soul waxed weaker and weaker, As Grace flourishes,
so Sin dies. Whenever there is any addition to Grace, there is a proportionable
substraction from Corruption. The more humility, the less pride. They that are
very humble, are not very proud. They that have a great deal of Faith, have but
little Unbelief. And when Grace shall be perfected, no Sin shall remain; the
perfection of Grace does expel all Sin. Where there is perfect light, there is
no darkness. 1 John 15. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. Where
there is perfect beauty, there is no blemish. Ephesians. 5.27. Not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy without blemish.

CHAP. VII. Conversion is wrought by Light.
GOD is the Author of Conversion: Men must be born of the spirit. Whatever
means are used they will be ineffectual, if there be not the operation of the
spirit: Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us. Such as are converted are born
of God, Joh. 1.13. And the way wherein he does it, is by letting spiritual
light into the Soul; by irradiating the mind, letting in beams of light into
the heart. In that way God increases Grace, and in that way he gives Grace at
first. While men remain in darkness, they do remain in the kingdom of darkness;
but by inlightning the mind he changes the heart. It is by inward discoveries
of the Glory of God that he sanctifies the heart* In this way the Gospel does
become a rod of strength. Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send forth the rod of thy
strength out of Zion. Spiritual sight prevails immediately upon the heart. Men
that have refused a long while do refuse no longer after God lets in this
light: Act. 26.18. To open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all as with open face
beholding in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. All that are ignorant of God
remain unconverted; all that know God are converted.

Arg. 1. Man's being capable to know God makes him capable to be holy. If man
had not a reasonable Soul capable to know God, he could not be capable to be
holy. The inferior creatures though they have some knowledge and resemblances
of reason, yet are incapable of the knowledge of God, and accordingly are
incapable of holiness, and accordingly are not under the direction of the Moral
Law. But if God makes man capable to know him, he thereby makes him capable of
holiness; the reason of it is, because if he actually knows God, he will be
holy: The knowledge of God and holiness go together: Psalm. 36.10. Stretch forth
thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the
upright in heart. God is so glorious, that if he be known, the heart will be
drawn to him. Psalm. 36.7. Because of the excellency of thy loving kindness, the
children of men put their trust in the shadow of thy wings. The excellency of
God draws the heart irresistably to him, when it is know. The knowledge of God
is inseparable from holiness. All that know him are holy: The very capacity to
know God, makes men capable to be holy, to love him and trust in him. The
Angelical nature is capable to know God, and so capable of holiness, and so the
human Nature: And when men are renewed in the image of God, they are renewed in
knowledge; Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after tho image of him that created him.

Ar. 2. Until men know God, no terror, or punishment, or persuasion, will make
them holy. Many men have very strong persuasions set before them to induce than
to be holy; the equity of it, the profit, the pleasure, and the honor of it,
are amply demonstrated; such arguments are as wont mightily to prevail in other
cases; yet the men are not gained, they make their hearts as adaments, and they
will not be gained until they have the knowledge of God. If the persuasions do
beget some desires, if they do beget some resolutions, if they prevail on men
to make some attempts; yet they do not make men holy: Men must be taught of God
else they will not be holy. Jon. 6 45. Every man that has heard and learned of
the Father, comes unto me. Terrors of conscience will not make men holy. Men
cannot be frighted into the love of God. Men may be scared it to Reformation,
but not into Conversion. Trembling may take hold on hypocrites, yet they remain
hypocrites. Cain's terrors did not made him holy. Judas his terrors did not
make him holy. Fear will make men hypocrites, but not Saints, Psalm. 78.34, When
he slew them, then they sought him, but, v. 36. They flattered him with their
mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue. The fear of Hell will not make men
hate sin more than hell: Punishments will not make men holy. Hellfire will not
purge away men's dross. One glimpse of the glory of God, will do more than all
the punishments in the world to make men holy. Cant. 1.4. Draw me and I will
run after thee

Arg. 3. The perfect knowledge of God is accompanied with perfect Holiness.
Holiness always hold a proportion to men's knowledge of the glory of God. They
that have not the knowledge of the glory of God, have not one spark of
holiness; if they pretend to it, yet they are utterly destitute of it. Men may
set up Altars to the unknown God, but they never love an unknown God. And when
there is the beginning of the knowledge of God, there is the beginning of
holiness; and as the knowledge God increases, so holiness increases; they keep
pace one with the other, they are in exact proportion one to the other. Every
beam of light has heat in it, 2 Pet. 1.2 Grace and peace be multiplied unto
you, through the knowledge of God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. And when
the knowledge of God is perfect, holiness will be perfect. We can never
comprehend God, nor search out the almighty to perfection; yet the grace of
Knowledge may be perfect: And when men do enjoy the light of Glory, they will
be as holy as they desire to be. Light and life will be perfected together.
Heaven is a place of perfect Light, and perfect Holiness: Psalm. 17.5. I shall
behold his face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. 1 John
3.2. We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

Arg 4. When men do see the glory of God, they would act against their nature
if they should not be holy. Every creature will act it is nature, and so will
Man. When men know things to be true, they will assent to them. When men see
God, they know his testimony to be true: When men know the excellency of God,
they must choose him. The glory of God is such, that it captivates the heart;
where it is seen it has a magnetic power; it irresistably conquers the will.
There is a necessity of loving God, when he is seen; if men should not, they
would act against their nature. There is no power in the will to resist
holiness when the glory of God is seen. It is impossible in nature that men
should know God and not be holy. The will always follows the last dictates of
the Understanding. The Understanding is the guide of the will; the will always
follows its direction. Men would offer violence to their nature, if they should
do otherwise. The excellency of God is a sufficient reason for men's loving and
serving him: Because God has such excellency, it is man's duty to love and
serve him; and it is their happiness to love and serve him: And when they know
the excellency of God it will be their practice. The gloriousness of God has a
commanding power on the heart.

CHAP. VIII. Men are capable to receive Light from the Spirit of God, before
they have an habitual Change in their Understanding.
MAN in his natural estate is represented in Scripture at utterly depraved,
dead in trespasses and sins. He is blind, and in darkness. And it may be
thought that he is incapble to see the gloriousness of God, until there be
first an habitual change in his undestanding; but if we examine the word of
God, we may find plain intimations, that this light does precede the habitual
change. Joh. 5.25. The time is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God; and they that bear shall live. Hearing the voice of
Christ is antecedent to their living: It is in that way that life enters into
them, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as is a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image: Before they are changed into God's
image, they do behold his Glory. This makes it evident, that men are capable to
behold the glory of the Lord before the habitual change. God discovers his
Glory, and that inclines him to assent and draws forth an actual assent. Which
may be further considered by these considerations.

Arg. 1. Man in his corrupted estate has his natural faculty of understanding.
He has the faculty of understanding in his corrupted estate, and in his
renewed estate. A godly man has not two faculties of understanding one whereby
he knows God, and another whereby he knows other things; but by the faculty of
understanding he knows God and Christ, and the truth of promises, and likewise
rules of art, the motions of the Sun and Moon, and the natural causes. Where
there is a natural understanding, endued with literal knowledge, and assisted
by the Spirit of God, there is a power to know God: In that case there is
nothing wanting in order to the spiritual knowledge of God. Men need no other
faculty in order to spiritual knowledge provided it be duly enlightened. To
imagine that there needs any other Power, is to fancy the need of another
faculty, or a faculty in a faculty, in order to the knowledge of God; as if we
understood the creature by one faculty, and God by another. A faculty of
understanding instructed and assisted by the Spirit, must needs enable men to
know God.

Arg 2. An babitual change in the understanding, does not give men a power to
know God. It must be acknowledged, that there is such a thing as an habitual
change in the understanding: Godly men have a sanctified mind; they have a
principle put into them, that leads them to judge aright concerning God and
Christ; and a principle of Faith to receive the testimony of God: But habits
does not give men a power to know. We must carefully distinguish between a
faculty or power and an habit: An habit is only an inclination to do a thing;
an habit fits a man to do a thing with more facility and dexterity. Habits are
not faculties; they do not enable men to do what they could not do before; they
dispose and incline the heart that way. A natural man has a prevailing
inclination to judge wrong concerning God, and an opposition to believe right
concerning God; his mind is averse to the reception of those doctrines that the
Scripture teaches concerning God; but yet he has the faculty or power to judge
aright when he is assisted. And the godly man having received habitual light,
has an inclination to judge aright of God and spiritual things.

Ar. 3. This actual light which men receive from the Spirit of God, does beget
habitual light. It is in this case as in many others; a man that has had
experience of the sweetness of honey, is inclined thereby to judge so from time
to time: He that has had experience of the saltness of the sea, is inclined to
judge it so: And he that has understood the gloriousness of God, is prepared
and disposed thereby to judge so from time to time. This discovery leaves such
a sense and impression on the heart, as inclines it for ever to judge so
concerning God: They never forget what they have seen, and so are inclined to
judge after the like manner. And the more frequently they have eminent
discoveries of God and Christ, the more strongly they are inclined to judge so,
and to reject the contrary temptations. Repeated discoveries strengthen the
habit, and dispose them with more readiness to judge so. The inclination to
judge aright of God is a rational inclination, flowing from a conviction of the
gloriousness of God.

CHAP. IX. The first thing that this Light discovers is the Gloriousness of God.
MAny men that have had experience of this spiritual light, are able to give a
very poor account how it does at first work in their heart The understanding is
so quick in it is operations, that the steps of those discoveries that are made
to the soul, does not fall under their observation. They may be able to give
some account what they saw, that they saw such and such encouragement to come
to Christ; but they do not know how they come to be convinced of it. But we
have abundant cause to conclude, that the first discovery that is made is of
the gloriousness of God. The knowledge of God is the foundation of all
religion: Psalm. 36.10. Stretch forth thy loving kindness to them that know
thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. Joh. 1.3. This is eternal
life to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Two things will make this evident.

Arg. 1. The spiritual knowledge of God does not depend upon the spiritual
knowledge of other things. There needs no antecedent discoveries in order to
the spiritual knowledge of God. When God opens the eyes of men, and gives
spiritual understanding to them, there are two ways wherein they may see the
glory of God.

1. By reasoning from the works of Creation and common Providence. There is a
great discovery of the glory of God in making the world, Psalm. 19.1. The
heavens declare the glory of God. and the firmament shows his handy works.
Isai. 6.3. The whole earth is full of his glory. And when they behold the work
of God, they may readily see, if their eyes be opened, that these things were
made by a God of infinite power, and wisdom, and goodness. There is a
self-evidencing light in these works of God, showing that they are the effects
of a God of infinite glory. The world is a glass, reflecting the glory of God;
and when men's eyes are opened, they may plainly see it. So in other of the
great works of God; the general deluge, the burning of Sodom, the delivery of
Israel out of Egypt, maintaining them in the wilderness, etc. God often puts us
in mind, that he has created the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth. That is an abundant manifestation to them that understand, that he is a
glorious God, worthy to be believed, and loved, and obeyed. When men's eyes are
opened, they see the force of the argument, they are at once satisfied about
the glorious properties of God. Reason enlightened by the Spirit of God, teaches
men convincingly what God is.

2 By reasoning from the word of God. The word of God has a self evidencing
light in it; it shows that it does proceed from a God of infinite Glory. The
holiness of the law, and the wisdom and grace that appears in the gospel, are
in themselves very evidential of God's glory. And though multitudes of men that
read and hear the word, are not convinced of the divine authority of it; yet
when God lets in beams of spiritual light, they receive it as the word of God;
they are convinced that it proceeds from a God of infinite glory. When God
shines into the heart, they see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. They do with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2
Cor. 4.18. They say, such things would never have entered into the heart of
man, if God had not revealed them, 1 Cor. 2 9.

Arg. 2. The spiritual knowledge of other things, does depend on the spiritual
knowledge of God. The knowledge of particular revealed truths, does depend upon
the knowledge of God. Until they know God they can have no Faith; Faith depends
upon the knowledge of God. Until they know God, they do not see a foundation
for Faith, nor know any thing that is to be known only by Faith. Until men know
God, they cannot know the saving benefit of the blood of Christ, or the
Divinity of Christ, or the certainty of the Promises, or the happiness of
heaven; for all Faith does depend upon our assurance of the faithfulness of
God: But when once we are convinced of the faithfulness of God, we are prepared
to believe whatever God has revealed. If God reveals things that are beyond
natural reason to comprehend, as the doctrine of the Trinity, and of the
Incarnation of the Son of God; such men will believe it. If God reveals things
that are very contrary to carnal reason; As, that God is angry with carnal men,
though they live in great prosperity; and that he delights in godly men, and
will save them, though they are low, and in great affliction. If he promises
pardon to them that have been very sinful, if they accept of the offers of the
gospel, such men will believe it. The consideration of the everlasting
faithfulness of God, will overcome all objections. If men were at never so much
loss about the truth of them before, and rejected them as false, or suspended
their belief, looking on them as uncertain; yet as soon as ever he understands
the faithfulness of God, the darkness of his mind is removed; he sees a
foundation for Faith, and so those things which were mysteries to him before,
are now heartily acknowledged. Heb. 11.7. Faith is the evidence of things not
seen.

CHAP. X. The Soul being convinced of the Gloriousness of God, sees
Encouragement to accept of Christ.
MUltitudes that are called to come, do upon one accasion or other excuse
themselves: Yea, men that are in great distress for the want of forgiveness, do
reject the offer. They would fain be pardoned, and pray to God to accept them
upon Christ's account; but they dare not accept of the offer of mercy. They
have all manner of persuasions but remain unpersuadable; they resolve to do it,
they may attempt it, but do not effect it: It seems a dangerous thing, and a
method to cast away their own souls; they think God would be very angry with
them for obtruding themselves upon him: It seems to them a desperate adventure.
But when they are convinced of the gloriousness of God, they see encouragement
enough to come to Christ.

They see three things especially that are encouragement to them,

1 The free Grace of God. They were wont to discourage themselves because of
their unworthiness; it seemed to them as if the heart of God was turned against
them, and they labored in that, that they might get something to incline the
heart of God toward them, that might appease his anger, and attract his love:
But when they have the knowledge of God, they are satisfied in the freeness of
his grace; they see that there is enough in his own heart to move him, that
there is an infinite ocean of grace there, that his thoughts are not as our
thoughts, that there is an height and depth, and length and breadth in the love
of God that it passes knowledge; that he can pity his greatest enemies, and
love those that have nothing to commend them. They say he is God and not man:
His mercy does not depend on any excellency in them: His grace is sovereign
grace, and he has mercy on whom he will have mercy. Though it be a great thing
to be pardoned and saved, yet it is not too much for him to do. There is no
need of any thing to move his heart; he can do it because it pleases him. They
were wont formerly to limit the mercy of God, and to think it would have been
sufficient, if they had not been such great sinners, or if they were more
broken for their sins; but now they are convinced, that if they were worse than
they are, that the mercy of God it sufficient for them; that there is an
infiniteness in the grace of God; and after they have reckoned up many things
that grace can do, that there is infinitely more than they can think of No
badness does discourage them, no want of goodness does discourage them. There
is no more limiting of the grace than of the power of God. There is mercy
enough to set against their unworthiness. Psalm 36 7. How excellent is thy
loving kindness O God, therefore the children of men put their trust under the
shadow of thy wings.

2 The preciousness and sufficiency of Christ's Righteousness. The threatenings
of the law were a terror to them like a flaming sword; they saw justice binding
them over to condemnation; they thought that every jot and tittle of the law
must be fulfilled; as Mat. 5.18. That the law cannot be abrogated not
moderated; that all the challenges of it must be answered. And when they heard
of the satisfaction of Christ, they did not satisfy their consciences. They
were told that Christ Jesus was the Son of God; that God has appointed him to
be a mediator; that his sacrifice was acceptable to God: And they looked upon
those things very probable; but were not certain of them: But when they see
God, and believe his word, Christ is precious to them, 2 Pet. 2.7. They look on
him just according to the report of the gospel. They say as Peter, Mat. 16. He
is Christ the Son of the living God. They are sensible that he has redeemed us
from the curse, having born the curse for us; that he has made reconciliation
for iniquity, made an end of sin, and brought in an everlasting righteousness;
that in the Lord Jesus we have righteousness and strength. They are satisfied
that he has made a new and living way to the holy place: They see now that the
guilt of sin was translated to Christ; that the law has been executed on him;
that his blood has quenched the fire of God's wrath; that an atonement is made,
and God reconciled. That Christ is at the right hand of God, exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior; that it is a safe thing to appear before God in his
Righteousness, there is no need of any addition to it. They say there are
unsearchable riches in Christ. Before, they did not know but the doctrine
concerning Christ was a delusion, a cunningly devised fable; but now they are
sure it is otherwise. Joh. 6.69 We believe and are sure, that thou art that
Christ, the Son of the living God. Joh 17.8. They have known surely that I came
out from thee, and they believed that thou did send me.

3 The faithfulness of the offers of the Gospel. God in the gospel makes many
gracious promises. That such as come to Jesus Christ he will in no wise cast
off, Joh. 6 37 That those that believe in Christ shall not perish, but shall
have everlasting life, Joh. 3 16. That all that believe in Christ shall have
remission of Sins, Act. 10.43. And this light gives assurance of the truth of
the promises: Before this light was given they seemed incredible. Sometimes
they doubted of them because of the greatness of them, sometimes because God
was angry with them, sometimes because there were but few that were saved. But
when this light comes into the soul, they see the certainty of these promises;
they come with a divine authority upon the heart. 1 These. 2.13. Ye received the
word, not as the word of man, but as it was indeed the word of God The
faithfulness of God convinces them that the promise is sure. They receive it as
infallible: They do not build their persuasions upon the opinions of men, but
upon the word of God. Many men dispute with a great deal of confidence for the
principles of religion, against Papists and Socinians, but it is upon that
supposition, that the Scripture is the word of God; and that they take for
granted, but do not know it. But when this spiritual light is let into them,
they are assured of the divine authority of the Scripture they are assured it
is the word of God, and know that God is faithful. They say as David, Psalm.
12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as Silver tried in a furnace of
Earth, purified seven times.

CHAP. XI. No man is able to give a full Account of all that he saw when this
light did first shine into his heart.
THERE is a great deal of difference in this light as to the clearness of it;
all that have this spiritual light do not see things with the like clearness;
the discoveries are more dim in some than in others. There are degrees of
natural light, so of the light of reason, so of spiritual light. This light is
sometimes called wisdom. Sometimes because of the clearness of it, it is called
revelation. Ephesians. 1.17. That God would give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him. But whether the sight be clear or more
obscure, they do all see the truth of the gospel; that Christ is a sufficient
foundation for them to build upon, that it is safe to cast themselves upon him;
that Christ is precious, and that the gospel is of divine authority. But no man
is able to give an exact account of all that he did see at that time. The thing
was done in the twinkling of an eye; and though men never forget it, yet they
cannot call to mind all that they were convinced of; no, not if they were to
give an account the next hour. Men have not at that time the actual
understanding of all gospel principles: Indeed they saw that that way of
Salvation that they had been for many years instructed in was true; but they
have not the actual understanding of them at the very time: Yet they did see,
and actually understood at the time, a great deal more than they can remember.

This may appear by these things,

1. From the shortness of the time wherein this discovery is made. There is but
a very little time between the opening of the eyes, and the hearts closing with
Christ, and the discovery is wont to last but a little time; and so it is
impossible that he should have a distinct remembrance of every thing that he
saw. The Spouse gives a very particular description of Christ in figurative
expressions, Cant. 5. from v. 16. ad fin And so Godly men are able to do from
what they find in the word of God; but they can remember but a little account
of what they saw at that time. If a man cast up his eyes to heaven, he sees a
multitude of stars; but is not able to give a particular account of what he saw
of the several stars and constellations. So, if a man should cast his eye upon
a beautiful Person, he is much affected with his beauty; but he cannot give a
particular account of all his features, the comeliness of his forehead, eyes,
cheeks and lips, nor give a description of them. If a man should cast his eye
upon a Garden wherein their is a variety of flowers, he may be much affected
with it, yet not able to tell particularly what sorts of flowers he saw. Or if
he should cast his eye upon a curious piece of Embroidery, he may perceive
immediately that there is much curiosity in it; but he cannot give an account
of all the colors and resemblances that he cast his eye upon. Thus it is when
men's eyes are opened. They see the way of salvation to be a glorious way, but
they cannot tell particularly all that they saw; they had but a transient
sight, and could not take such distinct notice of things, as to lay them up in
their memory.

2. There is need of the actual knowledge of many gospel Truths, in order to
the first closing with Christ. They heard of those things often before, but
they understood nothing in a right manner before; but they must understand them
in order to their closing with Christ. They need to understand something of the
Greatness of that Salvation that is offered. Men will not accept the offer,
except they judge it worthy to be accepted. They need to understand, that the
offer is made to them; the making of such on offer to others is no warrant to
them to accept thereof. They need to understand, their sins may be pardoned;
that the law does not render them incapable of Pardon. They need to understand,
that it is God himself that makes the offer in the Gospel: Nothing, less than
that can be an encouragement to accept. Men need to understand that God has
Mercy enough to pardon all their Sins, though they have no worthiness: If they
do not understand this, they will not dare to accept the offer. They need to
understand the Faithfulness of God, else they can see no safety in coming to
Christ. They need to understand the saving Virtue of the blood of Christ; that
it is acceptable to God, and sufficient to purge away Sin. They need to
understand that Christ Jesus is the Son of God, that they may be satisfied in
the divine virtue of his blood' They need to understand, that God made him a
Mediator, and wounded him for our Transgressions. They had need to understand
the sufficiency of Christ to sanctify them and make them persevere, and God's
ability to fulfill his promises. And there is no godly man that can recover the
remembrance of it, that at that time he saw all these things. Some can remember
more than others; but none can call to mind all that he saw at that time.

3 Because at that time men's thoughts are so fixed up one or two particular
things, that they are hindered thereby from remembering some other things.
Experience shows, that some men at their first conversion, have their thoughts
more fixed on the consideration of the free Mercy of God: They see a depths of
compassion in the heart of God; that he has no need of any external motive to
draw his heart; that he can overlook all manner of provocations, has mercy on
whom he will, and compassion on whom he will have compassion, as Romans 9.15.
Some men at the time had their thoughts more taken up about the Sacrifice of
Christ, how he has born the curse, bought us with a price, made his Soul an
offering for Sin, fully satisfied the Justice of God. And some others have
their thoughts at the time more fixed upon the Faithfulness of God, that his
words are pure words, that he is not as a man that he should lie, nor the Son
of man that he should repent; that his word is a sure foundation to build upon.
It is frequently so afterward. They are led into it sometime by the
consideration of some Scripture that comes to mind at that time. Sometimes by
having special temptations just before; as if God could not find in his heart
to pardon such as they; as if Christ's blood would not answer for their Sins,
etc. And the thoughts being fixed on one encouragement makes others less
observed. If a man takes particular notice of one Argument in a discourse, he
can give the less account of the rest. If a man takes special notice of what
concerns himself in a discourse, he will not take such particular notice of
what concerns others. If there be a great Show, one person takes more notice of
one particular, another of another, and are not able to give to good an account
of the other things that they saw.

CHAP. XII. This Spiritual Light does discover those things that Men were
convinced of before, under the Work of Preparation, and that in a better manner
than they saw them before.
BEfore God converts men, it is his manner to prepare them for it by a common
work of his Spirit, which is called Preparatory, which puts men upon it to to
be sensibly seeking after reconciliation. Men are called upon to seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness; to labor not for the meat that perishes,
but for that meat that does endure unto eternal life. And men are blamed for
slightly seeking, Luke 13.24. Many seek and are not able to enter. And that was
the happiness of some, their hearts were mightily set in seeking the kingdom of
God, Mat. 11.13 Men are laboring, some a long while for peace with God before
they are converted: They are convinced of the vanity of the world, and of the
necessity of the favor of God and eternal life: They are convinced also of the
insufficiency of their own righteousness, so as to relinquish hopes from that,
but when God sets in spiritual light to convert men, that does discover the
same that they saw under the work of preparation, and that after a better
manner than they saw them before,

1 When God gives spiritual light and reveals his Grace and the Glory of Christ
to the Soul, that discovers those things that they saw under the work of
preparation.

1 That will discover the terribleness of Damnation. One thing that Sinners are
sensible of under the work of preparation is, that the wrath of God is
terrible: And they are wont to cry out as he, What must I do to be saved. Act.
16.30. And as David, There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger,
nor any rest in my bones because of my sin, Psalm. 48.3. They see they, have
exposed themselves to the heavy wrath of God, and are liable to damnation,
which is intolerable. Isai. 33.14. Who can dwell with devouring fire, who can
dwell with everlasting burnings? And the sense of this is wont to fill them
with Terror; they are afraid of dying quickly, and they are urged in spirit to
cry to God, and beg the pardon of their Sins. This stirs them up carefully to
reform their lives, and leave off all sinful practices, and to resist
temptations. This makes them sensible of the vanity of the world. And when
gospel light is let into men, they will see the terribleness of the wrath of
God for Sin. If they did not see that, they would not see the necessity of
coming to Christ for Salvation; but when they see the truth of the Gospel, they
will be convinced of that; for then they will see the faithfulness of God, and
the truth of the threatenings of the law: Then they will believe the greatness
of Christ's sufferings, and thereby see the terrible wrath of God for Sin. Luke
23.31. If these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry? In the sorrows of Christ they will discern how intolerable the wrath of
God is, and what need there is of deliverance from it.

2 That will discover the vanity and insufficiency of men's own righteousness.
Under the work of preparation they are by degrees led into the understanding of
their own unworthiness, that they can do nothing to pacify the wrath, or merit
the favor of God. When sinners are in distress of conscience, they are wont to
labor to lay some bonds on the justice, or faithfulness, or mercy of God; and
in length of time God is wont to show them that their righteousness don't answer
the law, satisfies for no Sin, cannot draw the heart of God to them; that by
their best works they are meriting condemnation; that their hearts are full of
enmity to God; that they have no power to do any good; that they have nothing
of their own to depend upon, but stand in need of free grace and the
righteousness of Christ: And when the gospel light is let into them, that
teaches them the emptiness of their own works. When men see the excellency of
Christ's righteousness, they see it is a vain thing for them to think to pacify
God themselves; they shall never be able to get any thing of their own that is
comparable to the righteousness of Christ: That alone will serve their turn,
and they have no need of any other. Phil. 3.7. What things were gain to me,
those I counted loss for Christ. When men see their own hearts under the work
of Humiliation, they see the vanity of their own righteousness; but when they
see the righteousness of Christ, they see further into the vanity of it, and
prefer Christ's righteousness, and count their own as dung in comparison with
Christ's Phil. 3.8. And count them but dung that I may win Christ.

3. They are convinced of these things after a better manner than they are
under the work of preparation. Under the work of preparation, they are
convinced of them by the illuminations of natural Conscience. They see there is
great danger of damnation, and that damnation is intolerable, and that the
world is vain; that their own righteousness cannot draw the heart of God; that
it is just with God to destroy them. And some things they are convinced of by
Experience; as, that they are blind, and under the dominion of their sins, that
they are dead in trespasses and sins. But when spiritual light is let into
them, they know these things after a better manner, then they see these by
faith; they believe the testimony of God in his word, and this has a better
affect upon the heart. He sees so much of the world, that he hates a worldly
spirit; he sees the vanity of a worldly spirit, so that it is mortified ever
after; and the vanity of his own righteousness, and hates a self-righteous
spirit.

CHAP. XIII. The way considered, wherein God by this spiritual Light does
convert Men, or make them holy.
WHEN Man is in his corrupt estate the Essence of the soul remains entire, and
that natural disposition remains in the Will to follow the last dictates of the
Understanding; so that when God makes this change in the Understanding, there
is always a proportionable change made in the Will. When God makes an
Understanding he makes a Will, and when he renews the Understanding he renews
the Will: They are not two things, but one and the same soul, diversely
denominated according to two several ways of working, which are inseparably
conjoined. When the soul has this spiritual light, it necessarily acts
accordingly. Therefore the way to conversion is this,

I. The soul sees the reason and foundation of spiritual carriages. Holy
carriages are very reasonable; but whatever is presented before men to persuade
them, nothing will have any efficacy on them, until God gives spiritual light;
for naturally they are blind, they are at a loss about the reality of those
things, though they make a continual profession of them: But when God shines into
their hearts with the light of life, they are convinced of those things that
are the foundations of such carriages. They counted them probable before, but
now they are evident to them.

1. They see the foundations of faith in Jesus Christ. When the eyes of men are
opened they see the gracious Nature of God, that he can have mercy on whom he
will have mercy, that he can find in his heart to have compassion on them,
though they he mere creatures and incapable to be any profit to him, though
they cannot recompense him; and though sinful creatures, whatever be the number
and aggravation of their sins: they see that there is an excellency in the
loving kindness of God, Ps. 36 7.

They are convinced that none is like to God in Mercy; that he can abundantly
pardon; that his ways are not as our ways; that he is the God of all Grace;
that his mercy is unlimited; that his mercy passes knowledge; and so their
unworthiness is no ground of discouragement. He sees also a sufficiency in
Christ, Christ is precious in his eyes. 1 Pet. 2.7. God has made a new and
living way by the blood of Christ, what tears would not do, what thousands of
Rams could not effect, that has been done by the blood of Christ; Christ has
answered all the challenged of the Law, and made reconciliation, bought off our
punishment, and made a purchase of eternal Life, he has fulfilled every jot and
tittle of the Law, there be unsearchable riches in Christ, there is blood
enough to cleanse away all Sin, a sacrifice sufficient to make atonement, price
enough for our redemption, so that they may be saved without any reflection on
the justice of God. He also sees the faithfulness of God in the offers of the
Gospel. God invites him to come to Jesus Christ, and commands him to believe,
and has promised to accept of him in a way of coming to Christ, Act 10.43. To
him gives all the prophets witness that through his name whosoever believes in
him shall have remission of Sins. And when men see these things, they see
abundant encouragements to come to Christ, these encouragements remove all
difficulties, there is no one objection but is easily answered, the way is
clear and plain, they see there can be no danger in relying on Christ.

2 They see the foundation of love. When their eyes are opened to see the
gloriousness of God, they must needs see the reason why they should love him:
for all the attributes of God are lovely; his Grace is lovely; his Mercy is
very endearing, that he has a heart to pardon Sin; and to provide a way of
Salvation for Sinners; his Glory is renowned upon that account. Mic. 7.^8 Who
is God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, etc. God is mightily praised in the
Church upon that account, that his mercy endured for ever. His Justice also is
a lovely excellent property, his name is celebrated upon that account; the
church praises him upon that consideration: Rev. 19.2. That true and righteous
are his judgments. So his Holiness is lovely; the Seraphims cry before him,
holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of Hosts. His Wisdom is lovely; that is his
glory that he searches the heart and tries the reins of the Childen of men.
Jer. 17.10. His power is lovely. Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted Lord by thy own
Strength, so will we sing and praise thy Power. His Faithfulness is lovely;
that is his commendation, that his faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. Psalm.
36.5. that he remembers his covenant from generation to generation. He is
praise worthy because of all his attributes he therein excels all men and
Angels; he deserves to be loved with all the heart, and with all the soul, and
with all the strength. All his Attributes are Perfections, and we have reason
to delight in him. He is so excellent on the account of them that we have
reason to make it the business of our lives to glorify him; we have reason to
take a complacency in him, and choose him for our portion. When men see those
attributes, they see upon what account he may justly challenge their love.

3 They see the foundation of Humility. When this spiritual light shines into
Men, and they see the gloriousness of God, they understand that all nations to
him are as the drop of the bucket, and as the dust of the balance, they are
before him as nothing, and they are less than nothing and vanity, as it is
said, Isai. 49.15, 17. There is abundant reason to be thankful to him for the
least mercy, and to say as David that he humbles himself to behold the things
that are upon the earth, as Psalm. 113.6. And that it becomes them to be subject
to his disposals in all things; to sacrifice all their interests to his glory,
and to be obedient to his voice in every thing; to be abased because of their
Sins, and lie in the dust before him, as Job did, Job. 42.5, 6: I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor
myself and repent in dust and ashes. When their eyes are opened to see God's
glory, they see reason to lie low before him. Psalm. 8 3.4. When I consider the
heavens the work of thy fingers, the moon and stars that thou have ordained;
what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest
him. When men see the gloriousness of God, they see it an unreasonable thing to
set up their wisdom against the wisdom of God, and their will against the will
of God, and their interest against the glory of God. They see an infinite
difference between God and them, and that there is all reason that they should
be humble.

II. When they see the foundation of holy carriages, they do immediately carry
holily. They forthwith come to Christ with a spirit of love and humility. When
he sees the foundation of gracious carriages, he will carry graciously. Now he
acts reasonably in trusting in Christ and loving God. While he was in the dark
he was unperswadable; they might as soon prevail with a stone as with him: But
when he sees that that is the proper motive, that will work upon his heart.
When men see reason to be afraid, they will be afraid, and when they see reason
to hope, they will hope. So, when they see reason to believe, they will
believe, thorough conviction always prevails on the heart; God carries on his
work by Light. When suitable light is let into the heart, sinners are scared;
and when they see their own badness, they are broken off from their own
righteousness; and when they are turned from darkness to light, they are turned
from the power of Satan to God. Act. 16.18. When God teaches men, then they
come to Christ; Joh. 6.45. Every man that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me. For,

1 When they see the foundation of holy carriages they are able to carry
holily. Men cannot come to Christ unless the Father draw them, Joh. 6.44. But
the way whereby he draws them is by teaching them, v. 45. And when this light
is let into them, they are able. Many sinners are concerned to get the pardon
of sin; and they resolve to come to Christ, and they strive to come to Christ,
but they cannot; it seems to them a dangerous thing to venture themselves on
Christ, and they cannot overcome their fears: They set many encouraging
considerations before themselves, but they cannot vanquish their fears; they
dare not for their heart venture upon Christ: They are as unable to come as a
man that is bound with chains is to come out of prison. It is a terror to them
to continue as they be, yet they dare not cast themselves upon Christ: But when
their eyes are opened to see the free grace of God and the preciousness of
Christ, their fears are removed; their fetters are taken off, and now they can
come* Yea, they dare not stay away from Christ, they would not for a world stay
away from Christ: Satan with all his artifices cannot persuade them to neglect
Christ. They have been in great distress, and now they see the relief that is
provided for them; they are under a necessity in their own spirits to accept
the call. In like manner when they see the gloriousness of God, they are able
to love him. They were before urged in conscience to do it, and had abundance
of arguments set before them to induce them to love him; but nothing would
prevail upon them, because they were strangers to the loveliness of God: But as
soon as ever their eyes were opened to see the glorious grace of God in the
gospel, now they can love him. They made a profession before, but now they are
sincere; Psalm. 36.10. Stretch forth thy loving kindness to them that know thee,
and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. The heart is drawn to God, they
cannot deny their love to him. Whatever was dear to them before, now God is
dearest to them. And in like manner, now they can indeed abase themselves, when
they see the divine excellency of God: They look on themselves infinitely
inferior to him, and lay themselves low before him.

2 When they see the foundation of holy carriages, they love to carry holily.
There is naturally an enmity in the heart to holy carriages; Romans 8 7. The
natural mind is enmity to God, is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. But this light makes them love holy carriages. When men see the
preciousness of Christ, it mightily suits them to come to him; they take a
complacency in coming to Christ. Some men force themselves after a fashion to
venture on Christ; but when they see the divine authority of the gospel, they
love to come to him, as the hungry, man loves to eat, and the thirsty drink.
Act 16, 34. He rejoiced, believing in God. He sees that that makes it pleasant
to him; he sees that God is worthy of that honor. He is a God of such grace
and faithfulness, that he is worthy to be trusted in; and he sees that the
honor of a glorious Mediator is due to Christ; and he sees that it is a safe
thing to come to Christ. There is no rest any where else for the sole of his
foot, but Christ is a sure foundation, a precious corner stone: His heart takes
contentment in relying upon him: All the world shall not persuade him to
forsake him, and make choice of any other refuge. Isai. 45.24. Surely shall one
say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. So, the man loves to make
the glory of God his end; and he loves to abase himself before God, and look
upon himself as vanity, and nothing in comparison of God. The sight of the
excellency of God and Christ draws his heart; and he loves these holy
carriages. There was an antipathy against them in his heart before; but now God
and Christ are lovely in his eyes, and he has a mind to come to Christ, and to
honor God, and he will not be restrained; for such carriages are pleasant to
him. The glory of God and Christ draws the heart sweetly and powerfully, and he
rejoiceth therein.

3 This spiritual light makes the heart stand bent that way. This does not only
draw forth gracious actings, but leaves an Impression and bias upon the heart
that way. Beauty draws forth an act of Love, and leaves a disposition to love.
This sight changes the mind and makes men judge otherwise of God and Christ
than they used to do, and it changes the heart and inclines it to carry
suitably. The conviction is an abiding conviction, and so the disposition is
abiding. This discovery is like the needles touching the loadstone, it inclines
it toward the north When this light is let into the man he is principled to
trust in Christ, to love God, and live in a way of obedience, it prepares his
heart to live in such a way. When once he is thoroughly convinced of the
gloriousness of God and Christ, he is set in that way and it will abide with
him as long as he lives; there is an impression left on the heart that will
never wear out. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the
Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image. For,

1 When they do perform those holy carriages, they are inclined to perform them
It were impossible to do them without an inclination to do them. If the heart
were not inclined to trust in Christ, they would not trust in him. Holy actions
are never forced. Men may be under a necessity to love God and trust in Christ,
but that necessity does not arise from compulsion but from inclination. Psalm.
110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy power. Before the man had
aversion to those gracious actions, he was under the diminion of a contrary
inclination, but when he does them, he is inclined to do them; and that actual
inclination leaves an habitual inclination on the heart that way. We indeed
commonly say that one act does not make a habit; but we mean that one act does
not make a more perfect habit; as habit is distinguished from disposition,
which is called habitus imperfectus. But one act commonly does leave something
of an inclination that way: one act of love to another person or thing disposes
the heart to renew that act of love. One act is preparation for another of the
same kind; One act of faith puts the Soul into a believing frame: and one act
of humility into an humble frame; he is more inclined to believe again than he
was, and the clearer discovery he had of God and Christ, the more strongly he
does believe, and the greater inclination does remain in him to believe.

2 Such men as have this spiritual discovery never do utterly forget it. It is
possible for a man to forget the first time when he had the discovery of God
and Christ made to him, yet I judge that is not ordinary; but if he does forget
the time, yet he never utterly forgets the thing, he remembers that he has
seen God and Christ to be glorious: There be many times when he has not the
actual remembrance of it, and many times also when he has corrupt apprehensions
concerning God and Christ, and may be under the prevailings of carnal reason
and unbelief, yet he never utturly forgets what he has been convinced of, but
does recover the convictions that the gospel is true, and Jesus Christ is an
all-sufficient Savior, and so the inclination to holiness does abide in his
heart. 1 John 2.27. The anointing which ye have received of him abides in you.
And though he has not such discoveries as he has had, yet he knows he has
seen it and accordingly he has an inclination still to carry holily, when the
glory of God and Christ are out of sight. The man is sure from what he has seen
that it is so, and that maintains an inclination in him to carry himself holily.

CHAP. XIV. There is a great difference between Converting Light, and common
Illumination.
MEN are wont to distinguish between rational conviction and spiritual. Which
distinction had need to be carefully understood; for man's rational faculty is
the subject both of common and spiritual conviction. We have no other faculty
capable to receive conviction but our Reason. When the spirit of God gives
common conviction, he works upon reason; and when he gives spiritual
conviction, he likewise works upon reason. Besides, spiritual conviction is
rational conviction: Godly men act understandingly and rationally, when they
judge God to be worthy to be trusted, loved and obeyed; when they judge Christ
to be the eternal Son of God, and an all-sufficient Savior. Yet the
distinction may be allowed if it be thus explained; that rational conviction is
that which men by their natural reason do attain; which they may gain by the
force of their natural reason, improving the works and word of God; which
differs very much from that conviction which men have by the saving work of
God's Spirit. Common Illumination is of two sorts; one is from the more common
improvements of natural reason, the other from more affecting discoveries
wrought by a common work of the Spirit of God. There is a conviction that
rises from the common improvement of natural reason. Thus men see clearly the
Protestant religion is better than the Popish: That it must needs be a work of
wonderful wisdom and power to make the world, that the sacrifice of the Son of
God must needs be of great value, that it was great love for God to give his
Son to die: And hundreds of things of the like nature.

Besides these rational convictions there are affecting discoveries of divine
truths by the common work of the spirit which make for a time considerable
impression on the heart. Luke 14.15 When one of them that sat at meat with him
heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God; Mat. 13.20. He that received the seed into stony places, the
same is he that hears the word and anon with joy receives it. 2 Pet. 2.20
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are entangled therein and
overcome: Heb. 1.4, 5.6 For it is impossible for them that were one
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and has tasted the good word of God and the powers of the
world to come, if they fall away, to renew them again to repentance.

The two sorts of illumination, are resemblances of a twofold spiritual
Illumination that saints have. One is by sanctified reason, whereby men are
convinced of divine truths. Men understand the divine authority of the
Scripture, and thereby they are assured of the truth of Promises and
Threatenings: They are assured that God made the world, and from thence they are
convinced of his eternal Power and Godhead: They know that Jesus Christ is the
eternal Son of God, and thereby they know the saving virtue of his Blood.

The other is by special discoveries of divine truths. They are led into
Christ's chambers, as the phrase is, Cant. 1.4. God breaks into the heart by
divine light, and gives great discoveries of his faithfulness, of his holiness,
his grace, the delight he takes in the sacrifice of Christ, and many other
things. 2 Cor. 4.6. God has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, Both these ways of
conviction seem to be intimated, Ephesians. 1.17. That God may give unto you, the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.

The difference between those convictions that rise from the improvement of
natural reason, and that do arise from spiritual reason, lies in these two
things.

1. Natural reason does not discover the Certainty of divine things. Sanctified
reason does see them to be sure, Joh. 6.69. We believe and are sure, that thou
art Christ the Son of the living God. Joh. 17.8. They have known that I came
from thee, and they have believed that thou have sent me. Heb. 11.1. Faith is
the evidence of things not seen. 1 These. 2 13. They received the word not as
the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. But natural reason does
not discover the Certainty of divine truths: That can perceive the connection
between one divine truth and another, and perceive how one thing follows
certainly from another; but it does not perceive the certainty of any. Carnal
men's reasoning is from supposition; they reason very rationally, but they do
not see that which is the foundation of their reasoning to be certain. Carnal
men and Godly men do both of them argue from the divine Nature of Christ. Both
carnal men and Godly do strongly argue, that if Christ be the Son of God, there
is a divine virtue in his sufferings; and that it is safe relying on him. But
here lies the difference; the godly man knows that Christ is the Son of God,
Mat. 16.6. but the carnal man supposes that Christ is the Son of God. He says
the Church believe it, the Old and New Testament give an account of it, and
there be many things said that make much for the confirmation of it. He
discovered the secret thot's of men, did many miraculous works, rose from the
dead.

Upon such account he supposes him to be the Son of God, and judges it a
heinous crime for any to deny it; out he does not know these things, for he is
ignorant of the divine authority of the word, and dare not venture on Christ,
for fear it should not be so. So it was with the Jews, they did not believe
Moses. Joh. 5.46. Thus they both of them argue from the Types and Sacraments.
The godly man argues, that there were several types instituted by God, to show
the saving virtue of the blood of Christ; and the sacraments in the
New Testament are instituted to be a memorial of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.24. The
godly man argues from hence, that Christ has satisfied the justice of God; that
Christ was the lamb slain from the foundation of the world, 1 Cor. 5.7. These
sacrifices were only types of Christ, Col. 2.17. And he is abundantly satisfied
by these institutions, that Christ is a glorious Savior. Another man argues in
like manner, that God would never have appointed such Signs to signify Christ,
if he would not have us trust in him. He has not appointed these signs to
deceive us; God would never teach his people a false way of Salvation: But his
wound is, that he does not know certainly the divine authority of those
institutions; he does not know but they were the inventions of men. So, they
both of them argue strongly from the command to believe, from the promises of
Salvation in a way of believing, from Christ's ascension and sitting at the
right hand of God; but the carnal man is uncertain of those things that are
foundations of his reasoning; he does not know but there is some mistake: He
thinks that there is a great probability of the truth of those things, but he
has no assurance: His principles are grounded on an uncertain proposition; and
so he knows nothing as he ought to know.

2 Carnal reason does not receive a right idea of divine things. Godly men
though they have the exercise of spiritual reason, cannot find out the Almighty
unto perfection: But yet they do know God and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. They
have a true idea of God; they know him to be one of infinite perfection; they
know him to be a God of infinite power, grace and faithfulness; they are
convinced that he is worthy of that love, faith and submission that he calls
for; Psalm. 18.3. I will call upon God who is worthy to be praised. They know
that divine honor is due to him; Psalm. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his name. But carnal men have not a right idea of God: They acknowledge
that he is infinite in his perfections, and can give some description of his
infinite perfections; but they have not a right Idea of his glorious nature,
are not sensible what reverence and glory is due to him; and therefore they are
said to be ignorant of him: Joh. 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God.

The difference between those affecting illuminations that carnal men have, and
those discoveries that are given to godly men, lies in these two particulars.

1. The illuminations that carnal men have, are affecting, but not convincing.
They are many times much affected with Joy; so they said, What a blessedness is
it! when Paul preached the gospel unto them, Gal. 4.15. It works desires in
them, Luke 14, 15. And their hearts upon that occasion may be mightily weaned
from the world, and taken up about heavenly things: They may be mightily
transported with zeal. The people of the Jews were so affected with Christ,
that they were of the mind to make him a King. But these illuminations does not
convince them; the men remain ignorant of God, and Christ, and the truth of the
gospel. These flashes of light do not discover the certainty of divine truths.
The people that cry Hosanna to day, cry crucify him another time; and that was
a sign that they did not know him; for had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Many are greatly affected in the
hearing of sermons, that do not firmly believe what they hear: Act. 25.48. When
the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord;
and as many as was ordained to eternal life believed. They were generally much
affected, but it was only a select number that be loved. Stony ground hearers
are much affected, but not convinced. Men are often affected with such things
as they look upon as probable; but special discoveries that God makes to
Saints, are very affecting and convincing. Godly men must needs be affected
with those discoveries, for they are wondrous in their eyes: Psalm. 119.18. Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things in thy law. Sometimes the
love of God is said to be shed abroad in their hearts; that implies great
affection, Romans 5.5. Divine truths are of a very affecting nature; They will
stir up joy, and sorrow, and desires, and zeal; but these discoveries do not
affect them only, but convince them: They see the glory of God; Psalm. ^3.2. To
see thy power and glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. They know the
love of Christ that passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. When they behold the glory of
God, they are convinced of the glory of God, 2 Cor. 2.18. When God shines into
their hearts, he gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, 2 Cor.
4.6. When men see the sun, they know it is the sun; and when they see the grace
and faithfulness of God, they know he is such an one; they do not only see the
gloriousness of mercy, and holiness, and faithfulness; but that God is
gracious, and holy, and faithful.

2 The illuminations of carnal men does not draw forth any gracious Exercises.
The common discoveries that are given to carnal men, have a considerable effect
upon them; besides the stirring up of affections spoken of before, they have an
effect upon the conversation; they many times make men to reform their lives,
and cast of sinful practices: 2 Pet. 2.20. They escape the pollutions of the
World through the knowledge of Christ. Sometimes they encourage men in seeking
the pardon of their sins. They may have such a discovery of the happiness of
heaven, of the graciousness of God, and of the mercy of God in providing a way
of Salvation, as may greatly encourage them to continue seeking his favor.
They may likewise have that effect to make men presumptuous. Men may from
thence conclude their own estate good: They may take encouragements for
assurances of the favor of God: May take occasion also from them to get a
false faith. If they have some discoveries of a readiness in God to pardon
sinners, they may take encouragement to think, that men so qualified as they,
that are reformed and sorry for their sins, may be bold to venture on Christ:
But those spiritual discoveries that God makes, do always draw forth the
exercise of grace: Cant. 1.4 The King has brought me to his chambers, we will
be glad and delight in thee; the upright love thee. When God breaks into the
heart by light, the heart is drawn forth in love, and faith, and repentance.
Communion is reciprocal. When God draws nigh to his People, that mightily stirs
up a spirit of holiness; it does not only strengthen assurance, but it stirs up
all grace: Job. 42.5, 6. Now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor myself, and
repent in dust and ashes. Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ that
posseth knowledge; that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. This
gives great increase to grace. 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto
you, through the knowledge of God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XV. Conversion may be known.
MEN may have knowledge of their own Conversion. The knowledge that other men
have of it is uncertain; because no man can look into the heart of another, and
see the workings of grace there: Yet men may know that they are godly. Some
ungodly think that they have grace; but that which is not, cannot be known:
Things that are not, are called, things that do not appear, Heb. 11.3. That
which is wanting cannot be numbered. Eccl. 1.15. All converted men do not know
that they are converted. Though grace be visible, yet many times it is not
seen. Visible things are not always seen; sometimes because it is night,
sometimes because they are covered. It is the Calamity, and many times the
Iniquity of godly men, that they are ignorant of their conversion. They do know
that they have corruptions in them, and they may know that they have grace in
them. This is very evident, because many godly men have known their good
estate. If this knowledge had never been attained, it might more reasonably be
questioned, whether it were attainable. Job was abundantly satisfied; Job 10.7.
Thou know that I am not wicked: And he was not mistaken, Job. 1.1. So David
knew it; Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I shall behold his face in righteousness. So
Paul; 2 Timothy 4 7. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith. v. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. And we do not know of one godly man in the Scripture that was
under darkness about his sincerity. There be some Scriptures brought to prove
the contrary, especially some passages of Psalm, 88 But that Psalm represents to
us not the particular case of Haman, but of the Church of Israel

Further, it appears that conversion may be known, because we are directed to
examine our selves in order to it; 2 Cor. 13 5, examine yourselves whether you
be in the faith, prove your own selves; know you not that Jesus Christ is in
you except ye be reprobates. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling
and election sure, And to what purpose should we be advised to do a thing that
is not doable? God does not advise us to impossibilities. All the command of
God are possible to be fulfilled; if not perfectly, yet they may be fulfilled:
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me.

I shall only add that consideration* that God makes many comfortable Promises
to them that have grace; Romans 2.7. 1 Jam. 12. Isai. 3.10. But if men could not
know that they have grace, that would frustrate the design of these promises;
that would take away the foundation of their comfort; they would be incapable
of making application of the promises to themselves. How much happiness soever
is made over to them in those promises; yet if they could not know their own
grace, they must be strangers to their own happiness, and not rejoice in the
good that is made over to them.

Quest. How may a godly man know that he has grace?

Answ. 1 He cannot know it in a way of Arguing. We come to the knowledge of
many things in a way of reasoning; arguing from things known, to things that
are not known. Thus a man may know his justification: He may argue thus, He
that has faith in Christ is justified; or he that has love to God is
justified; or he that loves the brethren is passed from death to life: Because
there is a certain connection between these graces and a state of
justification. Thus a man may know by reasoning, that he had this and that
particular grace: He may argue so, If I have the grace of faith, I have the
grace of love, or humility; because there is a concatenation of graces, and
they are inseparable one from another: But they do not know that they are
gracious in this manner; the knowledge of their graces does not come in at that
door.

1 He cannot prove it from any such acts as may proceed from other principles:
A moral and religious conversation may proceed from other principles: Such a
conversation is an argument to other men to be charitable, but it is no
demonstration. The young man in the gospel walked exactly; Mat. 19.20 All these
things have I done from my youth. Paul was conscientious; Phil. 3.6. Touching
the righteousness that is in the Law I was blameless: Such a walk may proceed
from fear of hell and hope of heaven. Zeal for God does not prove it; There may
be zeal where there is no love: The Jews were great enemies to Christ, yet very
zealous; Rom 10.2. I bear them record, that they have a zeal for God. Paul had
great zeal before he had any grace. Natural conscience may produce zeal. Great
affections does not prove it: The Jews cried, Hosanna to the Son of David.
Striving against a self-righteous spirit does not prove it: Men may strive
against it, yet not mortify it. Associating with godly men does not prove it:
Achitophe. was David's companion, Psalm. 55.14. Sorrows for the afflictions of
the Church, and desires for the conversion of Souls does not prove it: These
things may be found in carnal men, and so can be no evidences of grace. Those
things that are common to saints and hypocrites, does not prove that a man is a
saint and no hypocrite. Men must do more than carnal men to prove that they
have grace: Mat. 5.10 Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of
the scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
heaven. That which is common to hypocrites is no sign of saintship. It is a
vain thing to make that a plea, that Publicans may plead as well as they, Mat.
5.46, 47. That which may rise from a corrupt principle, will not prove a
gracious principle; that which a beast may do, will not prove a thing to be a
man.

2 He cannot prove it from any such acts of Providence as are common to carnal
men. Some men have smiling providence, and great deliverances. God is very
bountiful; and many argue from thence that they are godly; but they do not
argue strongly: God may smile on men here, and frown on them in the day of
Judgment. Jude 5. The Lord having (...) the people out of the Land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them who believed not. Prosperity is no sign of the true
Church nor of men's being members of the mystical Church. So, if God do the
thing for men that they pray for, that, is no argument: Many prayers are
granted that are not accepted. God hears the cry of the Ravens: God heard the
voice of Ishmael. Sometimes God denies men's prayers because they ask amiss,
but not always. Men may be instruments of a great deal of good in the Church,
and in the common wealth; yet be destitute of grace. Saul did a great deal of
service in Israel, 2 Samuel 1.24. Ministers may be instruments of the conversion
of sinners and the comfort of saints, yet not be godly. There were several
godly in Israel under the ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees; and the Ravens
brought meat to Elijah.

2 They do not know it by believing that they are godly. We know many things by
faith: Heb. 11.1. By faith we understand that the worlds were made by the power
of God Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.

1 Thus men know the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead; that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God; that he that believes in him will have eternal life; the
resurrection of the dead. And if God should tell a saint that he has Grace, he
might know it by believing the word of God. But it is not in this way that
godly men do know that they have grace: It is not revealed in the word; and the
spirit of God does not testify it to particular persons.

Some think the Spirit does testify it to some; and they ground it on Romans
8.16. The Spirit itself bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
children of God. They think the spirit reveals it by giving an inward testimony
to it. And some godly men think they have had experience of it; but they may
easily mistake. When the spirit of God does eminently stir up a spirit of faith
and sheds abroad the love of God in the heart, it is easy to mistake it for a
testimony. And that is not the meaning of Paul's words. The Spirit reveals
things to us, by opening our eyes to see what is revealed in the word: But the
spirit does not reveal new truths not revealed in the word. The Spirit
discovers the grace of God in Christ, and thereby draws forth special actings
of faith and love, which are evidential; but it does not not work in way of
testimony. If God do but help us to receive the revelations in the word, we
shall have comfort enough without new revelations.

Paul's meaning is, that the miraculous works of the Spirit are a witness to
the Christian religion. The thing that is witnessed is, that sincere Christians
are the children of God; that the Christian religion is the true religion; and
that all that embrace it indeed are the heirs of eternal life: And the Person
that witnesses is the Holy Ghost; he testifies to it by Miracles and
extraordinary Gifts. The mighty works of the Spirit of God in the primitive
times, were evidences of the truth of the Christian religion; they were wrought
for that very end. Heb. 2 4. God also bearing them witness with signs and
wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost. 1. These. 1 5, Our
gospel came unto you, not in word only, but also in power, and in much
assurance, and in the Holy Ghost.

3 It is by Intuition or seeing of grace in their own hearts. It is by
consciousness; as Peter knew his love to Christ, when he says, Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, Joh. 11.17. And as David
knew his love to God; Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord, And as Job knew his
repentance; Job. 42.6. I abhor my self in dust and ashes, And as Paul knew that
he knew Christ; 1. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have believed. There is a
reflecting power in man: As he can look out and see external objects, so he can
look in, and see his own actions. In this manner saints know the corrupt
workings of their own hearts: They know their pride, and worldliness, and
frowardness, and unbelief; so they know their grace. In this manner they know
their natural actions; they know that they think, and what they think about;
they know the acts of their wills, what they cause and what they refuse; and
the acts of their Affections; they know that they love their children; that
they desire meat and drink; that they are afraid of pain and death; that they
rejoice in their good things: So, they may have the knowledge by intuition,
that they know God and Christ; that they receive the gospel; that they love God
and the saints; that they are sorry for their sins. A godly man understanding
what it is to love God and to repent, though he cannot give an exact definition
of them, yet may be able by his observation to know that he does so; and may be
as able to say, that he loves God, and believes in Christ, as to say, he has
pride and worldliness in his own heart. There may indeed be something or more
difficulty in it, because many actings of grace are low and weak; on that
account; it may be hard to see it; as it is hard to see the motion of water in
a river, when it moves very slowly; and upon that account, because grace is
much counterfeited; and there be many actings that do look like the actings of
grace that are not so: But sometimes grace works so powerfully, that it is very
visible; and men are able to distinguish between grace and the resemblance of
it, and be satisfied understandingly: 1 Chronicles. 29.17. As for me, in the
uprightness of my heart. I willingly offered all these things.

Notwithstanding this, it may be of great use for Ministers frequently to be
giving signs of Grace. These signs are of great use for the discovery of
hypocrisy. The want of particular graces is a means to discover some. Some may
be undeceived by considering, that they have not had an antecedent work of
Humiliation. The account of the way wherein God works grace, sc. by the
discoveries of Gospel Grace, may convince others. The want of Obedience may
convince others. So, the allowing of pride or worldliness, and the want of
doing duties out of regard to God's glory.

But Signs also are of great use for the encouragement and strengthening of the
saints. Sometimes the discoursing of such things does draw forth the exercise
of Grace; and men find in themselves that which they are hearing of. So it was
with Peter: The very question whether he loved Christ, kindled a spirit of love
to him, that he was assured that he loved him, Joh. 21.17. Sometimes the
explication of the sign, helps men to see it more clearly. They were at a loss;
but when it is clearly laid open, it helps them to see it. Besides, it brings
to remembrance what they formerly felt; and so it brings joy, and renews their
comfort. Moreover, it helps them against many temptations: They are under fears
because of the Providence of God, and because of corrupt workings of heart; but
when they hear that complacency in God, and the sight of the glory of Christ,
etc. are signs of a good estate, that satisfies them, and is a relief to them
under their temptations.

CHAP. XVI. The Grace given in Conversion is imperfect.
THE grace given in conversion, like other qualities, does admit of innumerable
degrees; and is very imperfect in the best of the People of God. Godly men are
far from pretending to perfection: Job 9.20. If I say I am perfect, it shall
also prove me perverse. Hence we find lamentations of some of the choicest men
that have been in the world: Prove. 30. Surely I am more brutish than any man,
and have not the understanding of a man. Romans 7.23.24. I see another law in my
members, bringing me into captivity. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? The sorrowful falls of David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, Jonah, Peter, are sufficient demonstrations of this; and that warfare
that every godly man does experience: Gal 5 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the
other: So that ye cannot do the things that ye would Especially, grace at first
conversion is very small; if after twenty or thirty years growth, it is very
defective, it must needs be very small at first.

There be many reasons why God suffers much sin to remain in his people, while
they remain in this world.

1 That the work of sanctification may be so carried on, that they may be in
continual need of Justification and Pardon The pardoning of the sins that men
committed in their unconverted state, is a great manifestation of the riches of
his grace, and the virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ; but God does day by day
pardon the repeated iniquities of his people; forgives men thousands of times,
though they have abused mercy, broken vows, fallen from resolutions: This does
wonderfully command the grace of God, and the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. If
there were not experience of it, it would be difficult to conceive, that God
would be willing so to do. These are mighty instances of the unsearchable depth
of mercy that is in the heart of God; and lead me to say, as Mic. 2 18. Who is
a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage, and retains not his anger for ever, because
he delights in mercy.

2 Because they live among carnal men, scattered up and down among unconverted
men; and if this their grace were perfect, they would not be sit to live
together; it would be known who were godly and who ungodly, which would fill
Families, Towns, and Countries with Temptation: Godly Men would be put to it to
bear the carriages of the ungodly, and ungodly men would not know how to bear
the carriages of the Godly; it would fill all societies with disquietment and
trouble.

3. Because this is suitable to those Administrations that God has appointed in
his House. It is meet that all should worship God; and the worship that God has
appointed is suited both for the conversion of sinners, and the building up of
saints; to promote their humiliation and recovery from backslidings and relief
under temptations. If godly men were perfect, they and ungodly men would not be
sit to join together in confession or petition. The Ordinances that God has
appointed are not fit to be attended by men that have attained to a perfection
in grace

Some saints do attain to greater perfection in grace than others; this is not
always in proportion to the time since their conversion, but according to the
improvement of their ^^me: It is said of the Thessalonians that their says
grew exceedingly, and their Charity abounded. 2 These. 1.3. Some have more grace
at first Conversion than others, and some may grow more in a Year than others
in Seven, and though it would be a presumptuous thing to determine the degree
of Grace any have attained to in this life, yet it seems probable that Saints
do not ordinarily, if ever attain to such measures of grace, but that they have
more corruption than grace.

It seems to be but a little grace compared with corruption, that God's choice
servants do attain unto. It is said of the angel of Philadelphia, Thou have a
little strength, and have kept my word and have not denied my name. Rev. 3.8.
And the experience of the people of God seems to confirm this: Sin does easily
beset them; Heb. 12.1. Corruption is like a fountain that is continually
sending forth its waters. Temptations do quickly infest. Pride and worldliness
and discontent and unbelief are very ready to work and there is a great
backwardness to spiritual duties, to faith and love, and to submit to the
sovereignty of God. Men's enjoyments are so dear to them, that they have great
difficulty to resign them up to the pleasure of God. There is much formality
that does attend duties of religion; and there is much spiritual blindness,
ignorance of God and Jesus Christ.

Neither does it make against this assertion, that some of the people of God
have a very exemplary Coversation; for there are many other principles that
join in with grace to effect this; natural conscience, regard to reputation, a
good temper, principles of morality, hope of reward and fear of punishment. If
an exemplary conversation were an argument that men had more grace than
corruption, how comes it about that some men that have not one spark of Grace
to carry exemplarily? A good conversation is sometimes only the effect of
nature improved.

USE.
The USE of this discourse is of EXHORTATION, to labor to be converted
Conversion is a glorious change, and will issue in eternal Glory. You may
observe many men striving with all their might to add to their worldly
comforts: they spare no pains, but are laying out themselves indefaticably to
mend their accommodations, and increase their enjoyments here; but it will turn
to better account for you to labor after a work of Regeneration. I do not
advise you to effect it, for it is beyond your power. When the Prophet said,
Make ye a new heart and a new Spirit, for why will ye die O house of Israel, he
intends that the nation should get a disposition to reform. But though you
cannot effect this your selves, yet you can labor in it: You may not indulge
your selves in negligence, excusing yourselves from your impotency: God expects
that you should strive to enter into the strait gate, Luke 12.24. That you
press into the kingdom of God, and be violent that you may obttain it. It is
well worth your while to be engaged in this matter, and to give yourselves no
not until you are converted. If God gives you many outward comforts, let not
them satisfy you; cry out, that one thing is wanting: What will it profit a man
if he should gain the whole world and lose his own Soul, Mat. 16.21. Some
content themselves with the reputation of being converted; but it is not the
name but the thing, that you must crave. Some things are to be sought with a
great deal of indifferency; this must be sought with agony of Spirit; you must
cry for wisdom, and lift up your voice for understanding, you must seek it as
silver, search for it as for hid treasures, Prove. 2.34. This is a thing of such
necessity, that you may not delay to strive after it; and whatever occasions
you have, you must allow of no excuse; and whatever difficulties you meet with,
you must never be discouraged. If others should faint, you must hold out. Avoid
every thing that has a tendency to hinder Success: Shun all things that will
stupify or divert, or discourage; and practice every thing that is proper and
serviceable to your conversion Do not think much to deny your pleasures, to
forego lawful Liberties, to let slip worldly opportunities, to endure hardship,
to endure terrors: Spare no cost, no pains, so you may be converted.

MOTIVES.
1 A Natural Condition is a very sinful Condition. Unconverted men (...)
ungodly men. There be but two sorts of men in the world, Godly and Ungodly. All
ungodly men are utterly destitute of holiness; their natures are corrupted,
they are servants of Satan, and live in a way of Rebellion against God. In this
respect they are worse than the beasts of the Earth; their natures are
superior, but they are more corrupt than brute creatures. Upon this account
they are vile in the eyes of God: If any of them be in an honorable station
outwardly; yet they are abominable, to God. Some think that God takes delight
in them because of his bounty to them; but they are mistaken; God looks on them
as filthy and abominable; and they are a continual provocation to God. Psalm.
7.11. God is angry with the wicked every day.

1 Your hearts are full of sin. Some men carry themselves more orderly and
religiously than others; but their hearts are desperately wicked: Eccl. 9.3.
The hearts of the Sons of men are full of evil. Some are under greater divine
restraints than others are; but the same abominations that break out in other
men, are in them; they have the seeds of all wickedness in them; the natural
mind is enmity against God, Rom 8 7. They are enemies to the authority of God,
and to the wisdom, and power, and justice of God; yea, to the very being of
God. They have a preparedness to all that wickedness that is perpetrated in the
world, if God did not restrain them: As face answers to face in water, so
does the heart of man to man. Many times if they be told before hand what
workings of heart they should have, they would say as Hazael, Is thy servant a
dog, that he should do this thing? If they were in Cain's circumstances, and
God should suffer them, they would do as bad as he did. If they were in
Pharaoh's circumstances, and left of God, they would be as cruel, false and
hard hearted as he. If they were in the like circumstances with Doeg, though
they condemn him for his hypocrisy, flattery and cruelty, they would do every
whit as bad as he If they were in the like circumstances as Judas was, whatever
indignation they have against him, they would be as false, and impudent, and as
very traitors as he. Yea, if they were under the circumstances that the fallen
Angels are, they would be as very Devils as they. A Serpent when benumed with
cold, is a Serpent still. A Lion in a grate is the same fierce creature that he
was before. A Swine that is washed is a Swine still. Some of them have a
regular conversation; but a spirit of uncleaness, and intemperance, and
profaneness, and atheism, and blasphemy is not mortified. That original sin that
reigns in every natural man is the fountain of every abomination. Every natural
man is overrun when the leprosy of sin from head to foot; has not one spark of
goodness in him; all his faculties are corrupted utterly. His understanding is
blind: He talks of God, but is quite a stranger to (...). His will is miserably
corrupted: He pr^^ers vain and base things before God. All his affections are
quite out of order: His whole Soul is like a dead carcass, like an heap of
carrion, loathsome and noisome, and God may justly abhor him; which evidently
shows a great necessity of his conversion.

2 Your lives are full of sin. Men in their natural condition are guilty of a
world of sin. Some of them live in a way of profaneness: The set their mouth
against the heavens, Psalm. 73.9. Some live in the ways of sensuality, and
wallow like swine in the mire. Some live in ways of injustice; they are beasts
of prey. Some are mere earthworms, seeking an heaven upon the earth: They are
under the curse of the serpent; Dust shall be the serpents meat. And such of
them as are addicted to morality and religion, are serving their lusts therein.
The most orderly natural men do live an ungodly life. In all the works of their
calling they carry themselves sinfully; Prove. 21.4. The ploughing of the wicked
is sin. In all their relations they carry themselves sinfully. Under all
Providence they live ungodly. When they eat and drink, they do it not as they
should, for God's glory; but are eating and drinking damnation to themselves.
Yea, their very religion is iniquity, Isai. 1.5. Their hearts are set upon
carnal things; Romans 8.5. They that are after the flesh do mind the things of
the flesh. Though some of them whose consciences are enlightened, are reforming
their lives and crying to God for the pardon of sin, yet they are minding
carnal things as well as others; they are setting up their own righteousness,
and nourishing the pride of their spirits, Rev. 3.17. And they do not mind the
spiritual, but the bodily enjoyments of heaven. They pray for holiness but
oppose it Job 5.^^ They have not the live of God in them. They praise God
because of his excellency, but they do not believe him to be such an one, it is
a burden to them that they suspect it, and they wish he were not such a one.
They wish God did not see their hearts, and had not power to avenge himself.
There is nothing but hypocrisy in all that they do. They confess their sins,
and bewail their iniquities, but they have no godly sorrow. They put up earnest
requests for holiness, but do not sincerely desire it. They strive against sin,
and all the while are cherishing of it. They have pangs of affection, but no
love They have some affection to saints, but hate real holiness. They are
zealous against some sins, but hate none. They are striving for Salvation, but
refuse the offers of it. Sometimes God tries them, by convincing them of the
great danger of their damnation; and they show a dreadful wicked and rebellious
spirit, that they are scared to see themselves. There is a great deal of the
spirit of the Devil in them: Upon this account there is great need of their
(...) ^^^^ersion.

2 If you be not converted you will perish forever. It may be God may bring
great calamities on you in this world on that account: He may curse you in your
estate, in your body, or in your relations. It may be he may shorten your days:
But however that be, you will be damned. If you live here among many that will
go to heaven, yet you will go to hell. You may possibly enjoy many good things
here from the bounty of God; but you will not find mercy from the Lord in that
day You may flatter yourselves with the hopes of heaven; but when your case
comes to be determined, you will be sent to hell. Jo^. 3 3. Except a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God If you have other qualifications
that are commendable and honorable, yet you will be rejected. Moral
qualifications which heathens may attain to, will not prepare you for heaven.
If you pity the poor, God will not pity you. If you shed many tears, that will
not quench the fire of God's wrath. You were born children of wrath; and if you
continue in your natural condition, you will remain under the wrath of God. God
will not take men to heaven that continue in a state of enmity to him. If the
choicest men upon earth pray for your Salvation, God will not hear them. All
unconverted men are ungodly men. If they be honest men, if they be sober men,
if they be religious men, if they be zealous, yet they are ungodly; and they
shall be driven from light to darkness, and chased out of the world. If they be
not converted, they are not pardoned, and there will be no place for them in
heaven, Mat. 28.3. Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

And can you content your selves to be in a perishing condition? Can you stand
still till the wrath of God overtake you? What will it signify for you to eat
and drink, and get land and cattle, and spend away a few years after a
troublesome manner; and then sink down into the bottomless Pit? A dying time
will come; Can you think of it without horror? Does it not make you tremble to
consider it? Will it not be a burden too heavy for you? It is an awful thing to
think of the damnation of neighbors; and can you bear the thoughts of your own
damnation? One would think you should not be able to take any comfort in your
choicest enjoyments, because it is like to be your portion at last to lie down
in sorrow. Do not you think that Cain, and Saul, and Judas, and the sinners in
the old world were in a doleful estate; and are you willing to be among the
rest? Can you bear to hear that sentence, Mat. 24.1. Depart ye cursed, etc. Is
not the wrath of God too heavy for you? Is not hell fire too hot for you? You
shun reproach, you avoid pain, you hate poverty; and are you able to bear hell?
When you come to lie in torment, can you satisfy yourself that you have had
your good things? Will you be able to applaud your self as having acted the
part of a wise man? Will you glory in your wisdom, and bless your self for
loitering away your time? One hours experience of the pains of hell will
effectually teach you that peace with God is worth your care and labor; and
that working out your Salvation is no intolerable burden. If the Doctrine of
Hell be a dream, if when you died your Soul would be resolved into its first
principles, if there were no hell but only in the imaginations of doting men,
you might bless your self in your way: But if there be a God in Heaven that
will execute vengeance upon ungodly men, your neglecting to get into a
converted condition is highest madness and folly: You act like the man
possessed with the devil, that cast himself sometimes into the fire, and
sometimes into the water. One would think that you should be saying to your
self as they, Isai. 33.14. Who among us can dwell with the devouring fire? Am I
patient enough, am I strong enough, am I stout enough, to bear everlasting
burnings? Are you more hardy than the devils, who believe and tremble? When men
are in great pains, they hope that they will abate after a while: When they
have sorrows, they hope for a change after a while: But what will you have to
comfort you, when your miseries are everlasting? When death shall come upon
you, can you bid it welcome? You had rather be turned into nothing than be
turned into hell. Is it not better to take pains that you may escape, than
loiter away your time, till destruction comes upon you like an armed man?

3 If you be converted, God will bestow eternal life upon you? If a man be
indeed converted, yet he may have great afflictions in this world. Though God
many times rewards men with outward blessings, yet that is a more arbitrary
way, and he mixes many afflictions with them. So it was with Jacob, and Job and
David; but converted men shall have eternal life. He will bestow some other
things of great consequence upon them: He will hear their prayers, accept their
services, and have communion with them; and at last he will bestow eternal life
upon them. Jam. 5.20. He that converteth a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death. Act. 3.19. Repent and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. Act. 26.18. To turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of satan unto God, that they may receive the forgiveness of sins: and
an inheritance among them that are sanctified. After they are converted, they
may do that which is very provoking to God, and God may execute fatherly anger
upon them; but they shall not miss of eternal life thereby; there is no falling
from a state of Adoption, or Justification. Conversion will issue in
Glorification. Job. 4.14. The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water, springing up into eternal life. It is a great thing to go to
heaven, but this shall be the portion of all that are converted. The generality
of men shall fall short of heaven, but no converted man shall fall short.
Wealthy men, and gifted men, and honorable men, and religious men may; but
converted men shall not* Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them he also justified, and
whom he justified, them he also glorified.

And can you content yourselves to lose such a benefit? If your Salvation be
secured, then you may bless yourself, you may rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. If you be under affliction, if you hear of wars and troubles, you may say
as David, Psalm. 46.1, 2. The Lord is my strength and refuge, a present help in
time of trouble, therefore will I not fear, though the earth be removed. When
you look into the Bible, there you may read your title. When you hear the word,
you will hear abundant matter of consolation. When you are exercised with your
corruptions, you may comfort your selves with that, after a while Christ will
present you without spot or blemish. When Satan is tempting, you may rejoice in
that, God will tread Satan under your feet shortly. When you mourn under the
withdrawings of God, you may be refreshed with that consideration, that ere
long you shall behold his face in righteousness. When you are afflicted with
your ignorance, you may rejoice in that you shall be wise like the angels of
God. When you are afflicted with a dull, crazy, distempered body, you may
remember to your comfort, that Christ will change your vile body, and make it
like to his own most glorious body. You desire such and such earthly comforts,
but you have reason to be more indifferent about those; they will not make you
happy if you have them; and the want of them will not make you miserable. Can
you be contented to have your portion in this life, and that others have heaven
and eternal glory! Christ has died for the Salvation of sinners; God has
appointed ordinances to persuade men to be saved, and is it not worth the while
for you to labor in it? If you get into a state of Salvation, you shall not
need to be afraid of death; death that is a terror to the princes of this
world, need be no terror to you: You may look upon it as a conquered enemy: You
may say, O death, where is thy sling, O grave, where is thy victory! Does it
not make too much of your pains and trouble in striving for conversion; heaven
will make amends for all. Men that are rejoicing in worldly things, walk in a
vain show; but heaven is not a little thing. It is a wonder that God does not
say, it is too much to give heaven to such as we; we should be far from saying
it is too little for us. It becomes you to say, let who will take the world, so
you may obtain heaven. There may be some joy in earthly things; but in God's
presence there is fullness of joy They that enter into heaven, enter into the
joy of their Lord. They are blessed, to whom it shall be said, Inherit the
kingdom prepared for you. If it be good to have meat, and drink, and clothing,
to be with Christ is for better.

4 There is much difficulty in the way of conversion. Thus are we taught by
Christ; Mat. 7.14. Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. Indeed we read of some that have been
converted on a sudden, that took no great pains to be converted; So the Jailor.
Act. 16. the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4 Many of the Gentiles; Acts 13. It may
possibly be so now with Some on their sick beds; and therefore there is
sufficient encouragement for Ministers to advise them, and pray for them. God
can suddenly let in so much light as is sufficient for their Conversion. But if
God do not wonderfully prevent it, ordinarily there is much difficulty in the
way; and Christ Jesus makes that argument for men to labor after it. Luke 3.14.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. There be abundance of difficulties in
the way, so that except persons labor in it, they are never like to be
converted: Many seek and are not able to enter. Their Ignorance makes the work
difficult; they are in great danger to take wrong paths; their reason misleads
them, and they get out of the right way, and so make a great deal of work for
themselves. Their love to carnal things makes the work difficult; there is much
opposition from a worldly Spirit, that makes them dull and sluggish, that
swallows up a great deal of time, that fills them full of care. Their Pride is
a great hinderance; it fills with conceits of their own sufficiency. Their
fearfulness creates a great deal of difficulty, and they are ready to be
discouraged. They have a great deal of frowardness; and they are ready to be
disgusted and prejudiced. The blindness of their minds hinders them from seeing
their way. A Spirit of self love leads them in wrong paths. And Satan is laying
many snares for them, works on their corruptions, and takes all occasions to
strengthen their lusts.

There is a great deal of difficulty in the way of Reformation. It is a great
while sometimes before they will forsake their evil ways: If they do many
things like Herod, yet they stick at some particulars; they will bear many a
gird of Conscience (...) they will reform some things; they have their excuses
and evasions. If they do thoroughly reform, and do duties of self denial, it is
not brought about without a great deal of Terror. His mothers curse made Micah
to reform his injustice; Judge. 17. They will not cast away their Idols of Gold
without a great deal of terror, Isai. 2.20, 21. Many Persons deal very
deceitfully a great while about the work of reformation; they pretend to
reformation when they are not thoroughly reformed; their moisture is turned into
the drought of summer before they will comply.

And there is a great deal of difficulty in the work of Humiliation. They are
called to come to Jesus Christ, but they will try other methods first, and go
about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. They dare not venture
upon Christ till they have made their hearts better. They say they are no
papists, yet they have great dependence upon their works. Sometimes they fancy
they are converted, and please themselves that God is bound in faithfulness to
pardon them upon Christ's account: Prove. 12.30 There is a generation that are
pure in their own eyes, yet are not cleansed from their filthiness. Sometimes
they think they have taken a great deal of pains, and done a great deal of
service, and cannot conceive that it is a fair thing for God to cast them off.
It looks very hard for God to despise all they have done, and reject them:
Isai. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see us not? wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? Sometimes they take notice
of the meltings of their heart, their desires of holiness, their delight in
sabbaths: And it seems to them as if God could not be very angry; as if they
had melted the heart of God into compassions, and made him more easy, and
willing to pardon them; as if God could not find in his heart to cast them off;
as if their lamentations could force the pity of God. And when their hearts
appear worse, they nourish an hope to bring them too; and take a great deal of
pains to work up such frames as may lay bonds on God to save them. They are
told, that it is in the pleasure of God to bestow mercy or deny it; but they
dread the thoughts of that, and try twenty conclusions before they will submit
to God. They strive much to bring God under a necessity to save them. They make
objections against God's prerogative. They strive to bring their hearts into a
kind of submission, making a righteousness of it; and would submit to prevent
submission. There be so many difficulties in the way, that men had need be
greatly concerned, and be working out their salvation with fear and trembling.
There is so much difficulty, that many times it is long, and with great
strugglings that they do obtain. Some never do obtain: After a great while they
grow discouraged, think it is to no purpose, grow cool and indifferent, start
some other design, and by degrees are entangled in the pollutions of the world
again; they become like the salt that has lost its favor. Some persons settle
at length in a way of carnal confidence, build their hopes upon the sand. There
be many Pharisaical Professors, that glory in themselves, and speak peace to,
themselves when there is no peace. They are deceived with false appearances of
love, and faith, and think themselves sent thing when they are nothing. Some
others spend their days like Israel in the wilderness; they wander about from
mountain to hill, seeking rest and finding none. They beat upon the coast, but
never enter into the harbor: They are striving, and death comes and puts an
end to all their hopes. But those that get into a converted condition, have
many difficulties to grapple with before they do obtain; and they are under a
necessity to labor much in it. Mat. 11.12. The kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force.

5. It is hopeful if you strive, that you may obtain. He that ploughs, ploughs
in hope. If there were no hope of obtaining, men would not be prevailed with to
seek. Hope made the king of Nineveh seek the favor of God, Jonah 3.9. Despair
kills the heart, and cramps the powers of nature, and makes men deaf to
persuasions; but hope makes men pray, and strive, and run ventures, and endure
hardship. Hopes of a cure makes the sick use medicines. Hopes of a harvest
makes the husbandman to till his ground. Hopes of arriving at the port, makes
the mariner hoist his sails. Hopes of victory makes the soldier fight. And God
encourages men to seek him from the hopes of success. Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Men are wont to
give way to a discouraged spirit, partly from dark appearances, partly from
frowardness, partly from slothfulness: But they do very ill, for it is hopeful
that they may obtain. For,

(1.) God will bestow converting grace upon some. We are indeed assured that
all will not obtain. We are also assured that some will obtain; for there are a
number of men whose names are written in the book of life. There may be more of
them in one age than in another, more of them in one professing country and
town than in another; but all that are elected shall obtain, Romans 11.7. There
is a number that are redeemed by Christ, that he did designedly shed his blood
for: He laid down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10.15. God would never have sent
him into the world, but that he designed to convert and save many sinners
through him. He has promised to Jesus Christ the salvation of many; Isai. 49 6.
I have given him to be a light unto the gentiles and salvation to the ends of
the earth. Psalm. 72.17. Men shall be blessed in him, and all nations shall call
him blessed. This is the promise spoken of, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie promised before the world began. God has made a
donation of an eternal kingdom to Christ, Mat. 16.18 The gates of hell shall
not prevail against the Church The work of conversion shall be carried on in
all ages. Ordinances shall not be in vain; Mat. 28 19.20. Go, teach all
nations, baptizing them; and lo I am with you even to the end of the world.
When God sends sowers to sow, some seed shall fall on good ground The Gospel is
as a Net that gathers some good fish, and some bad. As other great works of God
are continued, so this work of conversion shall continue in all ages. Though
satan has a kingdom in the world, yet Christ will always have a kingdom here as
well as he.

(2.) There is ground to hope that he will bestow converting grace on you. You
are under the means of Grace; accordingly the Ministers of the gospel should
hope for you, and accordingly take pains with you: It would be a very sinful
thing if they should be discouraged about you, and neglect to teach, and warn,
and direct you. Paul tells us that he warned all his hearers, Acts 10, 31. And
as there is ground for the Minister to take encouragement to endeavor your
conversion, so there is ground for you to be encouraged, to strive for your own
conversion.

If it were beyond the power of God to convert, or beyond the grace of God to
pardon you, then you would have reason to be discouraged. Men may not expect
impossibilities; but God can renew his image within you. The soul of a man is a
suitable subjection grace; and as long as the faculties of the soul do remain,
a capacity to be gracious does remain. Your corruptions are accidental, and so
may be mortified. Your mind cannot be so blind, a to be incapable of light.
Your heart cannot be so hard as to be incapable to be made soft. If your
corruptions are very strong, omnipotency can overcome them. Mat. 19.26. With
God all things are possible. Neither is it beyond the grace of God to pardon
you. It is great folly to set limits to that which is infinite. God's grace
exceeds man's sinfulness: His thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as
our ways; but high above them, as the heavens are above the earth. Indeed if
God had revealed, that he would not pardon you, that would cut off all hope;
but there is no such thing in the word. God says in his word, that his spirit
should not always strive with flesh, Genesis ^.3. but that only signifies, that he
would wait only an hundred and twenty years, and then bring the flood. He says,
that the heart of the people shall be made fat, Isai. 6.10. but that was a
national Judgment; particular persons might be converted for all. Sometimes God
swear concerning Israel, that they should not enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.11.
but there is no such thing said concerning you. God sometimes pronounces that
curse, Let him that is unjust be unjust still, and him that is filthy be filthy
still, Rev. 22.11. but he is using means with you still. You may take notice of
some dark appearances in Providence; that you are of such an age; that God has
refused hitherto to hear your prayers; that in the days when many have heard
the voice of the Son of God, you have been left; But it is unwarrantable and
presumptuous, without Scripture or Reason, to draw any dark conclusions from
thence.

3 If you be striving, there is a great deal of hope that you will obtain. If
men are striving, and will not be discouraged, it is very hopeful that they
will in time be converted; especially if they be directed aright, and be not
flattered; for diligent seeking is God's way; God's voice unto men is, Seek ye
my face; Psalm. 27.8. So, Seek the Lord and his face, seek his strength
evermore; Psalm. 105.4. There is hope that God will own men, when they take the
directions of his word. Though natural men when they seek conversion, always do
it with a selfish and hypocritical Spirit, and God does not accept it as
service to himself; yet it is not strange he should bless his own appointments.
Indeed the seeking of God diligently, reforming men's lives, searching into the
way of Salvation, has a great tendency to promote Salvation; for it takes them
off from their sinful practices, and worldly designs that hindered them from
getting into the way of life. They are searching into those things that will
conduce to their conversion. Besides, when men are earnestly seeking after
that, it is a sign that the Spirit of God is at work with them: And the Spirit
is promised to make the means of Grace effectual. Joh. 16.7, 8. If I depart, I
will send the Comforter to you; and when he is come he will reprove the world
of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. And when he does intend to Convert,
his way is, first to convince of sin; and when he does convince of sin, many
times it is in order to conversion. And indeed many persons have had experience
that in a way of laboring after conversion, God has showed mercy on them;
while others that have been careless and slighty, have continued in an
unconverted condition. Many that have been striving to enter in at the strait
gate have obtained; and it is always so, that where there is in any place, an
earnest desire to be seeking after peace with God, many do obtain mercy; and if
that spirit should continue longer, many more might obtain, according to that,
Mat. 11.12. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force.

6 If you should obtain conversion, you would not be in an unconverted estate
again for all the world. A man that has a fair estate, may be very willing to
exchange for another; But if you were converted, you would despise Lordships
and Principalities in comparison thereof. The glory of the world might possibly
be a temptation to you; but you would never be willing to change a converted
estate for the glory of the world. When you called to mind the doleful
condition of such men, you would look upon them objects of commiseration; their
jollity, and wealth, and grandeur, would not reconcile you to their condition:
You would remember the wormwood and the gall: You would think of the vanity of
their hopes, the dolefulness of their death, and their eternal confusion; and
their state would be matter of horror to you. Jeremiah dreaded to return to the
house of Jonathan. What ever enjoyments you had, pedigree, estate, honorable
offices; upon this account you would call your self happy, that you were
convered. When you considered what it delivered you from, and what it did
entitle you unto, you would say as the Apostle speaks of peace with God, that
it passes all understanding. Conversion opens a door to the richest treasures:
He thinks with himself, What a comfort is it to have peace with God, to be
delivered from the fear of death, to be provided for eternity? God is his, and
Christ is his, and Heaven is his; he wishes it was so with others: Acts. 26.29.
I wish that others were such as I am, except these bonds. Men that obtain great
things in the world are never contented; but when they are converted, they say,
it is enough. You would say, others eat the fat, and drink the sweet; some have
great incomes, some have honorable offices, some have glittering attire; but
as David says, Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I shall behold thy face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

THE END.
THE Way to know SINCERITY. AND HYPOCRISY Cleared up.
1 JOHN IV. latter part of v. 7. and former part of v. 8. Every one that loves
is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God.


GODLINESS is a thing of great concernment. The acceptance of services, the
hearing of prayers, and the salvation of the soul does depend upon it. And
because it is of such moment, the comfort of men does much depend upon the
knowledge of it. But there is a great deal of darkness in the minds of men
about it. Many times godly men have scruples, and sometimes great fears, that
they are not godly: They often set in judgment on themselves, and are at a loss
what sentence to pronounce. And some ungodly men have great hopes that they are
in a good estate, and steal comfort that do not belong to them. Some cannot see
their way to condemn themselves, and some give judgment for themselves. But the
Apostle does here direct the one sort and the other in the determination of
their condition. First, he tells us how a godly man may know his godliness: He
that sees the workings of the grace of love in himself; he that sees more or
fewer actings of that grace, may conclude for himself, that he is born of God,
has had a work of regeneration, the gospel has had a saving efficacy on his
heart, he has the spiritual knowledge of God, his eyes have been opened to see
the glory of God. Secondly, he tells us how hypocrites may know their
hypocrisy: He that loves not, that lives in the omission of love, that has
nothing of the working of that spirit, that lives in the neglect of it, has
not the spiritual knowledge of God; whatever pretenses he makes, this casts the
case against him. The like we may say with respect to every other grace: He
that believes on Jesus Christ, that loves God, that has godly sorrow, is born
of God: But he that does not believe in Christ, that loves not God, that has
not godly sorrow, knows not God, whatever professions he makes

DOCTRINE. Men may know their Hypocrisy only by their Course of life; but their
Sincerity only by particular Acts.
There are two sorts of professors, saints and hypocrites. Some are compared to
Wheat, and some to Chaff: Mat. 3.12. He will gather the wheat into his garner;
but he will burn up chaff with unquenchable fire. Some are compared to stony
and thorny ground, some to good ground. Mat. 13.20. and seq. Some have a
wedding garment, some have not, Mat. 22.11. Some are compared to wise, some to
foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.1.2. Some are compared to men that build upon a rock,
others to men that build upon the sand. Mat. 7.24. and seq. And many persons
are studying this question, of what sort they are: This Doctrine does resolve
it.

PROP. I. Hypocrisy is to be known only by their Course of life. Men know it
only by their walk.
For the clearing of this, Consider,

I. Particular Acts of sin are no evidence of hypocrisy.

1. Many internal acts of sin, are no evidence of hypocrisy. Every godly man
has a corrupt principle remaining in him, and that principle does not lie
still; but is busy and active. Though it be mortifyed, yet it is full of life,
Heb. 12.1. Lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us. It
is like a fountain, always springing up. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit. Romans 7.21. I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me. The choicest saints do find every day the stirrings of corruption. If
they are alone, if they are in company, if they are in the works of their
calling, if they are exercising themselves in the duties of religion, they are
always haunted with a corrupt heart. They have a multitude of evil thoughts,
desires, delights, fears, sorrows. Unbelief is often stirring; so pride and
worldliness, frowardness and envy. There be many stirrings of sin that they do
not perceive; but abundance that falls under their observation. A corrupt
principle will stir upon all occasions; every thing that occurs will awaken it:
Therefore saints are warned to keep their hearts with all diligence, Prove.
4.33. And godly men have great occasion every day to repent, and to say as Paul
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death!

2 Many external acts of Sin are no evidence of Hypocrisy. Men have much more
command of their words and outward actions than of their thoughts, and the
inward workings of their hearts: Yet godly men are often guilty of external
sins: They commit many sins in words, Jam. 3.8. The tongue is an unruly evil.
Many times their words favor of vanity, pride, unbelief, and uncontentedness.
And they are often guilty of other external sins, Psalm, 19.12. Who can
understand his errors? Every corruption is running them into transgression;
sometimes omitting duty, sometimes committing sin. They are guilty of many sins
of ignorance. Men that understand general rules, often fail in applying them to
particular cases. There be many proud, worldly, froward carriages that they are
not aware of, and are ready to justify. And many sins are committed through
inadvertency; they are hurried through fear, or passion, or pride, and consider
not at the time, but presently after they see it, and are sorry for it.

3. An act of gross transgression is no evidence. Gross transgressions are not
the ordinary spots of God's children; but grace is no certain preservation from
them. Mortified corruption may run a man into such transgression as many
natural men were never guilty of. Gross transgressions are of such a nature
that they seem to be inconsistent with grace: But as a man that has corruption
in him may do choice act of holiness, so a man that has grace in him may commit
gross acts of sin. If a man's nature be much weakened, yet in a fit he may act
very strongly: So, if men's corruptions be much weakened, yet they may have
fits wherein they may act very powerfully. It is an idle thing to think, that
such things are impossible as several time have come to pass. Noah's
intemperance, Lot's incest, David's adultery, Peter's denying of Christ, are
unanswerable arguments, that gross transgression is no evidence of an
Hypocrite. It is no wonder if a gross transgression should make a man suspect
his godliness, but it is no evidence. If God withdraw from a godly man, his
grace will not prevent gross transgression. Natural conscience does often
preserve men, but grace does not always preserve men from gross sin.

II A course of sin is an evidence of hypocrisy, If a man makes a profession of
religion, and lives in a way of sin against the light of his conscience, he is
an hypocrite. He that makes a profession, and contradicts it in his
conversation, is an hypocrite. Tit. 1.16. They profess that they know God, but
in works they deny him. He that pretends to godliness, and turns aside to
crooked ways, is an hypocrite; for those that are really godly do live in a way
of obedience. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that
walk in the way of the Lord, they also do no iniquity. Luke 1.6. They were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord blameless. But such as live in ways of sin are dissemblers; for all such
will be rejected in the day of Judgment: Mat. 7.23. Depart from me, ye that
work iniquity. The like we have, Luke 13.27. If Men live in a way of
Disobedience they do not love God; for love will make men keep God's commands.
1 John 5.3 Herein is love, that we keep his commands, and his commands are not
grievous. If men live in a way of Disobedience they have not a spirit of Faith;
for faith sanctifies men: Acts 16.68. Sanctified by faith that is in me. If men
live in a way of disobedience they are not Christ's sheep; for his sheep hear
his voice, Joh. 10.27. Men that live in a way of disobedience are not born of
God; 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sins not. Men that live in a way of
disobedience are the servants of sin; Joh. 8.34. He that commits sin is the
servant of sin.

1. A course of external sin is an evidence of Hypocrisy, whether it be a sin
of omission or commission. If men live in the neglect of known duties, or in
the practice of known evils, that will be their condemnation. Let the sin be
what it will; let it be Profaneness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Lying, or
Injustice. Thus it was with the Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas, they are
called sons of Belial, that knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. The foundation of
their censure was their profaness and uncleanness, v. 13.14, 22. So it was with
Jehu, notwithstanding his zeal in destroying Baal, because he practiced and
tolerated the worship of the Calves at Dan and Bethel, 2 King 10 3^. Jehu took
no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel, with all his heart and
with all his soul; for he turned aside after the sin of Jeroboam. So many of
the Pharisees were wicked, because they devoured widows houses, Mat. 23.14.
Thus Judas appeared to be an hypocrite, because he lived in theft, Joh. 12.6.
He was a thief That showed the rottenness of the heart of Demas, that he was an
apostate, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present evil
world. To live impenitently in any outward known sin, will cast against a man,
and prove him an hypocrite.

2 A course of internal sin proves a man to be an hypocrite. Though he washes
his hands, if he does not cleanse his heart, he is ungodly. The external
conversation of some hypocrites may excel the conversation of some saints; but
if there be a way of internal sin, their pretenses to godliness are vain. There
be two sorts of internal sins, which men may live in a way of, and is a witness
against them. One is, a way of corrupt thoughts and affections: If men allow
themselves in malice, envy, wanton thoughts, profane thoughts, that will
condemn them.

Though those corruptions do not break out in any scandalous way, those
thoughts are an evidence of a rotten heart Tit. 3.3. We our selves were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and enemy, hateful and hating one another. If a man allows
himself, though he thinks he does not, in malice or envy, he is an hypocrite;
though his conscience disallows it, yet if his heart allows it he is no saint;
if be does not hate and mortify those corrupt affections, he is no saint. The
other way of living in internal sin is, to live in the omission of spiritual
duties: Whether a man knows it or knows it not, it is an evidence of hypocrisy.
Many men that make a fair show, do not believe in Jesus Christ: They have a
persuasion of the truth of the gospel, they hope Christ will save them, they
have had some joy in heating the gospel, but they do not believe in Christ;
either they are carnally confident, or discouraged: This does condemn them. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. He that is
contentious and obeys not the gospel, will be condemned, Romans 2.8. So, if a man
live in the neglect of love to God; if there be no hearty love to God in his
profession, in his obedience, he is not godly: Though there be affection, yet
if there be not hearty love, that will condemn him: That was the condemnation
of the Jews, Joh. 5.42. I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.
If men be zealous men, have tenderness of conscience, delight in sabbaths, but
are destitute of love to God, they are hypocrites. So, if there be not a spirit
of love to saints, 1 Cor. 13.23. If I speak with the tongue of men and angels,
and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal So,
1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God.

PROP. II. Sincerity is known by particular acts of Grace.
The habits of Grace cannot be seen immediately: As no man can see his own Soul
or any of the faculties of it immediately, so he cannot see the gracious
principles that are there immediately. And there is no external act of
obedience that is evidential, for an ungodly man may do an external act of
obedience. He may give all his goods to the poor and his body to be burned,
though he has no charity. 1 Cor. 13.3. But by particular acts of grace they may
know their uprightness, and by them only. If a man were to try his sincerity by
his certain knowledge of his gracious carriages day by day, he would never
attain assurance, but be under perpetual uncertainty; but by particular acts of
Grace he may know it.

Consider,

1 Saints may certainly see particular acts of Grace. Though there be many acts
of grace that a man does not know to be such, yet some acts of grace are plain
to be seen. We find Christ enquiring of one whether he did believe, Joh. 9.35.
Do thou believe on the Son of God? and of another whether he loved him, Joh.
21.16. Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? That shows that such things may be
known, else to what purpose would it be to ask those questions. And reason
shows that they may be seen, for they do greatly differ from all counterfeit
acts, and sometimes grace acts very strongly and apparently. And we have an
account in Scripture of saints that have spoken very confidently about the
workings of a spirit of grace; so Job, Job 42.5, 6. Now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor myself in dust and ashes. He saw the mighty workings of a
spirit of repentance, and was at no loss about it. So David, Psalm. 116.1. I
love the Lord. He speaks of it as of a thing he was assured of. The like
workings of heart he found toward the law, Psalm, 119.97. O how love I thy law.
So, Peter appears to Christ, who knew his heart, Joh. 21.17. Lord, thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee. And others have had the like
experience.

2 Ordinarily, they do certainly see but few particular acts of grace. There is
a very great difference in godly men upon this account. I take it for granted,
that there are not two men in ten thousand, that have just the same experience.
More generally, godly men do hope and think, that they exercise grace many
times every day, in their prayers, and in their callings, and in their
conversation with men; but it is but now and then that they can certainly speak
up to it. There he great mixtures of corruption with grace, there be many false
appearances of grace, which makes them afraid whether they did indeed exercise
grace; and this makes it evident, that it is thus with Saints, that many of
them are for a long time under doubt whether they be indeed godly; thence we
have these precepts, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine yourselves, whether you be in the Faith.
Some hypocrites are a great deal more confident than many saints. Many godly
men are at a loss whether their faith be any other than what unconverted men
may have. And so about their other graces; there be some saints that have
assurance, but the foundation of it is, that now and then they see the plain
actings of faith and love, and repentance. They see something of encouragement
from their daily walk. But that which begets assurance is, that sometimes they
plainly see Grace.

3. By these visible actings of grace, they may conclude there is a course of
gracious carriages. Godly men are described to be men that walk in a course of
holiness. Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in the
law of the Lord. And we find that godly men have been well satisfied that they
have walked in a way of holiness. Isai. 39.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee,
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight. If it be enquired, how they do know that their
obedience is not the fruit of natural conscience and common grace, as it is
with many others; The Answer is, that they see now and then the plain exercises
of grace, and from thence conclude, that they are under the influence of a
gracious spirit in their walk; that though they be guilty of much formality and
hypocrisy, yet there is a spirit of holiness working in them, and an hearty
care to keep the commandments of God. If a man sees now and then a spirit of
love to God, he may safely conclude that his religion is not the fruit of
ostentation, or slavish fear, but that a gracious spirit does stir him up to
perform his duty, and that his walk his holy.

USE I. Is of awaking to those that live in a course of sin. Some make
pretenses to godliness, whereby they do not only deceive others, but which is a
great deal worse, they deceive themselves also. But this will condemn them,
that they live in a course of sin; and such must go with ungodly men: Psalm.
125, 5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord will lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity. If there be a great change in a man's
Carriage, and he be reformed in several particulars, yet if there be one evil
way, the man is an ungodly man. If he does choice service for the church of
God, yet he is an ungodly man. If there are twenty hopeful things that may be
alleged for him, yet he will not pass for a godly man. Where their is piety,
there is universal obedience. A man may have great infirmities, yet be a godly
man; so it was with Lot and David and Peter; but if he lives in a way of sin,
he does not render his godliness only suspicious, but it is full evidence
against him. Men that are godly, have a respect to all God's commandments,
Psalm. 119.1. There be a great many commands, and if there be one of them that a
man has not a respect unto, he will be put to shame another day. If a man lives
in one evil way, he is not subject to God's authority; but then he lives in
rebellion, and that will take off all his pleas, and at once cut off all his
pretenses, and he will be condemned in the day of Judgment; Luke 13 27. Depart
from me, all ye that work iniquity. One way of sin is exception enough against
the man's salvation.

1 Though the sin that he lives in be small such persons will not be guilty of
perjury, stealing, drunkeness, fornication; they look upon them to be heinous
things, and they are afraid of them, but they do not much matter it if they
oppress a little in a bargain, if they commend a thing too much which they are
about to sell, if they break a promise, if they spend the sabbath unprofitably,
if they neglect secret prayer, if they talk rudely, and reproach others; they
think these things are but small things: If they can keep clear of great
transgression, they hope that God will not insist upon small things; but indeed
all the commands of God are established by divine authority, and that man that
does not lay weight upon little commands, keeps none as he ought to do. A small
shot may kill a man as well as a cannon bullet. A small leak may sink a ship.
If a man lives in small sins, that shows that he has no love to God, no sincere
care to please and honor God. Little sins are of a damning nature as well as
great; if they do not deserve so much punishment as greater, yet they do
deserve damnation. There is contempt of God in small sins, Mat. 5.19. He that
shall break one of the lest of these commandments, and shall teach men so,
shall be called the least in the kingdom of God. There is rebellion in little
sins; Prove. 19.16. He that keeps the commandment keeps his own soul, but he
that despises his ways shall die. If a man says, this is a great command, and
so lays wait on it, and another is a little commandment, and so do not regard
it, but will not allow himself to break it, he is in a perishing condition.

2 Though their temptations be great. Some Persons delight in iniquity, they
take pleasure in rudeness, and intemperate practices: But there be others that
do not delight in sin; they can handsomely avoid it, they do not choose it:
Except they be under some great necessity they will not do it: They are afraid
to sin, they think it is dangerous, and have some care to avoid it. But
sometimes they force themselves to sin: They are reduced to difficulties, and
cannot tell how well to avoid it. It is a dangerous thing not to do it. If
Naaman do not bow himself in the house of Rimmon, the king will be in a rage
with him, take away his office, it may be take away his life, and so he
complies; 2 Kings 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my
master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my
hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, when I bow my self in the house
of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this. So Jeroboam forced himself to
set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel. He thought if the people went up to
Jerusalem to worship, they would return to Rehoboam, and kill him; therefore he
must think of some expedient to deliver himself in this strait: 1 King
12.27.28. Whereupon the king took council, and made too calves of gold; and
said to them, it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy gods O
Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. He was driven by
appearing necessity to take this wicked course. So the stony ground hearers
were willing to retain the profession of the true religion, but the case was
such that they thought they could not well do it; Mat 13.21. When tribulation
or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. They
would have chose to have lived and died in the profession of the truth, but
they cannot brook confiscation, and prisons, and death; and so they must be
excused if they drop their profession. So Achan and Gehozi had singular
opportunities to get an estate; if they live twenty years, they are not like to
have such an advantage, and they force themselves to borrow a point, and break
the law of God. They lay a necessity on estate, and liberty, and life, but not
upon obedience. If a man be willing to serve God in ordinary cases, but excuse
himself when there be great difficulties, he is not godly. It is a small matter
to serve God, when men have no temptation; but Lot was holy in Sodom, Noah was
righteous in the old world. Temptations try men, but they do not force men to
sin; and grace will establish the heart in a day of temptation. They are
blessed that do endure temptation, Jam. 1.12. But they are cursed that fall
away in a day of temptation.

3 Though they be afterward sorry for it. Some men fall into great
transgression, but when they consider of it they are sorry for it. They do not
justify themselves, neither do they excuse themselves, and say others do so as
well as they, and if men be left of God who can help it; but they confess it,
and bewail it before God, it is an affliction to them that they were carried
away with temptation, they see they have acted foolishly, that they have
despised the commandments of God, and they hope they shall never do so again,
be drunk, again, or lie again. Sometimes men take occasion to talk with them,
and they are ready to own their fault, they are ashamed, and they shed tears;
but after a while the temptation returns, and they are as bad again: They are
like the dead fish, that are carried down the stream; but they are sorry again;
and so they keep on, sinning and repenting. Just thus it was with Saul:
Jonathan talks to him and he hearkens, 1 Samuel 19 6. Saul hearkened to Jonathan,
and Saul swear, as the Lord lives, he shall not be slain. After a while he is
persecuting David again; but upon David's saving his life, he weeps and makes
confession, 1 Samuel 24.16. Saul lift up his voice and wept. But upon the
Invitation of the Ziphites he pursues David again, and David spares his life a
second time; and upon that Saul confesses and promises, I Sam. 26 21. Then said
Saul, I have sinned, return my son David, for I will no more do thee harm, I
have played the fool, and erred exceedingly. There is no trusting such men; if
they live in ways of sin, they are ungodly. Godly sorrow will make men live
holily; 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation, not to be
repented of.

USE II. Of encouragement to those that have seen gracious actings in their own
hearts. I suppose that there be several of you that have seen the actings of
grace in your own hearts. You have seen the workings of faith, as Paul 2 Timothy
1.12. I know him whom I have believed. of love, as Peter. Joh, 21.17 Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee; of repentance, as Job. Job
42.6. I abhor myself and repentin dust and ashes. You may conclude from hence
that you are godly. You may have scruples upon many account: You may be under
difficulties because God hides his face at present from you: You may have
temptation from singular afflictions, and because God denies to answer some
prayers, in things that lie much upon your hearts: You may have difficulties
from such workings of corruption as seems to be inconsistent with Grace: You
may have temptation because you do not seem to grow; but if you have certainly
seen the working of a gracious spirit, if an hundred times, if ten times, if
one time, you may conclude that you are godly. That which was not in being
could not be seen that which is not, is invisible. If there were no sun, or
moon, or stars, none could be seen: So, if there were no faith, or love, they
could not be seen. There may be grace where it is not seen, but where it is
seen, there it is; and you may conclude that you are godly. For,

1. This shows that there was at the time a principle of grace. The habits of
grace are not immediately to be seen, but only by their workings. If there be a
gracious act, there must be a gracious principle; if there be not an antecedent
one, there must be at least a concomitant one; for while a man remains in his
natural condition, he cannot act graciously; Romans 8.7. The natural mind is
enmity to God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. If
a man loves God, he is disposed to love him; if he believes in Christ, he is
disposed to believe in Christ. It is impossible to do those actions without a
disposition to them; and that disposition is a principle or habit of grace.
Every man that acts graciously is a new creature: Until the heart be changed,
it will not carry graciously. Any act of grace is a sure token of regeneration:
If a man believes in Christ, he is certainly born of God; Joh. 1.12, 13. To
them that received him gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name, who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. If a man breaths, and sees, and
hears, and walks, he is certainly a living man. Where there is an act of life,
there is a principle of life; 1 John 37. He that does righteousness is
righteous, as he is righteous. Every effect must have a proper cause. If the
heart were utterly opposite to believing, loving or repenting, he would not
believe, love or repeat. The heart of a man is always inclined to what he
chooses. The mind may understand a thing that he is not inclined to understand;
but the Will never chooses without an inclination so to do. If there be a change
in the behavior of the heart, there is a change in the disposition of the
heart.

2 If a principle of grace were once there, it is always there. It was
otherwise under the covenant of works; Adam's grace was perfect but mutable;
for he did not fulfill the condition of the covenant; if he had once done that,
his grace would have been immutable. But under the new covenant, if a man be
once godly, he always will be godly; for every one who is godly, has fulfilled
the condition of the covenant. Grace may decay, but it never will be lost: It
may wither, but never die. Common grace may be lost, but saving grace cannot be
lost: If grace be once begun it will continue; Phil. 6. I am confident of this
very thing, that he that has begun a good work in you, will perfect it to the
day of Christ. The power of God is engaged for the preservation of grace. Once
godly and always godly; 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through
faith unto salvation. Sometimes they are afraid they shall fall away, but
whether they have more strength or less strength, they shall never fall away;
God's covenant is their security. Such men may have great temptations;
Heretics may endeavor to seduce them, vicious men may seek to debauch them,
worldly men may entice them, persecutors may seek to fright them out of their
religion; but nothing can be too hard for them: Many waters cannot quench love,
neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8.7. They may have temptation to pride,
to presumption, to discouragement; but if they be led into temptation, they
will be delivered from evil. A principle of grace is like a living fountain;
Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him. shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shallbe in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. False hearted men may fall away, but those
that are sincere will be more than Conquerors. If Abraham be once godly, he
will continue so, though he lives an hundred and seventy years. If grace be
begun here, it will be perfected in heaven.

USE 3 Of direction to godly men, how you may know your sincerity; viz. by
renewing the visible actings of grace. Many signs are given of holiness, that
will not bear examination; and there is danger that many are deceived thereby.
Some godly, and some ungodly men that find them in themsevles may be comforted
thereby, but they beget no assurance: And some men that find them in
themselves, remain at a loss whether they be godly or no. The way to know your
godliness, is to renew the visible exercises of grace. When a man sees that he
loves God, and believes in Jesus Christ, he will not be unsatisfied about his
godliness. If he has been in the dark, and in great temptations just before,
yet this will beget assurance.

Here you may observe,

1 If you do not know that you live in sin, that can be no evidence of your
godliness: As you cannot condemn your selves, so you cannot justify your
selves. Some persons examine themselves whether they live in any known sin; and
upon the strictest enquiry they do not find that they do. They do not find that
they live in the neglect of any duty, or in the commission of any sin. Their
hearts do not reproach them: They duly attend prayer, they are careful to
sanctify the Sabbath, they live soberly, chastely, justly, they are true to
their word, and faithful in their places, they do not know upon the most narrow
search that they live in any way of sin, yet they cannot justify themselves
from hence; 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby
justified: For men that examines themselves may be ignorant that they live in a
way of sin, yet they may live in a way of sin; men's understandings are
corrupted, and they may live in pride, worldliness and unbelief, and not know
it: They may think those corruptions do not reign when indeed they do reign.
Many men that do not know that they live in sin, are fain to suspend their
judgment about themselves; they hope from hence that they are holy, but do not
know it. Though men do not know that they live in sin, yet God may know that
they do: Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, yet
are not cleansed from their filthiness.

2 If there be great probability that you live in a way of faith, and love, and
repentance, that do not make it evident. There is some probability of some men's
faith, because gospel promises have been a comfort to them; and of their love,
because they are zealous and do delight in ordinances, and in praising God; of
their repentance, for their sins are a great burden to them, and they are
careful to avoid sin: but probabilities prove nothing; that may be probable,
that may be false; there may be some probability of a thing, yet the contrary
may be certain. Probabilities leave men under uncertainties. If they raise
hopes, yet they leave room for fears. There may be probabilities one way, and
as great probabilities the other way. Men will not content themselves with a
probable title to their land. God will not take men to heaven because there is
a probability of their goodness. Twenty Probabilities make the thing more
probable, but they do not make it certain. Probabilites are no Demonstration.
The hopes that are built on them may be disappointed, therefore we are directed
to make our Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.

3. All the visible exercises of grace are evidential. The word of God tells
that all that believe in Jesus Christ are Chrildren of God, Joh, 1.12. To them
that received him, gave he power to become the Sons of God. It tells that all
that love God are heirs of heaven. Jam. 1.12. God has promised a Crown of life,
to them that love him. So it tells us that all that have godly Sorrow shall be
saved. 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto Salvation. And that
all that love the brethren shall have eternal life, 1 John 3.24. We know that
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. Hence if
any of these workings be clearly seen, the man has a sure evidence of his good
estate: He has ground to cast the case for himself: It is no presumption for
him to conclude his Justification: He has a divine warrant to give sentence for
himself: At such a time when he pronounces himself a saint, he goes according
to law and evidence: His confidence is assurance: For those exercises of grace
that he is conscious to are peculiar to godly men, and do assuredly distinguish
them from all other men.

4. The more these visible exercises of grace are renewed, the more certain you
will be: the more frequently these actings are renewed, the more abiding and
confirmed your assurance will be. A man that has been assured of such visible
exercises of grace may quickly after be in doubt whether he was not mistaken;
but when such actings are renewed again and again, he grows more settled and
established about his good estate. If a man see a thing once, that makes him
sure; but if afterward he fear he was deceived, when he comes to see it again,
he is more sure he is not mistaken. If a man read such passages in a Book, he
is sure it is so; some months after some may bear him down, that he was
mistaken, so as to make him question it himself; but when he looks and reads it
again, he is abundantly confirmed. The more men's grace is multiplied, the more
their peace is multiplied. 2 Pet. 1.2, Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you
through the knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord. The third time the question
was put to Peter whether he loved Christ, he answers with greater assurance;
the very proposing of the question stirred up the working of a spirit of love,
and he speaks with very great confidence, Job. 21.15, 16, 17. The first and
second time he says, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee: But the third
time he speaks with greatest assurance, Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee. It went greatly to his heart that his love should be
so often questioned, and so he was more abundantly satisfied in the truth of
his love.

FINIS.

