THE TRIAL OF His R. H. the D. of C. FOR CRIMINAL CONVERSATION WITH Lady
HARRIET G -- R. To which is prefixed, AN INTRODUCTORY DISCOURSE UPON THE
Ancient and Modern Punishments of Adultery, and the uncommon Progress of that
Crime. INCLUDING ALL THE LETTERS Which have passed between His Royal Highness
and her Ladyship, and were read in Court.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOHN DUNLAP, at the Newest Printing-Office, the
South Side of the Jersey Market, and three Doors below Second-street, M DCC LXX.

INTRODUCTION.
ADULTERY is become so fashionable, and Divorces so frequent, that it may admit
of some debate in the polite world whether the first is criminal or the latter
dishonorable: the law, however, judiciously punishes the one and stigmatizes
the other.

Advowtry, which in the old law-book signifies adultery, is the sin of
incontinence between two married persons; but if only one of the persons be
married, it is, nevertheless, adultery. In this last case, however, it is
called simple adultery, to distinguish it from the other which is compound.
This crime was severely punished by the laws of God, and the ancient laws of
the land. The Julian law among the old Romans made it death; but in most
countries (as is the case in England) it is at this period punished by fine,
and in others by banishment. According to the law made by William the
Conqueror, whoever, forced a Woman should lose his genitals, the offending
parts. Before the statute of the 22d Charles II. which made malicious maiming
felony, it was a question, whether cutting off the privy members of a man taken
in adultery with another man's wife was felony or not? as an instance of which,
in the thirteenth year of Henry III. one John a monk, being taken by Henry Hull
in the act with his wife, he cut off the privy-members, of the monk, and was
only indicted for a maheim, or maiming.

Hence it plainly appears that the statute enacted in the reign of that amorous
prince, Charles the Second, who doubtless had an eye therein to the very
business in question, has wonderfully propagated and secured the honorable,
noble, (I had almost said royal) practice of performing the drudgery of
matrimonial duty; for we cannot suppose the knight errants of those, or the
present times, however valorous in espousing the causes, and the protection of
their mistresses, would have chosen so publicly (as they have since done) to
manifest their abilities in intrigues of this kind, had they run the risk of
legally losing those very important parts, which would ever after have
disqualified them from entering the lists of gallantry. I shall not even
scruple to suppose that his R. H. notwithstanding the many disguises he took
upon himself, and condescensions he submitted to, would have persevered either
in his intrigue, or his elegant correspondence (which was so immediately the
means of detection) had not his whole person (which certainly includes those
parts) been sacred, and had he not been convinced that the greatest damages
that could happen to him, would be only issuing a little more money out of the
T -- y, either for secret services or public lawsuits Vide the Damages
obtained by Mr. Wilkes against Lord Hallifax, etc. etc. etc.
(as in similar cases) which might, indeed, terminate in an additional tax upon
any thing left untaxed, or a new Stamp Act properly modified to quiet the minds
of the people of North America.

As to her Ladyship she seemed resolved at all events to imbibe the sublime
sentiments inherent in r -- l blood; as either she had, or was very near having
a similar connection with the late duke of Y -- k before his departure for the
continent, and which was so generally talked of, that at length it was imparted
to Lord Gro -- r, and a separation had then nearly taken place upon that
account; but upon her promising his Lordship in the most solemn manner that she
would never again speak to that R. H. in private, he forgave her. Indeed, her
Ladyship may plead something in her excuse, besides her fondness for an
alliance with r -- l blood; as it is well known that her marriage was not a
match of her own choice; but strongly recommended to her by her parents. An
anecdote is handed about of her first acquaintance with his Lordship, which is
as follows: Lord G -- had in his youth led a very debauched life, and had
almost destroyed his constitution, by a certain disease which is never
communicated but by the ladies; his physicians therefore advised him, as the
only means of preserving the small share of health that he remained possessed
of, to marry: he accordingly resolved to marry the first woman of family that
was agreeable to him, without paying any regard to fortune. Just as he had come
to this resolution, he was walking one day in Kensington gardens, whilst his
coach was waiting for him at the gate, and a shower of rain (...) on, he took
shelter in the same alcove where Miss V -- n (his present lady) and her sister
Carry had retired for shelter. After some common conversation upon the weather,
and other general topics, he asked the ladies, if they had not a carriage at
hand, to do him the honor of taking part of his; which, with very little
entreaty, they consented to, as it was likely to be a rainy evening. His
Lordship was at first-sight struck with Miss V -- and was only waiting for an
opportunity of saying a civil thing to her, when upon the road Miss V --
declaring, she thought his Lordship's coach was the easiest she ever rode in;
he replied he was very happy at its meeting with her approbation; and that she
might be mistress of it whenever she pleased. She blushed, without making any
reply, which he construed into a favorable omen; and the next day he applied
to her relations to obtain their consent to pay his addresses to Miss V --. So
great a match highly flattered her mother's ambition; and she prevailed on Miss
V -- to give his Lordship her hand, though she then declared he was very
disagreeable to her; add to this, her mother, who, on account of her employment
in the princess Amelia's household, strove upon every occasion to show the
greatest respect to all the r -- l family, constantly recommended to her
daughter never to refuse any thing the K -- 's brother requested; -- which lady
G -- r has most dutifully obeyed. This she may, at least, plead as some excuse
to her relations; but it is a moot point whether it is so good a one as what F
-- te made for her to lady H -- r -- n some weeks since, when he was taking
chocolate with her. -- Good heaven, said her ladyship, is it not astonishing
that lady G -- r should prefer the D -- of C -- to lord G --! not at all, my
Lady, replied the wag, for his R. H. is only Dis -- but his L -- p is DEATH
itself.

Now we have introduced F -- te we shall also introduce a few more of his bon
mots upon this occasion. He said the other day, the present K -- had created
Sir Richard G -- r a Lord, and his brother had created him a Cuckold; dignities
somewhat similar according to the present times; and the more so as they had
both tipped his head with gold, the first his coronet, the last his horns.

His R. H. asked F -- te, the last time he dined with him at North-End, what he
thought about his Letters that were read in court. -- Think, please your H --
s, (said Sam) it is impossible to think about them, as you never once thought
when you wrote them.

His R. H. told F -- te, a short time since, in great confidence, That Lady G
-- r was one of the most sensible women in England; and that he should one day
or other see her Letters. The day after the trial this genius said, I am
convinced of what your R. H. said. -- She is a damned sensible woman as to
parts; but it was left for a man of your H -- s's penetration to discover her
genius. The same great mimic observed, That in several parts of the country a
certain personage, in the course of his intrigue, was taken, by his disguise in
a black wig, for a horsestealer and a highwayman; but no where for a conjurer.

It is positively asserted that this course of correspondence was not the first
grounds of suspicion: for that lord G --, having surprised a packet with one of
the D -- of C's curious epistles addressed to his Lady, which Mrs. Reda the
millener, opposite St. Alban's-street, Pall Mall, was bringing to her
immediately after her lying-in, or at least before she had been abroad; his
Lordship had the great good nature, upon her Ladyship's assuring him that
nothing had passed between her and the D -- but indiscretions of the least
vicious kind, not only to forgive her, but assure her, that if she gave him no
cause for future discontent, the discovery he had made should never be public,
nor go farther than between him and her. But the interception of the first
letter annexed rekindled all his resentment.

The Editor of these sheets has taken the earliest opportunity of laying them
before the public, as this is the most important and remarkable Trial that ever
came before a court of judicature; and the only one that has any similarity to
it, fell out in the last century, when Robert earl of Southesk charged his R.
H. James duke of York (afterward James II.) with an amor with his countess;
but it was never brought into court: nor is there, perhaps, any precedent in
any country of a like process; and though no more than 10,000l. damages were
granted, it evidently demonstrates the integrity and upright sentiments of a
British jury, who pay no regard to rank, title, or station, but administer
justice with equal impartiality, from the first to the last subject in the
land. His lordship has thereby obtained all he desired by this verdict, -- a
divorce; and had he received ten times the damages he would have applied it in
the like manner he proposes doing these, by distributing them to the most
useful and beneficial public charities. So little temptation, indeed, has money
in the eyes of his Lordship, that it is confidently asserted that 50,000l. were
offered from a certain quarter, to stop the prosecution, but nobly refused by
his Lordship.

THE TRIAL OF His R. H. the D. of C. FOR CRIMINAL CONVERSATION WITH Lady
HARRIET G -- R.
ON Thursday, July the 5th, 1770, at eight in the morning, came on, in the
Court of King's Bench, Westminster, before the Right Hon. Lord Mansfield, the
cause, wherein Richard Baron G -- r was plaintiff, against his R. H. the D. of
C. for criminal conversation with Harriet, the wife of the said Lord G -- r.

Counsel for the Plaintiff.
Mr. Wedderburn, Sergeant Glyn, Sergeant Leigh, Mr. Wallace, Mr. Walker, and
Mr. Lee.
Counsel for the Defendant.
Mr. Dunning, Mr. Skinner, Mr. Mansfield, Mr. Impey.
Attorneys.
For the Plaintiff. For the Defendant. Messrs. Patington, Messrs. Buxton,
Messrs. Garth. Messrs. Winduse.

It was contended by the counsel for the defendant, that the laying the damage
at 100,000 l. was excessive and immoderate; but to this it was answered, that,
in the reign of Charles the Second, much higher damages were sued for by the
then Duke of York, against one Pilkington, a Sheriff of the city of London, in
an action of scandalum magnatum, in the King's Bench, and a verdict of 100,000
l. was obtained in his favor; and it was farther urged, that when the injury
was done to an inferior, that circumstance alone greatly aggravated the offense.

Mr. Wedderburn, in the course of opening the cause, strongly insisted on the
case becoming more criminal on account of the rank of the defendant: This he
instanced in two cases; the first was that of Lord Belvidere in the kingdom of
Ireland, whose brother (Mr. Rochford) having crim. con. with his lady, his
lordship obtained 20,000 l. damages, though the defendant's fortune was no way
answerable to such a sum. The other was a case of defamation brought by James
II. when Duke of York, against a tradesman in the city, when the damages were
likewise laid high: "And these, continued the learned counsel, were given for
very substantial reasons; to show society, that where particular duty and
respect is required, an action of criminality becomes doubly so, when these
ties are broke through.

Mr. Wedderburn then methodically stated the facts. He set forth, that his R.
H. in his excursions to Towcester in Northamptonshire, Coventry, Marcourt-Hill,
Whitchurch in Shropshire, Chester, and St. Alban's, in order to meet Lady G --
r, assumed, at different times, the names of 'Squire Morgan, 'Squire Jones, the
Farmer, etc. that he sometimes appeared as a young 'Squire disordered in his
senses, and used to be called at the inns the Fool, particularly at Whitchurch,
where a noise being heard in passing from one room to the other, it was
disregarded by the people of the house, who said it was only the Fool; and that
he had taken down with him to St. Alban's a servant, who went by the name of
Trusty, for the purpose of carrying on his intrigue with greater security: That
they had witnesses to prove, that Lady G -- was several times carried to the
back door of the D. of C's house in the Park, where she went in, and staid for
a considerable time. That several of Lord G -- 's servants went down to St.
Alban's with his Lordship's brother, who, upon breaking open the door at the
inn, found the D. of C. sitting on the bedside along with lady G --, with his
waistcoat loose, and the lady with her Dresden unbuttoned, and her breasts
wholly exposed; that on their entering, her ladyship made toward the door of
communication with the next room, but in the attempt fell; on which he, who was
left to guard the door they entered by, went to her assistance, which his R. H.
availed himself of, and run out, calling on them, when he got on the other side
of the door, "to take notice, he was not found in the room; and that he would
take his Bible oath, he was not."

But Mr. Wedderburn said, previous to his calling several witnesses to prove
this, and many other important facts, he should read to the court several
letters written by Lady G -- r to the D. of C. and from the D. of C. to her
ladyship, which would set the nature of their connection beyond a doubt; first
premising by what means they had fallen into Lord G -- r the plaintiff's hands.

His lordship meeting with one of his servants, near Chester, going with a
letter from his Lady to put into the post, stopped him to go upon another errand,
taking the letter, and saying he would put it in himself: he then had the
curiosity to open it, which he found to be the first See p. 22.
letter from Lady G -- to his R. H. when, after having taken a copy of it, he
put it into the post, and intercepted all the rest.

Mr. Wedderburn then read the letters in the following order.

LETTER I.
MY dearest Love how sorry I am that I am deprived the pleasure of seeing this
Evening but especially as you are in pain God grant it over upon my knees I beg
it although it may go off for a few days it must return and then you will be
easy my only joy will be happy, how shall I thank you for your kind Note your
tender manner of expressing yourself calling me your dear friend and at this
time that you should recollect me. I wish I dare lie all the while by your bed
and nurse you -- for you will have nobody near you that loves you as I do thou
dearest Angel of my Soul O that I could but bear your pain for you I should be
happy what grieves me most that they who ought to feel don't know inestimable
Prize the Treasure they have in you -- thank God if it should happen now Mr.
Croper is out of Town and you may be quiet for a few Days -- I shall go out of
Town to night but shall stay just for an answer pray if you can just write me
word how you find yourself, I shall be in Town by eight Tomorrow Evening in
hopes of hearing again I am sure my Angel is not in greater pain than what my
heart feels for my adorable Angel -- I sent this by D -- servant she is gone to
Ranelagh do if you write direct to her the Boy has my orders and will bring it
to me -- Adieu God bless you and I hope before Morning your dear little one.

To Lady G --

LETTER II.
MY Dear little Angel I am this instant going out of Town ten thousand Thanks
for your kind note I am sure nothing could make my aching heart to night
bearable to me than when you say you are sensible how much I love you pray God
it may be over before morning or that you may be better I shall be in town at
eight o'clock for I shall long to know how you are don't mention to D that I
wrote by her servant to you for I have ordered him not to tell -- Adieu Good
night God bless the Angel of my Soul Joy and Happiness without whom I have no
comfort and with whom all the happiness alive an revoir I hope very soon.

To Lady G --.

LETTER III.
MY Dear little Angel, I wrote my last Letter to you yesterday at eleven
o'clock just when we sailed I dined at two o'clock and as for the afternoon I
had some music I have my own servant on board that Plays and a couple of hands
from London for the six weeks I am out we were a good many at Dinner I had
about 9 People Yesterday and shall have more when the rest of my Squadron join
me they staid with me till near seven I got to supper about 9 o'clock but I
could not Eat, and so got to bed about 10 -- I then prayed for you my dearest
love kissed your dearest little Hair and lay down and dreamt of you had you on
the dear little couch ten thousand times in my arms kissing you and telling you
how much I loved and adored you and you seemed pleased but alas when I woke I
found it all dillusion no body by me but myself at Sea I rose by time at half
past five and went upon Deck there I found my friend Billy and walked with him
for about an hour till Barrington came to me we then breakfasted about eight
o'clock and by nine I began and exercised the ships under my command till
twelve it is now one, and when I finish this Letter to you my dear Love I shall
dress and go to dinner at two o'clock it is a rule on board to dine at two,
breakfast at eight and sup at nine -- always if nothing hinders me I shall be
a-bed by ten or soon after and up by half past 5 in the morning in order to
have if there is any occasion orders ready for the Fleet under my command
before I begin to exercise them -- I am sure the account of this Days duty can
be no pleasure to you my love yet it is exactly what I have done and as I
promised you always to let you know my motions and my thoughts I have now
performed my promise this day to you and always will until the very last
letter you shall have from me which will be when I between 5 and 6 weeks hence
send the Admiralty word that I am arrived at Spithead then I shall only wait
for their answer which will be with me in a few hours to strike my Flag and
then I shall return to you that instant O my love mad and happy beyond myself
to tell you how I love you and have thought of you ever since I have been
separated from you the wind being contrary to day about one I put off dinner
till three o'clock in order to anchor Ships for this Night in Portland-Road
just off Weymouth about 3 Miles I hope to sail tomorrow by 5 in the Morning I
hope you are well I am sure I need not tell you I have had nothing in my
thoughts but your dearself and long for the time to come back again to you I
will all the while take care of myself because you desire my dear little Friend
does the Angel of my heart pray do you take care of your dearself for the sake
of your faithful servant who lives but to love you to adore you and to bless
the moment that he has made you generous enough to own to him I hope my dear
nay I will dare to say you never will have reason to repent it, the Wind was
not so contrary but we could have sailed on but I told Barrington that as it
was not fair I would anchor especially as I could send one of my Frigates in
for that I had dispatches of cansequence to send to London indeed my dear Angel
I need not tell you I know you read the reason too well that made me do so it
was to write to you for God knows I have wrote to none else nor shall I at any
other but to the King God bless you most amiable and dearest little creature
living -- aimons toujours mon adorable petite amor je vous adore plusque la
vie mesme

I have been reading for about an hour this morning in Prior and find these few
lines just now applicable to us.

Now often had Henry changed his sly disguise,
Unmarked by all but but beauteous Harriets eyes;
Often had found means alone to see the Dame,
And at her feet to breath his amorous flame:
And often the pangs of absence to remove
By letters soft interpreters of Love
Till Time and Industry (the mighty two
That bring our wishes nearer to our view)
Made him perceive that the inclining fair
Received his vows with no reluctant ear;
That Venus had confirmed her equal Reign
And dealt to Harriets heart a share of Henry's pain.
Such is my amusement to read those sort of things that puts me in mind of our
mutual feelings and situations now God bless you till I shall again have an
opportunity of sending to you, I shall write to you a letter a day as many days
as you miss herein of me when I do they shall all come Friday 16th June God
bless I shant forget you -- God knows you have told so before I have your heart
and it lies warm in my breast I hope mine feels as easy to you thou joy of my
life adieu.

To Lady G --.

LETTER IV.
Sunday the 18th My Dearest Friend
I Sent a letter last night but fear you could not receive it while on shore,
but I hope it wd not be long getting to you, I hope you are perfectly well, and
have had a good voyage so far.

he appears rather in better temper to day, so I Am in great hopes he did not
get enough of the Letter to make out much he stayed out very late last night
which seems to have occasioned a weezing to day, by the means of my Sisters I
think I can send and receive my Letters very safe for the future. Carry is out
of Town for a few days so in the mean time I send them by another Sister who
comes to see me every day, and she thinks it some business I have with Reda
about some Milenary that I don't choose he should know of so if she gets ever a
Letter for me she knows she is not to take it out of her pocket till we are
alone so its all cleverly settled again at present, how miserable I should have
been if we could not have contrived to hear from one another, I quite live only
upon the thoughts of its not being a great while before I have the happiness of
a Letter from you, for I Am very sure you will write as soon as you can, I know
your tenderness for me well enough to be certain of that, --

he is coming up stairs I find so I shall conclude till tomorrow, God bless you
my Dear Dear Friend. Monday the 19th.

I resume my pen to tell you today how sincerely I esteem you, he is still
rather more come about again to day, Yesterday he shook hands with me, and this
morning he came and kissed me and said he was going out of Town to Wathemstow
to dine with his Brother, perhaps he is gone to ask his advice, but I don't
care he may take what measures he pleases with me if you will but love me, I Would
a note from Mrs. Reda this evening she sais she is certain he dares not say a
word to her but she wishes he would above all things for that she knows very
well how to answer him for that she knows enough of his Intrigues for him to be
afraid of saying any thing to her, and she is sure he is not assez Hardi to say
a word to her upon the subject, her note was in answer to one she had received
from me to prepare her in case he should speak to her and I told her if he
asked her any questions to say she knew nothing of where or who the Letter came
from -- I hope I shall be in London when you come back, I dares say I shall I
fancy he had not a mind to part with me let him have seen what he would in the
Letter for he asked me Yesterday when I should be able to go into Cheshire, I
told him I co'd not give the least guess as it depended entirely upon how I
was, and I think I Have laid a good scheme for I Have alreaddy complained I Have got
a pain in my side and I intend to say it is much worse at the end of the month
and that I cannot bear the motion of a carriage, it will I really believe be a
very good plan, for if I said I had a Fever or any thing of that kind a
physician would know by my pulse I had not and might discover me to him, and
besides this will be a more lasting complaint so at the end of five or six
weeks, I Will grow very ill and send for Fordyce the Apothecary and make him send
me a quantity of nasty draughts which I Will throw out of the window only think
how wicked I am for in reality I Am already as strong and as well as ever I was
in my life, Ly Harrington called upon me the other day to know how I did I
longed to see her but dared not as he was at home, I intend to go to her as
soon as I can get out, Lady Barrymore was with her I Have heard nothing of D -- I
suppose she is afraid of writing or coming as he is in Town but I shall write
to her soon, my month is out by the week the 5th of July but by the month not
till the 7th so I Will take it at the longest and not be well at the end of it A
decent intimation from a modest lady.
, that we meint lie together and he must be going to New market the 8th or 9th
for the Races which are the Tenth and he will stay there some days and when he
comes home he shall find me worse with the pain in my side, and your Six Weeks
will be out the 26th and I hope you will not be long after that, I Am quite in
sperrits with the thoughts that by some means or other we shall make out the
time that I shall be so happy as to see you when you return, my Dear Soul,
adieu till tomorrow when I shall add more, continue to love me pray

Thesday Evening the 20th
I Am going to Teize my dear little Friend with more of my stupid Letter, I Have
not seen Mr. Croper since yesterday morning he did not come home from his
Brothers till I was assleep last night, and went early this morning to set for
his picture to West and just came home to dress and went out to dinner without
coming up stairs and left a Gentleman in the house that he had made come up ten
miles out of the Country to dine with him Mr. Knox his great Friend, so is he
below stairs dining by himself, I cannot think what the Duce he is about, -- I
suppose by his not coming up to see me Mr. Gro -- r has cunsur'd out part of
the Letter and advised him to be angry but I shall se if he comes home to Tea
and how he behaves -- there is no news about to talk to you off so god knows my
Letter is stupid enough to tire you to Death, for I can only give you an
account of our odd way of going on at home, when I go out I will tell you every
where I go every hour of the day.

O my Dearest Soul I Have just received Two the dearest Letters in the World from
you, how can I I cannot express My feelings of gratitude and love for you, your
dear heart is so safe with me and feels every emotion mine does, with you, how
happy your dearest letters make me I Am so much obliged to you for saying you
will take care of your dear Health because I desire you, do my dearest Friend I
entreat you and I Will do the same, how sweet those verses are you sent me they
are heavenly sweet because they are marked by you I always liked Prior but
shall adore him because you like him, I Am made quite happy to night by having
fresh asurances of yr Love, you have mine entirely, how happy will that day be
to me that brings you back I wonder where I shall se you first I form a
thousand happy ideas to myself I shall be unable to speak from Joy, in the mean
time let us write as often as possible, how kind it was of you to say you had
letters of consequence to write when it was only to poor me, Your Dear little
heart is flurried too on reading the dear letters it has both laughed and cried
with Joy it lies warm in my breast I cherish it and think of nothing else but
to preserve it there safe and happy, my dearest Soul I send you Ten thousand
kisses I wish I could give them, -- 'God bless you I will now conclude for I Am
sure this letter is stupid enough to tire you to death pray forgive it, I Am
finishing it in the dark, I se no body to tell me any thing to make my Letter
entertaining, so can only tell you how sincerely I do and ever shall love you
and I know you will like that as well as any thing for nothing makes me so happy
as your telling me so and we love too well not to love by sympathy.

Amons tout Jour Tendrement mon adorable ammi mon tres chere ame.

I Will write again everyday, and send it to Reda at all opportunitys God bless
you my Dearest dear life I shall ever love you.

This Letter was enclosed in a Cover directed to his R. H. the D -- of C --.


LETTER V.
Portland Road Saturday 17th June
MY ever dearest little angel the wind to day is not fair so I shall lay here
in Portland Road till it is and take this precious Moment in sending this other
Note to you I hope it will find you well and that you are not afraid of being
gone out of Town before I return back to you thou loveliest dearest Soul I have
been reading since my last note of Yesterday to you a great deal out of Prior
keeping the Heroine bye till I have read quite through and find many things in it
to correspond with us exactly.

Hear solemn Jove; and conicious Venus hear;
And thou bright Maid, believe me, whilst I swear,
No Time, no Change, no future Flame shall move
The well-plac'd Basis of my lasting Love.
Do not think I wanted this Book with me to tell me how well I loved you, you
know the very feelings of My heart yet it is great pleasure when I am reading
to find such passages that coincide so much with my own ideas of dear you, I
will write constantly it is my only entertainment that and hearing from you
will be except my Duty on board the only thought or employment I shall have or
even wish I have just now had a message from shore it is about 2 Miles from
Weymouth to go to the rooms this Morning, I have excused myself being much
quieter on Board and happier in writing to You, You are not there or else the
Boat that should carry me would go too slow I long for that happy moment that
brings me back again to all I love and to all that I adore -- indeed I am sorry
my letters are so stupid pray write to me you know whether to send them to send
them to D -- or to Mrs. Reda -- I long to hear from you it is now within two
days of a fortnight indeed it seems forty thousond years how happy when we meet
that our letters has opened to each other the very feelings of our honest
hearts -- permit me to name yours with mine then they will be words and happy
looks from two of the most sincere Friends alive Your heart as well although
fluttered while I write to you I hope mine is flurried too they ought to have
had the same emotions I know they have they are above dissembling I must now
conclude God bless You I send you ten thousand kisses pray when you receive
this return them to me for I want them sadly.

Adieu je vous aim adorable petite Creture je vous adore ma chere petite
bejoux l'amant de mon coeur --

God bless I will write constantly

To Lady G --

LETTER VI.
HOW do you do my dear little sweet Carry I do long to see you and hope soon to
hear from you again at least at Mrs. H -- I believe we don't set out for there
till Wednesday but if any letter comes for me to her she will take care of it
till I come My Lord went out Yesterday to Halken Hollywell etc and stays till
tomorrow dinner he left Mr Gros -- r with me but as he went out for an hour I
seized this favorable opportunity to write you a line, but he unfortunately
returned before I had finished the enclosed which will I Am heartily sorry make
this shorter than I proposed for I Have nothing but nonsense to write, I do love
writing to my dear Carry its a great pleasure in absence from those one loves,
I hope my dear love You are well. I se Almacks begins the 1st of Decr. W'd to
good fortune We were all going together well I hope there will not many pass
first for I se thanks to good fortune the Parliament meets the 9th of January
so I Am living on the hopes of coming before then, they are all pestering me to
come to supper, Gd, cur -- se them I wish them at Jerico, first one peeping
there head in ^^en the other and Mr. G -- shutt up taking snuff in my dressing
Room; I Am stole into my Bedchamber coue se qui coute I Will finish my stupid
Letter I propose You a much longer soon I hope You amuse yourself well in
London, poor little Carry I do love You dearly, did You get my letter safe
after Hollywell, I hope so, will You my love be so kind to let me trouble you
to send the enclosed, I expect my Ld the second of Decr. will you write a line
by them my love, I always burn your letters immediately as safe as a thief in a
Mill -- he has never once named my Friend and is in a tolerable humor. Tomm
lives and dies with, odd people drop and I now and then play a game at Cards,
if You should see Billy You may just give him a hint (if quite convenient) not
to name my Friend if he writes -- but a dismal life I have here Dear Heart Dear
Heart with a tirable Life do I lead I may well sing that song and often -- they
are Bawling about supper so farewell I Am ashamed of my Letter the Devil take
'em I Will write a long one soon Dear little Dear Carry a thousand times farewell
a Thousand times the worse to want thy light. I die to see you my dearest
Friend and Sister ever with sincerest truth and Affection.

Yrs H.G.
What a deal of talk shall we have when we meet I never shall have done.



The foregoing Letter and that directed to the D -- of C --, were enclosed in a
Cover, directed by Thomas Grosvenor, Esquire as follows:

To the Honble Miss Vernon at St. James's palace London

T Free Grosvenor


LETTER VII.
My dearest Soul Friday Night
HOW happy you made me by your Letter it seem ages to me since I heard from you
though in reality not many days, but Minutes count for years with those that
love, but I don't like to hear that you have still a little cough you don't take
care of yourself, I wish I could take care of you indeed -- he went out
yesterday morning to Hallkin and Holywell and don't return till tomorrow dinner,
he left Mr. Gros -- r and 3 or 4 people with me, who are gone and Mr. G -- is
just gone out for an hour, so I take this favorable time to write to you and
shall send it off in the Morning, I long most heartily for the time I shall see
you again, your letter came perfectly safe, I was so happy to get it, I hope
you will have received my last safe where I sent you the Account of Hollywell,
only think of your having lost your road to Tarpolly I should have been so
miserable if I Would known it at the time I Am so sorry, how dreadful at that time
of night its a terrible intricket road, I Would a very odd discourse with Mr. G --
to day about my Lord he first begun by saying he was very uneasy about his
health and did not think he was so well as he used to be and he ought to take
great care, he after that said he thought he gave up his whole time attention
and fortune to Horses and was worse and worse infatuated than ever about them
and that he never could talk upon any other subject therefore he never could
have any discourse with him and that he would lose all his acquaintance but
Jockeys, I could not help laughing at his description of him which was very
just for sais he he will set for half an hour with his eyes fixed on a Table or
Chair and then apply to Tomm or any body that is by, do you know what Mare such
a Filly was out of, or can you tell what Horse such a Colt was got by, by God,
I have got the best stud in England no body will have any horses to run but me
very soon, then if he or any body that don't understand that subject offers to
mention any thing else he is as cross as any thing for half an hour, and then
fast asleep, so sais Mr. G -- you see nobody ever comes to see him but in
partys. I never do sais he I always get people to come every day to meet me or
else I know my amusement would be to see him snoring in one corner of the room
instead of being sociable and like other people -- this was as you may imagine
a Tete a Tete subject but its so exact a picture of him I was resolved you
should have it -- I Will tell you how I pass my time I get up about eight or I Am
afraid nine Breakfast at ten then walk or ride dine at 3, stupifie or play at
stupefied Cards after Tea with any body that drops in (he never plays) this
lasts till supper but I now and then steal off we sup soon after nine, and in
bed before eleven, where I always dream of you my Dearest Friend -- I hope soon
to have a letter from Carry with some writing from you in Milk, I fancy we
shant go to Mrs. H --, till Wednesday when I shall hope for a letter from you
if it arrives before me it will be safe as I Would a letter to day to say if any
came from Carry they should be taken care off, I imagine we shant come away
till quite the end of the week and shall then be so happy in the thoughts of
seeing you in a few days, how I long for the 1st and 2d of December and yet it
is being too selfish for what a situation for you but I Will say no more of that
as you are so kind to say you don't mind it, to day is my Birth day, I think it
has turned out quite lucky to me as I Have such an opportunity of writing to you.
Mr. G -- is come home which obliges me to shorten it and vexes me, though I Have
nothing but nonsense to talk off -- I don't like to be interrupted and prevented
and I must write to Carry a line as I enclose this to her, I see Almacks begins
the 1st Dec. do take a dance there and tell me how it looks it will make but
two days difference and I cant bear to prevent you from every thing O dear I am
always a teazing you, I think I Am quite provoked at myself, I wish to God I was
the only one to suffer in an uncomfortable situation and I Would bear every thing
with pleasure but the thoughts of my dearest Friend being unhappy is ten times
more to me than any thing I could ever suffer, indeed my dearest life it is
believe me that is my greatest anxiety and concern, I can never make you amends
but my sincerest love you shall ever have from the bottom of my soul that you
are kind enough to say you value and as long as you esteem it and give me yours
it will be our mutual comfort, God bless you my dearest Soul, I Am glad the time
is fixed for the Parliament meeting which I hope will bring us to Town Farewell
a thousand times most sincerely till we meet

My dearest Soul ever most faithfully and affectionately Yours H --
I Will write Carry a line and then go to Mr. G -- I Am happy in keeping my own
Room.

Dearest Soul adieu an revoir I Will write from Mrs. H -- and tell you when we
return here.



The above Letter was enclosed in a Cover directed to the D -- of C --. In one
of the folds of the cover was wrote, Thursday night I believe I said Friday by
mistake in the Letter.


LETTER VIII.
IF you have a mind to see your Wife go off with her gallant place yourself at
K -- Gs Garden door at a little before Eight and you will see her and her
little Sister go with him to his own back door a little way off and so return
the same way at half an hour after nine if you are fool enough to discover this
information or not be thankful for it, you shall have no more that is all at
present from your humble Servant

Jack Sprat

To L -- d G --

LETTER IX.
I Know you did as I instructed you to do some time ago concerning the Garden
Gate, but they were alarmed and made their escape some other way to their
married sisters The little Devil is in all the schemes and goes into the garden
with them over against your Windows continually playing fine pranks under your
nose. I dare say they will meet there tomorrow Evening. Kensington Palace in
the morning (where no servant is allowed to follow) is the constant practice.
As you did not discover my first intelligence I shall give it to you till you
do, from your unknown Friend

Jack Sprat

To L -- d G --.

LETTER X.
Eaton Monday night. My Dearest Sister
HOW do you do I long to hear from you I go to Town Wednesday and shall be very
happy if I find a Letter from you we shall leave it again on Friday I hope you
received my last safe -- I Have been a little alarmed by my Maid having told me
it has got a little about here that he has been in this part of the world, I Have
but a few minutes to write in as my Lord is at home, but was determined to let
them know immediately and should take as a great favor my love if you would
forward it as soon as possible as its necessary on some accounts to inform them
as soon as possible -- upon account of the intended visett, I hope to God this
Letter will get safe to you, I thank God my dear Carry that I am like to see
you before its very long as my Lord says he will certainly be up by the meeting
of Parliament, I pray God we may as soon as I know the day I Will send you word I
warrant me -- what a vast deal of talk we shall have -- I Am all in a twitter
dreading every moment he may come in so dare say but little as it would betray
all and undo us he has never named their name so all seems quite I pray God to
keep it so -- I don't fancy he has heard any thing God bless you my dear Carry,
I love you sincerely and I wish could write more but dare not I Am dying with
fright, so

Adieu my dear little Soul I Will write soon, ever with tne sincerest affection
Yours H: G:
I hope you have had some diversions my Love I desired they would write me an
answer as soon as possible in Lemun Duce, if you would permit it and enclose it.



To the Honble Miss V -- Maid of Honor. St. James's Palace London

LETTER XI.
ONCE more and no more if I have not often enough pointed out ways for you to
be convinced of the Truth, I am not your Friend but if you have not a mind you
will take no notice perhaps of a certain person that is gone in disguise and
ly's at every Inn where she does examine your servants and they will be more
able to tell you of his constant attendance. He is now about your house and
Gardens in the Country.

Jack Sprat

To L -- d G --.

LETTER XII. To his Royal Highness the D -- of C --
Monday night My dearest Soul
I Hope you are well I Am come up stairs for bed, so steal this safe Moment to
write to you a line to tell you of some thing that has happened, and though I
hate to say any thing to you that may be disagreeable still I Am always
determined never to conceal any thing from you, as you can then act as you
think will be best my Maid tells me there has been some of our servants telling
her that its all about here that you have been here and she has really told me
every particular that you came down with us, and that we met here in the Fields
and Lanes, and the day you went away, and that you was at Chester, at Halkin
and they knew you there, that you used to have your horses at Ecleston the
little Alehouse, that you had a Gentleman with you and a servant, I denied it
and said I wd acquaint my Lord and make every body prove what they had said,
Upon which she turned pale looked vastly frighted, and said it was from one
person she had heard it and begged it might not be mentioned unless she heard
more, this makes me hope she made the most of it but yet I fear it has been
much talked of by her naming so many particular facts, don't be alarmed my dear
Friend, but act as you think proper in regard to your coming down -- the worst
come to the worst thank God my Lord has told Mr. Gro -- r before me we should
all be in Town in about a Month -- Nothing could make me so unhappy as not to
see you, but at the same time we had better not do any thing imprudent, and we
might possibly not be able to meet but very seldom which when you had taken so
much trouble in coming would give me if possible more concern than for you not
to come, but consider it well over my Dearest Friend if we can meet with safety
nothing could give me so much but our feelings and our Dangers in this is
mutual, for our meeting imprudently might endanger our not meeting so often at
another time, but could it be done safely it would be a pity to loose any of
our (too few) opportunities -- I was very much frighted at first but by
thinking it over am not quite so much alarmed and hope it is not so much talked
off as she said -- she said that at first they said there was Highwaymen in the
reads about and that afterward a person from Chester knew you and discovered
it to every body I hope they wont dare to say any thing to my Lord as he has
not said a word or even named you, and he has been at Halkin, Mr. Gros -- r
leaves us tomorrow and on Wednesday we go to Mrs H -- where I hope to receive
your dear Letter -- I Am miserable in having any thing to tell you that can give
you the least uneasiness, it vexes me more than any thing I feel myself, what
do you think about it, Pray my dear Soul do either way you think best and I
hope as we have been tolerably fortunate hitherto we may scramble through it
somehow or other, but I don't know what to say what to advise but I Am sure you
can judge much better than me pray let me have a few lines in Lemon Duce by C
-- to tell me, I wish I could find a Meathod for you to write in ink, I Will
consider about it night and day, but I fear I can but realy I make out the
Lemon Duce very well, we leave Mrs H again on Friday, don't my dear Soul be
alarmed about the Affair, if you think it better not to come we shall meet I
hope not 3 weeks later, thank God for that he seems horribly tired of being
here, and impatient to be in Town he sais he would not be from London when the
parliament meet for the world, and I hope will be there some days before, he is
not yet well so any how thank God we shant be very long as under though indeed
while I say so, a day nay an hour appears Ten thousand years, but my Soul if
you think you can come safely we'll settle every thing the best that's possible
and we may perhaps do very well -- O I don't know what to say, I say and unsay
every minute -- I long to see you and yet I would not do any thing that might
be against our future meeting, in short I Would say no more for I scarcely know
what I say my Dearest Soul think it over and I Am vastly in hopes every thing
will be for the best and will happen well and fortunate at last, I am racked
between to se my Dear Friend, and fear of being found out, but don't my life be
uneasy, think it over and either way you determine will I dare say end well,
I Have told Carry you will write a Line to me by her in Lemon Duce, -- how happy
it is we come to Town so soon let us think of that -- this Letter is to set at
6 in the morning by the post as I must send it down as soon as I can that my
sitting up may not be particular and cause my Letter being suspected so I wont
say much more but that I love you and always shall my Dear Dear Friend pray
don't be vexed about this affair ask Trusty what he thinks of it God bless you my
Dearest Dear Soul

Ever with the most sincere affection Yours H --

We have gone on just as usual but to day we had a heap of men to dine here Sir
W: Williams stays all night Mr. G -- r goes off in the morning, Farewell once
more my Dearest Friend don't pray be uneasy I entreat you my Soul Je vous
etimerois ettern^lement tres cherie (...) adorable Amme

What Joy will it be to me when I can see my Dear Soul

Bon Soir

The foregoing Letter was enclosed in a Cover directed to the D -- of C --.


LETTER XIII.
Tuesday night 5 My dearest Sister
YOUR last Letter I must own my dear little Carry makes me very uneasy as I was
very plain you was in very low Sperrits, and I Am afraid indeed not well, I am
sure I love you too well to risque running you into any scrape therefore if
there is the least Appearance of it I wd not give any Chance of it for the
World. the report you know my love is very false therefore that particular don't
make me uneasy as it will be proved to the contrary by seeing we live together,
it was some spiteful person raised it maliciously and very silyly indeed As the
whole world must see the contrary, Mama's mentioning it in a serious style to
you was very ridiculous as she knows we are living together here and it may be
of some use both in regard to her and the World in general as they will se
false reports raised, if you remember there was exactly the same report raised
of Ly Barrymore about the time she was at Bath, the people seeing that false
(and I remember myself for one) said we imagined every thing else was so and I
assure you my dearest Carry I propose behaving in such a manner as will be
quite proper and clever when I come to Town which I hope will be very soon and
I shall tell you all my plans when I have the happiness of seeing you -- Mama's
behavior to you and speaking to you in that manner I do assure you hurts me
much more than any thing in regard to myself; how little Mama's friendship is
worth having when she is turned and wound about every different way by a little
flattery if she was my friend to day and abused my enemy, if to morrow they
falsely told her they loved her by way of emposing upon her, and getting her to
their sides she would still be more inveterate against me than she had been
against them -- I have been very ill used in the World and those that have
professed themselves my friends have generally acted to me in this style, you
my Dear Carry have been a real friend, and I shall ever acknowledge it with my
last Breath, and ever be sincere to you I only wish it may ever be in my power
to serve you I would be happy beyond measure to prove it to you indeed I would,
I am capable of sincere friendship, I Have only my own word for it now, but will
prove it with joy and thankfully if fortune will but let me -- my poor Friend
indeed has taken a most terable Journey and only just seen me twice, they are
very prudent and told me the 2d time they should set out immediately for fear
of danger, You se by this means my love it was empossible for me to write as I
did not know it till then, and you know that in the Place I saw them it was
impossible to write, or indeed my Dear I should not have been so ungrateful
not to have wrote as I promised and answered yours -- my dear I am very low
spiretted I wish I could have a fly over to you and talk every thing over and I
do believe we should make one another easyer, when you know how I propose to
act -- I wd not have you indeed send any more to S -- ros as your Servants seem
to suspect and be so cross about, for I would not have you run a risk for me
for the World. If I had had an idea of it I would not have ever asked you, but
I thought by one way or other either happening to call or send as it was only
now and then it wd not be suspected, but as they once begin to think, its much
better to do it no more, I desired my Friend to send Saturday Morning for this
and to send one to you as I thought that way would be safe and I Am to send
another for them to send for on Thursday sev night, unless you think it will be
dangerous if so let me know and I Will never send again, but contrive some way
just for one more or so which will be all I shall have occasion to write before
I set out just to let them know the day we set out for we shall set out I do
believe and hope in less than three Weeks for he said to day he did not believe
he shod stay so long as he at first thought which was against the Meeting of
Parliament so may be we may set out in a Fortnight he seems horridly tired of
this place and is fidgeting for ever into Wales etc he sets out for Wales to
morrow and only came back from there sunday so I hope it cannot possibly belong
now before I shall see my dear little Carry again don't be low my dear love I Am
afraid you will make yourself ill, I wish to God you had a little Country air --
never mind what any of them says nor let them vex you I'v a vast good plan to
tell you of; so if people don't change their note this Winter, I know you are
laughing and think I am only building Castles in the air, but see if you don't
find it as I say I assure you you will -- I Am quite uneasy about my Friend I
don't think them well -- I Have advised them to go into public as aint you of my
mind that it would appear too particular for them just to come out when I come
to Town and they think so too well God bless you m. Ld is come home so I must
not say much more at present but you shall hear again from me ver. soon. I
think what you say in regard to Billy may do very well I Will try when I come to
town by hints as you say pushing the Preferment Ah a Wheel within a Wheel, I Would
lay any thing some of the Gros-rs have been at Mama canting the Devil take such
deceit and old about your going out with me never mind the cant prove any
thing don't be frighted for that's impossible let her suspicions be what they
will, for she is very credulous in every Gosops Story -- Adieu m. Dear Soul
forgive the writing nonsense and be merry pray, I Have many things to make you
laugh about when I see you and believe me ever most

sincerely and affecty Yrs H. G --
Robin for ever talks of you he and Dick^ send their lovs he has been drinking
Aunt Tarralilines health just now



The foregoing Letter, and that directed to the D -- of C --, were enclosed in
a Cover directed by Lord Grosvenor as follows:

To the Honble Miss Vernon St. James's Palace London

Free Grosvenor


LETTER XIV.
Tuesday Evening 5th My Dearest Soul,
MOST sincerely unhappy I felt ever since we parted, both in having lost your
dear Company which is so great a happiness to me, and in the thought of the
cold dreadful Journey you have had indeed I Have been miserable about you, I Am
afraid you are scarcely arrived yet, I Have not heard any news at all about you
but I Have been very low spireted ever since tho I Have hid it as much as in my
power, I don't know to express my gratitude to you for the constant proofs you
give me of the sincerity of your affection, I Am sure all the trouble you have
taken only just to se me thoroughly convinces me of it you say all the return
you desire is my affection and Friendship indeed you have them most sincerely,
my heart is always with you indeed it is my dearest Friend -- they came home
sunday to dinner he was here a little before the rest he came on horseback as
he rode part of the way I grew in a fright least as he rode he might have come
to shorten the way through the fields and met you, but hoped as he did not
arrive till nearish 3 that you was got to where you dined first, to day they
are gone to Chester to dinner, and tomorrow I believe they set out for Wales
again for 2 days, I wish we had known it beforehand and may be we might have
contrived to have made some use of it but perhaps it may in the end be better
as it is, I hope I shall have the happiness of hearing from you and if he is in
Wales I shall endeavor to catch my letter before he comes -- I hope C wont
make any objections to receiving and sending the letters by the means you
propose of sending Trusty to her, if she does pray let me know and I Will be sure
to find a method of writing to you, and I Will tear my brains to pieces but I Will
find some way of hearing once or twice from you while we are here I thank God I
don't believe it will be long for he has been taking to day of setting out and
sais he believes he shall go before he at first thought of which was against
the meeting of Parliament, as I am in vast hopes he will fix the day soon, and
I will immediately write you word when I know, as soon I hear from you and C --
and find if I may write again by her I will take the first moment any how if I
don't hear to the contrary from C -- I Will write the beginning of next week that
if you send on Thursday sevenight it will be at C -- y's I shall be sure to
find some opportunity as I dare say he will not be long together at home --
while I feel it so cold I Am in pain and Misery for you good God in those post
Chaises how starving it must be I Am so in fear it should hurt your breast, do
take care of yourself pray my Dear Dear Friend and if you aint quite well pray
take some advise, don't take it ill my plaguing you so but really I love you so
much I cant help wishing you to take more care of your health.

he seems in a tolerable humor not much one way nor other but still drinks
toast and water and very little wine he had a little weazing last night, I
suppose dining out to day wont do him much good he sais as the weather is so
cold he could get off his business in Wales, but I realy believe he is very
glad of any excuse to carry him there as he don't seem to know what to do with
himself at home

I do believe and hope there is no suspicions about you, and indeed tho painful
I Am sure to both of us I really believe it was the most prudent thing posible
to go before people talked or began to suspect; nothing here has happened worth
relating, I Have Breakfast'd dined and sup't gone to bed and rise at the same
hour as usual but we rehearst our play in my Room the other night, I fancy it
will be done middling well its a most horrid play but they will have it, I must
act both the women's characters we are not to have the general Rehearsal in the
Playhouse till Monday evening -- indeed my dear soul you are very prudent in
intending to go a little in public before I come to town, it would really look
much too particular just to come out then and might cause remarks which
possibly might be conveyed to my Ld. and every thing of that sort might rouse
him and make him more and more observant to prevent our Meetings, and the best
thing we can possibly do now is to make him believe it is all over between us,
and we have really I beleiv blinded him for some time at least he has no proof
about us, and I hope to God that by degrees his suspicions will be lulled and
then we may form some plans for our meeting happily we must not despair but
look forwards that is the only way to support ourselves under our present
unhappy situation and there is probability of many things happening to mend the
present, so we think like Philosophers and believe every thing is for the best
and hope we may enjoy better days soon, and indeed I think it very probable my
dearest and dear Soul with this idea be happy, if I knew you were so I should
be more than half way to it, as I assure you what concerns you is more to me
than my own feelings upon any thing. God forbid there should be a War if you
go what then remains for me but misery, don't lets think on that, no, its wrong,
one must not meet misfortunes, but how can I talk so, I Am sure that is not
adopting the Style I before proposed to look forward for better times -- I
shall long to hear from you my dear life, indeed I do, I am afraid you had a
miserable Journey indeed, I hope C -- will manage our letters as you send, if
she wont don't be uneasy I Will certainly contrive some other means to write and
to hear from you -- I shall write to C -- as soon as I Have done this and
persuade her all I can, I really think no body can suspect any thing as you
said -- so if you send to her the Thursday after you get this you will find
another from me, I think I have better now conclude and write my letter to C --
as I imagine he will come home pretty soon, or I could write to you for ever,
indeed my dearest Soul I could tire you to death with my nonsense -- I shall
only now add what I have often said to you my Dearest Friend, that you may ever
be assured of my tenderest and most sincere affections and that I shall ever
remain in the truest sense of the expression

Yrs Most Faithfully and Affectionately
You have thoro'ly convinced me of your regard for me which I prise above all
things and can never thank you enough for the proofs you have given me of your
Love.



The foregoing Letter was enclosed in a Cover, directed To The D of C

In the Cover was written as follows:

Pray my dear do tell my poor Friend Foulkes I very sincerely condole with him
and advise him not to mind the old people if he loves her and she loves him to
persuade her to run away with him, it will be delightful, I wish to Goodness
they would


LETTER XV.
Eaton. -- Saturday My dearest Carry
How do you do I Am in constant Expectation of a letter from you, and hope it
will arrive to morrow Morning, I long to hear you are in better Sperrits, and
my Friend well, thank God I shall have the Happiness of seeing you very soon,
my Lord setts out next Wednesday he goes to Newmarkett in his Way, I shall set
out about Monday or Tuesday Sevenight and to be in Town the end of the week, as
I come slow with the Children, I hope I shall see my dear little Carry as soon
as I arrive, I shall send to your Lodgings immediately and hope you will be able
to come to me, I shant tell Mamma exactly when I come, I shall say the End of
the week toward the Sunday, because I must see you first, and if she knows she
will come and spoil all our Comfort, I Am in great Anxiety to se poor dear Mrs.
Hill before we go, but I sadly fear I shant, but I have some hopes they may be
able to come before we set out, at least before I do -- we have got our Play
Lethee quite up, and are to Act it on Tuesday Evening in the Playhouse litt up,
and all in Order, I do both the Women's Characters, I don't much relish them, but
they Are pretty easy, I shall have no trouble with them and we have some very
good Actors, and I believe it will be altogether very well acted we have had
many Rehersals, and we are to Rehearse Monday and Tuesday Morning in the
Playhouse to be quite perfect against the Evening, we have Rehearst in the
Playhouse once or twice, we are to have an Orchastre of music, and Company to
se us Tuesday and if Toms who is one of our Actors don't set out with my Ld. on
Wednesday we shall act every Evening till we set out, my Ld. is going presently
to dine at Chester to day and the Gentlemen who are here, I hope Almacks was
agreeable and how was the Ball at Court, I hope you got up your Sperrits and
enjoyed it, I hope you got my last letter safe, -- my little Boys are very well
and send their loves to Aunt Taraliline, I ride out almost every day as the
Weather is very fine, and it always agrees vastly with me, I often wish you of
my party, I'v a very pleasant Chare that goes very pleasantly and I Gallop very
hard some times, I shall be very happy to hear from you before I set out, but I
cannot be sure of receiving it, if you write later than Friday Nght so do if
you can write on Thursday, and make a cross under the Seal as otherwise I maint
get it, if you do that I shall be sure of it, if you cant write before Friday
to write then as the Post will bring it in the Morning I set out, and earlyer
then we shall be gone, so that w' do if you cant on Thursday my Ld. is but now
set out for Chester which is the Reasons that in the former Part of my Letter I
cd say nothing but as it was late was forced to begin for fear it should be too
late for the Post, and dared say nothing but what he might see, for fear he
should come up, the Post goes out at half past Two, it is now within a quarter of
the Time it must go and I'v my Friends to write which shall I do, and how happy I
am I shall se you so soon do come to me as soon as ever I arrive what a vast
deal of Talk I shall have, if you can write to me on Wednesday Thursday or
Friday do pray, and you may say any thing and my Friend write in Ink it will be
sure to come safe as nothing will prevent his setting out on Wednesday as he
has particular Business at Newmarket I believe he will be in Town for a day
first, if he should even be taken ill or such unforeseen Accidents happen. I Will
meet the Post Boy in the Lane pray remember to put a cross under the Seal,
every thing has gone of well not a Creature have I heard a Word from, and he is
in very tolerable Humor, Farewell my Dear, I have not Time to say more I fear
it must be too late, but if so there is another Post at six in the Morning so
Adieu and Believe me my Dearest Carry

Yrs with the most sincere Affection
I hope the way my Friend takes of sending Trusty as its only for twice wont be
disagreeable to you my Love or suspected we thought it w'd be much the safest
Way

ever my Dear Soul. Yr most faithfully


Pray burn all my Letters how does Mama behave

O dear how can you get this to him, as I quite forgot he was not to send
Trusty to you till Thursday, I wd not loose this opportunity for I cannot write
then he will be at home, but on Wednesday as soon as he is gone I Will write to
you as I can tell you exactly the Day I Am off and you will get that Friday Night
or Satt. Morning what can be done I doubt he wont have it in time to write on
Wednesday or Thursday, I feer you cant send it Once more dear Soul

Dec. 9. 1769. Adieu




After Mr. Wedderburn had read these Letters, which took up very near an hour,
he entered into observations on their contents, as well as the case.

He asked (as the words mutual feelings See Letter III. and Letter XII.
, and I hope I shall never have occasion to repent this confidence, were
mentioned in one of her letters) "What mutual feelings should pass between a
married woman and any other person but her husband? Or, why the word repent
should be used, if it did not strongly imply a foregone dishonor?" He observe
"That it would be given the Jury in evidence that his R -- H -- had assumed the
fictitious name of Morgan, a country 'Squire, not very sound in his
understanding; that he had taken down a servant with him to St. Alban's, who
went by the name of Trusty, for the purpose of facilitating this amor." He
therefore asked, "What pain of mind it must cost his R -- H --, for one of his
elevated station to associate himself for several days with his own servant,
pass under a fictitious name, and forego all those honors and distinctions
usually paid to his rank, if he had not this dishonorable scheme in pursuit?"

After finishing these observations, which were made with great accuracy and
judgment, he told the Jury, "That they had two principal objects for their
observation. The first was the very great quality of the defendant, and the
second the irreparable injury sustained by the plaintiff. As to the former, he
said, no given sum could be punishment sufficient, as the elevated rank and
situation of life he sustained, should the more deter him from setting a bad
example to the subordinate classes of society." He observed, "There were
certain situations in life, that made the same offense more criminal in one
than another, on account of the greater duties they may owe the offended party
in particular, or society in general. This he instanced in the case of a
servant prosecuted for crim. con. with his master's wife, when the damages were
laid very considerable, though the offending party had no fortune to bear it;
and this he said was done for very wise purposes; to point out to society the
greater breach of duty in a servant, from whom confidence, respect, and
fidelity, were more immediately expected." He observed, in the present case,
though the damages may be thought to be laid high, yet, as it was all the
punishment the law could inflict, none of it ought to be remitted, as they had
it now in their power to convince his R -- H -- in particular, and every man of
rank in general, "That the laws of England in the hands of a BRITISH Jury, are
always superior to situation and connections. He likewise hoped, that this
would, in future, direct his R. H. to nobler pursuits than the seduction of the
wife of a Peer, and incline him to copy from a very near relation of his
(meaning his M.) whose conjugal attachments, abstracted from his other virtues,
not only ornamented the throne he filled, but showed a bright example to his
subjects in general."

And now, gentlemen, continued the learned and eloquent Counsel, I shall leave
you in possession of these sentiments, and only direct one thing more to your
consideration; which is, that you have now before you the chastity and honor
of the sex, the sanctity of marriage, and the custody of British morals, and
that your determination will severally operate on each of these."

Several witnesses were then called, the first of whom was,

The Rev. Mr. Tailor.
A clergyman, and chaplain to Lord G. proved the marriage of Lord G. with Miss
Harriet V --, on the 19th of July, 1764, it having been solemnized by this
witness on that day; proved their having lived happily and well together from
that time until the present affair.

Elizabeth Sutton.
Was employed to take care of the Countess of Dunhoff's house, when the family
were out of town -- Knew Lady G --. Said that the Countess of Dunhoff went out
of town in the month of May, 1769, and staid five weeks in the country. That
the day the Countess went out of town, Lady G. came in the evening, about seven
or eight o'clock, and said her brother would come there that evening, and then
Lady G. ran up stairs into the drawing room; in about half an hour after a
gentleman came in a chair, with a double knock, the curtains of the chair were
drawn very close. He had on a blue great coat, -- he got out of the chair, and
ran up stairs very quick, he went into the drawing room, where Lady G. was. The
witness did not follow him into the room, but went up about half an hour after,
with candles. The lady and gentleman were then sitting on a couch, close to one
another. The witness shut up the windows, and left the room. She said they
staid till about a quarter past ten o'clock. That it was then about the latter
end of May. That Lady G. went away in her coach. She, this witness, wondered
the gentleman did not go away with the lady; but that, soon after he came down
stairs, and went away on foot. The gentleman was very fair, with light hair,
and large eyes, had a scar on the side of his neck. The very next night after,
they came again, both of them, in the same manner as before, and staid pretty
much the same time. Lady G. went away alone, and the gentleman soon after. They
never did stay later than eleven o'clock any night -- That they came there
three or four nights one after another, in the same manner. That one evening,
as the gentleman was going away, the husband of this witness, a laboring man,
happening to be in the hall, and upon her saying that the gentleman was Lady
G's brother, her husband made answer, "No, you fool, that he is not, I am sure,
for that gentleman is the D. of C." -- She said that the couch did remain and
continue in the drawing room at all these several times of their coming.

Cross examined.
She said that Lady G. always came in her own coach, and attended by her own
servants -- That until the husband of this witness gave her cause to think
otherwise, she always verily believed that the gentleman was Lady G's brother
-- That she never observed the door to be locked, when she went up at any time,
when they were there.

Samuel Sutton.
Husband to the last witness, said, that he knew the person of the D. of C. and
that he saw him, about the latter end of May was twelvemonth, one evening, at
the Countess of Dunhoff's house, and informed his wife who he was.

John Bourne.
Servant to the Countess of Dunhoff, in the capacity of postilion, had lived
with her three years and a quarter. -- Remembered to have seen the D. of C. at
his lady's house about a year ago, who then asked him to carry a letter to Lady
G. and not to tell his own lady of it. He was to take the letter as if it was
from the Countess of Dunhoff -- which he accordingly did, and the Duke gave him
half a guinea for his trouble -- Said he still continued to be servant to the
Countess of Dunhoff.

Thomas Denison.
One of Lady G's footmen, remembered about February, 1769, that he attended his
lady to Almack's; that he was ordered to return at eleven o'clock at night;
that she then went away in a figured chair to the Countess of Dunhoff's, in
Cavendish-square, where he saw the D. of C. come in at that time. -- He
remembered that in the month of May, 1769, his lady was at Cravenhill, near
Paddington, and came from thence frequently to the Countess of Dunhoff's. --
That he had often attended Lady Grosvenor to St. James's palace, about the
latter end of April, or the beginning of May, 1769, where she was set down at
the fore-gate, that he had seen her then go cross the courtyard, at St.
James's, into the Park, and go in at the D. of C's back door in the Park,
attended by the Countess of Dunhoff, and that upon these occasions, which were
generally at about eight or nine o'clock in the evening, it was Lady
Grosvenor's custom to discharge the coach, and order it to come again in two
hours time; after which she returned through the Park the same way to her
coach; that this happened four or five times. -- That about the latter end of
September, in the same year, he had attended Lady G. to Kensington gardens,
where the D. of C. had frequently met her. That in the month of October, in the
same year, he attended his lady down into Cheshire. The first night she lay at
St. Alban's, the next night at Towcester, the third night at Coventry, the
fourth night at the Four Crosses, the fifth night at Whitchurch, and the sixth
night at Eden-hall, in Cheshire, the seat of Lord G. That after his Lady's
arrival there, he observed she walked out in very dirty weather, and in very
dirty fields; that he remembered goins once to deliver a message to her in the
fields, and saw her with a man, sitting down or lying down, he could not tell
which; that upon seeing him, she suddenly got up and ran toward him; that he
did verily believe the man to have been the D. of C. That whilst his lady came
toward him to take his message, the man seemed to skulk behind a tree. That on
the 21st of December last he attended his lady at St. Alban's, where she was
that day, on her return to London. That he, this witness, being already gone to
bed, was called up by Mr. Stevens, the butler, who likewise attended Lady G. on
her journey to London. That Stevens told him there was a man locked up with
their lady in her bedchamber, and that he had called him, this witness up, as
it was his, Stevens's, intent to break open the door, which he did accordingly
effect with an iron poker; that when the door was broke open, he saw the D. of
C. standing in the middle of the room, dressed, that it was then about eleven
o'clock; that Lady G. got to the opposite door, which led to another room; that
the D. was buttoning his waistcoat, which had been open. -- That Lady G's neck
was naked; that her dress was such an one as did button down before, and
likewise buttoned at the wrists. That he thinks they call it a jesuit. -- The
D. upon the discovery being made, stood very much confused, like a statue, and
could not speak; that when he did, he said, Gentlemen, I hope you will not hurt
me. -- He then attempted to go out, but Stevens called out, Stop that
gentleman. As soon as the D. had got into another room, he said. Take notice, I
was not in Lady G's room; to which Stevens made answer, No, you are not now,
but you was this minute; to which the Duke replied, He would take his Bible
oath he was not in my lady's room. This witness observed the bed to be very
much tumbled, but not the bolster; said that he knew the D. very well, that his
coat was darkish, his waistcoat of a light color, that he had a silk
handkerchief about his neck, and a dark round wig on, that he had white
breeches, and white stockings.

Cross examined.
Said that when he saw his lady first in the fields, he was upwards of a
hundred yards off; but when he delivered his message, he was not twenty yards
off; said that when he attended his lady to Kensington-gardens, Lady Carolina
Vernon was usually with her, said that at St. Alban's, the servants of the
house were not at the breaking open of the door, but that they did come up soon
after and before the bed had been examined.

Edward Bennet.
One of Lady G's footmen remembered going with his lady, in the month of June,
1769, to Carlisle, house, along with Lady Harrington. They staid there about
three quarters of an hour, and then came away; remembered to have kept places
at Drury Lane, in the month of February, 1769, that the D. of C. came into the
box and sat down, and told him he need not stay any longer, for that he, the D.
of C. would take care of the place for Lady G. Remembered that in the month of
April or May, 1769, his lady and the Countess of Dunhoff went several times in
the coach to St. James's palace, and from thence walked through the courtyard
into the Park, and so in at the D. of C's backdoor, etc. Confirmed the
evidence of the last witness as to the St. Alban's affair, with this addition,
that he, this witness, put his ear to the keyhole of the door, and could
plainly distinguish two voices whispering to each other, upon which Mr.
Stevens, and this witness, broke the door open.

Robert Gedding.
Said he was porter to the D. of C. that he had seen Lady G. acknowledged that
he did attend the D. of C. to St. Alban's in the month of October, 1769; did
not remember the precise hour of the day they arrived there, but believed it
was in the afternoon. That there was one servant with him besides this witness;
that he was a groom, and his name John Swan; that they lay at St. Alban's, and
went forward next day through Stony-Stratford, lay at Towcester next night;
remembered that the Duke's chamber door was chalked by him, this witness, and
said it was his usual custom to do so; said that the D. was dressed plain like
a country farmer, and this witness in the same manner, and passed for such kind
of people, by fictitious names, which he, this witness, gave them of his own
accord, without any orders for it from the D. that they came back to London the
next morning from Towcester, sat out from thence, about two in the morning, but
returned back in the evening from London the same road again; that they went on
all night, lay at Coventry the next night, and at the Four-Crosses the night
after, did not know there was any other company at the inn; that they got to
Whitchurch the next night, but at what hour could not tell. The next day at
Barnhill, where a family went by, whom they found afterward to have been Lord
G's. They then went to Chester, and from thence to Eden-hall, where his R. H.
went to visit Lady G. The next day he went also to visit Lady G. and came back
to the Falcon at Chester, where they called each other farmers, and passed as
such; did not recollect that he did chalk the door of the Duke's chamber when
at the Falcon at Chester. The next day the D. went again to visit Lady G. said
that his R. H. never went into Lord G's house at all, nor even into the garden,
except on the Saturday, which was the first day, but always saw her on the
outside of the garden rails; that they lay on the Monday at Marcourt-heath, saw
Lady G. on Tuesday, lay that night again at Marcourt-heath, and returned to
London the next day; that the occasion of their sudden return was, this witness
thought that his R. H. was known at Marcourt-heath, and therefore advised him
by all means to return to town immediately. Said positively that his R. H. did
not at any time go into the house of Lord G. remembered that he received a
parcel undirected from Lady G. in the month of December, in answer to a similar
parcel which he had carried down to her from the D. of C.

Cross examined.
Said that until their arrival at Barnhill he did not in truth know that the
D's journey at all related to Lady G. declared that at every visit the Duke
made to Lady G. this witness was present, and in sight the whole time; that
sometimes they were walking, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting on the
ground. He said that at St. Alban's, on the 21st of December he observed a man
in a blue coat, who was boring holes in the door of Lady G's bedchamber, and
that he, this witness, acquainted the Duke therewith. That at the time of the
breaking open the door, the witness was in bed, but got up directly, being
roused by the noise; that when he came into the bedchamber, my Lady was gone,
and the Duke was not there; that the condition the bed was in was as if one
person had been sitting upon it, and no more; merely the pressure of sitting
upon it, and no more.

John Burton.
Said he was waiter at the Tun-inn at Towcester; that in the month of October
last, two persons were at the Tun-inn, who passed for farmers, whom the witness
believed to have been Mr. Gedding and the D. of C. said that he, this witness,
attended them both at supper, and remembered to have told them both, when at
table, that Lady G. was in the house, with her family; remembered that the two
persons set out toward London, at two o'clock in the morning.

Jane Charlton.
Lived at the Four Crosses in October last; that sometime in that month, a
gentleman and two servants came there, the gentleman was low in statute, that
she had seen him since, and knew him to be the D. of C. The servants said his
name was Morgan, and that he was rather disordered in his mind. Remembered that
his chamber door was chalked. That there was another family in the house that
night, Lady G's, who lay herself in the next room to the gentleman.

Sarah Richardson.
Lived servant at Whitchurch, in October last, at the Red Lion inn; that Lady
G. came there one day in that month with her servants; that she desired to see
the chambers, which this witness showed her; that she was shown one of the best
rooms in the house, which she did not like, and made several objections to;
that she afterward went through the rest of the rooms, and made choice of the
worst room in the house; that it was noisy, being near to stables, that some of
the windows were broke, and the room very damp. That she remembered two
gentlemen were there, who were, as she has since discovered, the D. of C. and
Mr. Gedding; that they had a servant with them. That the D. past for a young
'squire, one 'squire Morgan, who was a little foolish in his mind, and
traveled about for his health, under the care of the other gentleman, Mr.
Gedding, who went by the name of Farmer Trusty, -- That she remembered the
young 'squire's chamber door had a chalk mark upon it; and she likewise
remembered the room Lady G. made choice of, was in the same passage, and nearly
opposite to the young 'squire's chamber.

That Lady G. went to bed about nine o'clock, and that about twelve o'clock, as
she this witness was sitting in the bar below, along with a fellow servants,
adjusting their money-accounts before they went to bed, they heard a rustling
of clothes in this same passage; that this witness would have gone up stairs to
know what was the matter, but her fellow servants stopped her, saying, It is
only the foolish gentleman; and added, Don't go up, perhaps the fool may harm
you. That when the witness made the young 'squire's bed the next morning, it
was most exceedingly tumbled, so as she never saw any bed that had been lain in
only by one person, and there were she did not know how many pins in the bed.
That she observed nothing particular in Lady G's bed.

Mary Spencer.
Said that she was mistress of the Red Lion inn at Whitchurch, remembered in
the month of October last the two gentlemen being there, who past for 'squire
Morgan and Farmer Trusty, together with a servant; -- remembered the young
'squire's chamber door being chalked; remembered Lady G's being there, and her
choosing the worst room, whilst others were vacant.

John Jones.
Said that he kept the inn on Marcourt-heath, that the D. of C. came there in
the month of October last, and stayed several nights. That he went by the name
of farmer Jones; and had another person with him called farmer Trusty. That he
staid till about the 3d of November.

John Andrews.
Said he was a servant to Lord G. remembered his Lordship came down to
Eden-hall on the 3d of November last. That he, this witness, came there on the
2d of November, both from Newmarket.

Matthew Stevens.
Said he was butler to Lord G. was at St. Alban's, at the White Heart inn, on
the 21st of December last, attending his lady and the family from Cheshire;
that they came in about half past five o'clock; that upon arriving there, he
made enquiry, and found there were two gentlemen in the house, one of whom he
had strong reasons to believe was the D. of C. That this witness took an
opportunity in the evening to bore two holes in the door of the bedchamber his
lady had made choice of, and stopped them with paper. That he then went down,
attended his lady at supper, and carried in a dish of meat to the table; that
his lady retired to her chamber before nine o'clock. That he made her a negus,
as was his custom, and carried it into the parlour, but finding her gone, he
went up stairs with it to her chamber. That she took the negus of him at the
chamber door, and shutting the door, turned the key upon him. He went down and
fetched his brother John Stevens, who kept the Woolpack at St. Albans, and,
returning some time after, he took the paper from the holes in the door, and
applying his ear, very plainly perceived two voices, one of which he knew to be
lady G's, he could not however distinguish any words. That soon after John
Andrews, the groom, bringing him word the D. of C. had ordered a chaise to be
ready at two o'clock in the morning, he was determined to lose no time,
therefore he resolved to break open the door immediately, and he did so with an
iron poker. That the door broke at the hinges, and not at the lock; and the
first object he saw was lady G. endeavoring to escape into the next room; in
doing so, she fell down; that this witness assisted her to get up. That her
ladyship then said, "I suppose you think you have done a very fine thing now."
That this witness answered her, "My lady I am sincerely sorry for the
occasion." To which she said, "I am sure you are." That the duke got into the
next room, and then said, "Take notice I am not in my Lady G's room;" to which
this witness made answer, "No, you are not now, but you was this minute;" to
which the Duke replied, "He would take his Bible oath he was not in my lady's
room." That the D. was asked by this witness, who he was? To which he made no
answer. That this witness called in the rest of the servants, who all declared
they knew him to be the D. of C. upon which the D. was told, that his person
was very secure, and that he might go wherever he pleased. That the bed was
very much tumbled, as much so as a bed could be. That the sheets were
exceedingly tumbled, and a dent on the farther side of the bed, like the
impression of a head. That when he bored the holes in the chamber door, he
remembered there was no other light in the room but that of the fire; that no
candle was in the room.

Cross examined.
Said that he did not know any lady of the name of Charlotte Wynn, or Miss
Williams, nor did he in the year 1765. That this witness did remember to have
carried a Letter from Lord G. to a lady at the Falcon inn at Chester, but did
not remember her name. Thought that it was a message for the lady to come to
Lord G. to speak with him. That he thought the lady might have been about five
or six and twenty.

That this witness did not observe any thing very particular about Lady G's
dress, as she turned about very quick. Nor did he observe any thing very
particular about the D's dress.

John Stevens.
Brother to the last witness, and kept the Woolpack at St. Alban's. That on the
21st of December last, between ten and eleven o'clock, his brother broke open
the door of Lady G's bed chamber; and confirmed the last witness in all that
followed.

Several other witnesses were called on in succession, who all corroborated the
discovery at St. Alban's, which seemed the principal point aimed at by the
plaintiff's counsel.

Mr. Dunning began the defense with observations on the proof, which he said
was so far from being positive, that it was not circumstantial; and that if it
were admitted upon this occasion, it would open a door for many artifices that
might be practiced upon the unwary by artful women, in combination with their
husbands. After expatiating upon the impropriety and danger of allowing such
proofs, which he did with great energy, he then produced the following
exculpatory witnesses.

Mrs. Langford.
Who said she was mistress of the White-heart inn, at St. Albans's; that upon
her coming into Lady G's room, the bed appeared to her as if it had been sat
upon by somebody, especially on that side next to the fire, but did not appear
at all as if it had been lain upon; that Lady G. appeared much in the same
dress as when she came in; that her head dress did not appear at all disordered.

Cross examined.
Did not recollect that she had at any time since declared, that she had not
particularly observed the situation of the bed.

Sarah Gilby.
Said she was chambermaid at the White-heart, at St. Alban's; saw the room
after the door was broke open; that Lady G's servants and the waiters of the
house were all there; that she saw my Lady G. that her hair appeared no ways
disordered; that the bed was flatted on one side, as if it had been set down
upon, but not as if it had been laid upon. This witness said that she warmed
Lady G's bed twice that evening.

Cross examined.
Said she gave the key to Lady G. which was before on the outside of the door,
and this she did before she carried away the warming-pan; that the corner of
the sheets were a little tumbled; acknowledged a paper that was shown to her,
to have been subscribed by her, but says that when she signed that paper, she
was very much flurried, and it was so soon after the affair, that she could not
then recollect what had past so well, as she had been able to do since.

Thomas Robinson.
Said that he was a waiter at the White-heart, at St. Alban's; thought the bed
had the appearance of having been set down upon, but, to the best of his
belief, did not appear to have been laid upon.

There was a laugh in court when this counsel began to assist his fair Client;
a wag calling out on his getting up (in the words of an old song) There pops in
little Davy.
Mr. Morton spoke next, and supported his brother Dunning's arguments very
forcibly, and at length allowing for the argument's sake that her ladyship
might have been guilty, he said he had several witnesses to prove that his
Lordship had frequently been guilty of the same crime.

These witnesses being sworn, they were called upon to prove that his Lordship
had connexions with them; when, by Lord Mansfield's direction, the leading
questions only being put, these ladies answered as follows.

Mrs. Beau Germain.
Said that she knew Lord G. had known him ever since the year 1768; that she
was introduced to him by one Mrs. Muilman, who lives in Crown-court, in
Westminster; that she, this witness, first saw Lord G. in Jermyn-street, at a
stay-maker's, where lodgings were taken for her by Mrs. Muilman, in order for
her to see Lord G. in them: said she had particular connexions with Lord G. as
man and wife; that she was known to him by the name of Sarah King; that she
continued in that lodgings three weeks; that she did not afterward see Lord G.
for eight months, when she saw him at Miss Woodfall's in Oxford-road; that she
lay-in in April, 1769; that the child was Lord G's, of whom she received a 20
pound Bank note.

Cross examined.
Acknowledged she knew Mr. Gedding, the Duke of C's porter, very well; that he
came to her lodgings in order to bring her the subpoena; that she told Mr.
Gedding the whole story some time ago, and came there merely to serve Lady G.
and to support the cause of the whole sex; said she was married to a Captain of
a French ship, and that they have expectations from a brother of her husband's.

Mary How.
Said she knew Lord G. had seen him at Mrs. Lloyd's house, where she came to
lie with Lord G.

That she did do so. That she saw him three days after, the same again. That
she saw him next day, but that nothing at all past then.

Cross examined.
Said that she lived in Mercer-street, Long-acre, and knew Lord G's person, if
she saw him.

Mary Waten.
Lived in Bolton-row; said she knew Lord G. and had seen him at her house; that
he came to see some waistcoats belonging to Mrs. Tremilly.

Ann Tremilly.
Said she knew Lord G. and that he came to Mrs. Waten, in order to relieve her
[Mrs. Waten] she being in very great Distress; said she knew Mrs. Gunning, and
that she met my Lord G. at Mrs. Waten's once or twice.

Mary Smith.
Q. What acquaintance had you with his Lordship?


A. A very intimate one.


Q. Did you eat together?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you lie together?


A. Yes.


Q. Any farther connection?


A. Yes; in every respect like man and wife.


These witnesses being examined, the Counsel for the Plaintiff gave the reply,
which lasted a full hour, and in one part particularly created a great laugh in
observing, "That however aggravating the circumstances were otherwise, they
could not charge his R. H. with intriguing merely for the sake of intrigue, as
the incoherency of his letters plainly proved him to be really a lover."

Lord Mansfield began about half an hour after six, and, with his usual
clearness, summed up the proof with the utmost strictness and impartiality, and
concluded with saying, "That the jury were to consider the damages received,
and give an adequate recompense to the person injured, and not give a sum as a
punishment upon the person who committed that injury. As in that case, it would
become rather a fine, which would be incroaching on the power of the court, in
whose breast the inflicting fines alone depends."

His Lordship's speech continued till fifteen minutes before eight, when the
jury enclosed till ten minutes before ten, when, of the three complaints, they
found the defendant only guilty of one, and then set off in carriages for
Bloomsbury-square, with their verdict, finding for the plaintiff TEN THOUSAND
POUNDS damages.

Upon the arrival of the jury at Lord Mansfield's, in Bloomsbury-square, a
number of people, whose curiosity was very great, had collected together round
the door; and before the jury had well got into the house, many rushed in with
them, Lord Mansfield being acquainted with the arrival of the jury, he came
into the hall from his room, by a private door; and being attended by the
proper officers of the Court, the usual questions were asked, whether they were
agreed in their verdict, and who should speak for them? when he received their
verdict, and immediately withdrew. Some of the people, who were nearest the
door, after having heard the verdict, communicated it to others; and a loud
huzza was heard, as approbatory of the jury's conduct.

FINIS.

