CONSIDERATIONS ON THE TRUE HARMONY OF MANKIND; And how it is to be maintained.

BY JOHN WOOLMAN.

And the Remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of (...) people, as the dew
from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor
waits for the (...) of men,

Micah v. 7. PHILADELAHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK IN THIRD-STREET, MDCCLXX.

INTRODUCTION.
AS mankind from one parent are divided into many families, and as trading to
sea is greatly increased within a few ages past; amidst this extended commerce
how necessary is it that the professed followers of Christ keep sacred his holy
name, and be employed about trade and traffic no farther than justice and
equity evidently accompanies? that we may give no just cause of offense to any,
however distant, or unable to plead their own cause; and may continually keep
in view, the spreading of the true and saving knowledge of God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, amongst our fellow creatures, which through his infinite love
some feel to be more precious than any other treasure.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE TRUE HARMONY OF MANKIND; And how it is to be maintained.
CHAPTER I. On serving the Lord in our outward Employments.
UNDER the humbling dispensations of the Father of mercies, I have felt (...)
inward labor for the good of my fellow creatures, and a concern that the holy
spirit, which alone can restore mankind to a state of true harmony, may with
singleness of heart be waited for and followed.

I TRUST there are many under that visitation, which if faithfully attended to
will make them quick of understanding in the fear of the Lord, and qualify with
firmness to be true patterns of the Christian life, who in living and walking
may hold forth an invitation to others, to come out of the entanglements of the
spirit of this world.

AND that which I feel first to express is, a care for those who are in
circumstances, which appear difficult, with respect to supporting their
families in a way answerable to pure wisdom, that they may not be discouraged,
but remember that in humbly obeying the leading of Christ, he owneth us as his
friends, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you; and to be a
friend to Christ, is to be united to him, who has all power in heaven and in
earth; and though a woman may forget her sucking child, yet will he not forget
his faithful ones.

THE condition of many who dwell in cities has often affected me with a
brotherly sympathy, attended with a desire that resignation may be labored
for; and where the holy leader directs to a country life or some change of
employ, he may be faithfully followed; for under the refining hand of the Lord
I have seen that the inhabitants of some cities are greatly increased through
some branches of business which his holy spirit does not lead into, and that
being entangled in these things, tends to bring a cloud over the minds of
people convinced of the leadings of this holy leader, and obstructs the coming
of the kingdom of Christ on earth as it is in heaven.

NOW if we indulge a desire to imitate our neighbors in those things which
harmonise not with the true Christian walking, these entanglements may hold
fast to us, and some, who in an awakening time, feel tender scruples, with
respect to their manner of life, may look on the example of others more noted
in the church, who yet may not be refined from every degree of dross; and by
looking on these examples, and desiring to support their families in a way
pleasant to the natural mind, there may be danger of the worldly wisdom gaining
strength in them, and of their departure from that pure feeling of truth, which
if faithfully attended to, would teach contentment in the divine will, even in
a very low estate.

ONE formerly speaking on the profitableness of true humility says, He that
troubles not himself with anxious tho'ts for more than is necessary, lives
little less than the life of Angels, whilst by a mind content with little, he
imitates their want of nothing. Cave's prim. Christi. page 31.

IT is not enough, says Tertullian, that a Christian be chaste and modest, but
he must appear to be so: a virtue of which he should have so a great store,
that it should flow from his mind upon his habit, and break from the
retirements of his conscience, into the superficies of his life. Same book,
page 43.

THE garments we wear, says Clemens, ought to be mean and frugal -- that is
true simplicity of habit, which takes away what is vain and superfluous; that
the best and most solid garment, which is the farthest from curiosity. Page 49.

THOUGH the change from day to night, is by a motion so gradual as scarcely to
be perceived, yet when night is come we behold it very different from the day;
and thus as people become wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight; customs rise up from the spirit of this world, and spread by little and
little, till a departure from the simplicity that there is in Christ, becomes
as distinguishable as light from darkness, to such who are crucified to the
world.

OUR holy Shepherd, to encourage his flock in firmness and perseverance,
reminds them of his love for them, As the Father has loved me, so have I loved
you; continue ye in my love; and in another place graciously points out the
danger of departing therefrom, by going into unsuitable employments; this he
represents in the similitude of offense from that useful active member, the
hand; and to fix the instruction the deeper, names the right hand, If thy right
hand offend thee cut it off and cast it from thee -- If thou feel offense in
thy employment, humbly follow him who leads into all truth, and is a strong and
faithful friend to those who are resigned to him.

AGAIN, he points out those things which appearing pleasant to the natural
mind, are not best for us, in the similitude of offense from the eye, If thy
right eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee. To pluck out the
eye, or cut off the hand, is attended with sharp pain; and how precious is the
instruction which our Redeemer thus opens to us, that we may not faint under
the most painful trials, but put our trust in him, even in him who sent an
Angel to feed Elijah in the wilderness; who fed a multitude with a few barley
loaves, and is now as attentive to the wants of his people as ever.

THE prophet Isaiah, represents the unrighteous doings of the Israelites toward
the poor, as the fruits of an effeminate life, As for my people, children are
their oppressors, and women rule over them; what mean ye that ye beat my people
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord God. Then he
mentions the haughtiness of the daughters of Sion, and enumerates many
ornaments, as instances of their vanity, to uphold which, the poor were so
hardly dealt with, that he sets forth their poverty, their leanness and
inability to help themselves, in the similitude of a man maimed by violence or
beaten to and forced to endure the painful operation of having his face
gradually worn away in the manner of grinding.

AND I may here add, that at times, when I have felt true love open my heart
toward my fellow creatures, and been engaged in weighty conversation in the
cause of righteousness, the instructions I have received under these exercises,
in regard to the true use of the outward gifts of God, have made deep and
lasting impressions on my mind.

I HAVE here beheld, how the desire to provide wealth, and to uphold a delicate
life has grievously entangled many, and been like snares to their offspring;
and though some have been affected with a sense of their difficulties, and
appeared desirous, at times, to be helped out of them; yet for want of abiding
under the humbling power of truth, they have continued in these entanglements;
for in remaining comformable to this world, and giving way to a delicate life,
this expensive way of living, in parents and in children, has called for a
large supply, and in answering this call the faces of the poor have been ground
away, and made thin through hard dealing.

THERE is balm, there is a physician! and O what longings do I feel! that we
may embrace the means appointed for our healing, know that removed which now
ministers cause for the cries of many people to ascend to heaven against their
oppressors, and that we may see the true harmony restored.

BEHOLD how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity. The nature of this unity is thus opened by the apostle, If we walk in
the light, as Christ is in the light, we shall have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Christ will cleanse us from all sin.

THE land may be polluted with innocent blood, which like the blood of Abel may
cry to the Almighty; but those who walk in the light as Christ is in the light,
they know the lamb of God, who takes away sin.

WALKING is a phrase frequently used in scripture, to represent our journey
through life, and appears to comprehend the various affairs and transactions
properly relating to our being in this world.

CHRIST being the light, dwells always in the light, and if our walking be
thus, and in every affair and concern we faithfully follow this divine leader;
he preserves from giving just cause for any to quarrel with us; and where this
foundation is laid and mutually kept to, by families conversant with each
other, the way is open far these comforts in society, which our heavenly father
intends as a part of our happiness in this world; and then we may experience
the goodness, and pleasantness of dwelling together in unity; but where ways of
living take place, which tend to oppression, and in the pursuit of wealth,
people do that to others which they know would not be acceptable to themselves,
either in exercising an absolute power over them, or otherwise laying on them
unequitable burdens; here a fear lest that measure should be meeted to them,
which they have measured to others, incites a care to support that by craft and
cunning devices which stands not on the firm foundation of righteousnese: thus
the harmony of society is broken, and from hence commotions and wars do
frequently arise in the world.

COME out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. Rev. xv. 3, 4. This Babel, or Babylon, was built
in the spirit of self-exaltation; Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top
may reach to heaven, and let us make us a name. Genesis xi. 4. In departing from
an humble trust in God, and following a selfish spirit, people have intentions
to get the upperhand of their fellow creatures, privately meditate on means to
obtain their ends, have a language in their hearts which is hard to understand.
In Babel the language is confounded.

THIS city is represented as a place of business and those employed in it, as
merchants of the earth: The merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the
abundance of her delicacies. Rev. xviii. 3.

AND it is remarkable in this call, that the language from the father of
mercies is, my people, Come out of Babylon my people! Thus his tender mercies
are toward us in an imperfect state; and as we faithfully attend to the call,
the path of righteousness is more and more opened; cravings, which have not
their foundation in pure wisdom, more and more cease; and in an inward purity
of heart, we experience a restoration of that which was lost at Babel,
represented by the inspired prophet in the returning of a pure language. Zep.
iii. 9.

HAPPY for them who humbly attend to the call, Come out of Babylon my people.
For though in going forth we may meet with trials, which for a time may be
painful, yet as we bow in true humility, and continue in it, an evidence is
felt that God only is wise; and that in weaning us from all that is selfish he
prepares the way to a quiet habitation where all our desires are bounded by his
wisdom. And an exercise of spirit attends me, that we who are convinced of the
pure leadings of truth, may bow in the deepest reverence, and so watchfully
regard this leader, that m^^^ who are grievously entangled in a wilderness of
vain customs, may look upon us, and be instructed. And O that such who have
plenty of this world's goods, may be faithful in that with which they are
entrusted! and example others in the true christian walking.

OUR blessed Savior, speaking on worldly greatness, compares himself to one
waiting and attending on a company at dinner: Whether is greater, he that
sits at meat or he that serves? Is not he that sits at meat? but I am
amongst you as he that serves. Luke xxii. 27.

THUS in a world greatly disordered, where men aspiring to outward greatness
were wont to oppress others to support their designs, he who was of the highest
descent, being the Son of God, and greater than any amongst the greatest
families of men, by his example and doctrines foreclosed his followers from
claiming any show of outward greatness, from any supposed superiority in
themselves, or derived from their ancestors.

HE who was greater than earthly Princes was not only meek and low of heart,
but his outward appearance was plain and lowly, and free from every stain of
the spirit of this world.

SUCH was the example of our blessed Redeemer, of whom the beloved disciple
said, He that says he abides in him, ought also to walk even as he walked.

JOHN BRADFORD, who ^^^^^red martyrdom, under Queen Mary, wrote a letter to his
friends out of prison, a short time before he was burnt, in which are these
expressions; "Consider your dignity as children of God and temples of the Holy
Ghost, and members of Christ, be ashamed therefore to think, speak or do any
thing unseemly, for God's children and the members of Christ. Fox, acts and
mon. page 1177.

CHAP. II. On the Example of CHRIST.
AS my mind has been brought into a brotherly feeling with the poor, as to the
things of this life, who are under trials in regard to getting a living in a
way answerable to the purity of truth; a labor of heart has attended me, that
their way may not be made difficult through the love of money in those who are
tried with plentiful estates, but that they with tenderness of heart may
sympathize with them.

IT was the saying of our blessed Redeemer, Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
There is a deep feeling of the way of purity, a way in which the wisdom of the
world has no part, but is opened by the spirit of truth, and is called the way
of holiness; a way in which the traveller is employed in watching unto prayer;
and the outward gain we get in this journey is considered as a trust committed
to us, by HIM who formed and supports the world; and is the rightful director
of the use and application of the product of it.

NOW except the mind be preserved chaste, there is no safety for us; but in an
estrangement from true resignation, the spirit of the world casts up a way, in
which gain is many times principally attended to, and in which there is a
selfish application of outward treasures.

HOW agreeable to the true harmony of society, is that exhortation of the
Apostle? Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.

A PERSON in outward prosperity may have the power of obtaining riches, but the
same mind being in him which is in Christ Jesus, he may feel a tenderness of
heart toward those of low degree; and instead of setting himself above them,
may look upon it as an unmerited favor, that his way through life is more easy
than the way of many others; may improve every opportunity of leading forth out
of those customs which have entangled the family; employ his time in looking
into the wants of the poor members, and hold forth such a perfect example of
humiliation, that the pure witness may be reached in many minds; and the way
opened for a harmonious walking together.

JESUS CHRIST, in promoting the happiness of others, was not deficient in
looking for the helpless, who lay in obscurity, nor did he save any thing to
render himself honorable amongst men, which might have been of more use to the
weak members in his Father's family; of whose compassion toward us I may now
speak a little. He who was perfectly happy in himself, moved with infinite
love, took not upon him the nature of Angels, but our imperfect natures, and
therein wrestled with the temptations which attend us in this life; and being
the Son of HIM who is greater than earthly Princes, yet became a companion to
poor, sincere hearted men; and though he gave the clearest evidence that divine
power attended him, yet the most unfavourable constructions were framed by a
self righteous people; those miracles represented as the effect of a diabolical
power, and endeavors used to render him hateful, as having his mission from
the prince of darkness; nor did their envy cease till they took him like a
criminal and brought him to trial. Though some may affect to carry the
appearance of being unmoved at the apprehension of distress, our dear Redeemer,
who was perfectly sincere, having the same human nature which we have, and
feeling, a little before he was apprehended, the weight of that work upon him,
for which he came into the world, was sorrowful even unto death; here the human
nature struggled to be excused from a cup so bitter; but his prayers centered
in resignation, Not my will but thine be done. In this conflict, so great was
his agony that sweat like drops of blood fell from him to the ground.

BEHOLD now as foretold by the prophet, he is in a judicial manner numbered
with the transgressors. Behold him as some poor man of no reputation, standing
before the high priest and elders, and before Herod and Pilate, where witnesses
appear against him, and he mindful of the most gracious design of his coming,
declineth to plead in his own defense, but as a sheep that is dumb before his
shearer, so under many accusations, revilings and buffetings remained silent.
And though he signified to Peter that he had access to power sufficient to
overthrow all their outward forces; yet retaining a resignation to suffer for
the sins of mankind, he exerted not that power, but permitted them to go on in
their malicious designs, and pronounce him to be worthy of death, even him who
was perfect in goodness; thus in his humiliation his judgment was taken away,
and he, like some vile criminal, led as a lamb to the slaughter. Under these
heavy trials (though poor unstable Pilate was convinced of his innocence, yet)
the people generally looked upon him as a deceiver, a blasphemer, and the
approaching punishment as a just judgment upon him, They esteemed him smitten
of God and afflicted. So great had been the surprise of his disciples, at his
being taken by armed men, that they forsook him and fled; thus they hid their
faces from him, he was despised, and by their conduct it appeared as though
they esteemed him not.

BUT contrary to that opinion, of his being smitten of God and afflicted, it
was for our sakes that he was put to grief; he was wounded for our
transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; and under the weight of them
manifesting the deepest compassion for the instruments of his misery, labored
as their advocate, and in the deeps of affliction, with an unconquerable
patience, cried out, Father forgive them, they know not what they do!

NOW this mind being in us, which was in Christ Jesus, it removes from our
hearts the desire of superiority, worldly honor or greatness; a deep attention
is felt to the divine counselor, and an ardent engagement to promote, as far
as we may be enabled, the happiness of mankind universally; this state, where
every motion from a selfish spirit yields to pure love, I may, with gratitude
to the father of mercies acknowledge, is often opened before me as a pearl to
dig after; attended with a living concern, that amongst the many nations and
families on the earth, those who believe in the Messiah, that he was manifested
to destroy the works of the Devil, and thus to take away the sins of the world,
may experience the will of our heavenly Father, may be done on earth as it is
in Heaven. Strong are the desires I often feel, that this holy profession may
remain unpolluted, and the believers in Christ may so abide in the pure inward
feeling of his spirit, that the wisdom from above may shine forth in their
living, as a light by which others may be instrumentally helped on their way,
in the true harmonious walking.

CHAP. III. On Merchandising.
WHERE the treasures of pure love are opened, and we obediently follow him who
is the light of life, the mind becomes chaste; and a care is felt, that the
unction from the holy one may be our leader in every undertaking.

IN being crucified to the world, broken off from that friendship which is
enmity with God, and dead to the customs and fashions which have not their
foundation in the truth; the way is prepared to lowliness in outward living,
and to a disentanglement from those snares which attends the love of money; and
where the faithful friends of Christ are so situated that merchandise appears
to be their duty, they feel a restraint from proceeding farther than he owns
their proceeding; being convinced that we are not our own but are bought with a
price, that none of us may live to ourselves, but to him who died for us. 2
Corin. v. 15. Thus they are taught, not only to keep to a moderate advance and
uprightness in their dealings; but to consider the tendency of their
proceeding; to do nothing which they know would operate against the cause of
universal righteousness; and to keep continually in view the spreading of the
peaceable kingdom of Christ amongst mankind.

THE prophet Isaiah spoke of the gathered church, in the similitude of a city,
where many being employed were all preserved in purity; They shall call them
the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord, and thou shall be called sought out,
a city not forsaken. lxiii. 10. And the apostle after mentioning the mystery of
Christ's sufferings exhorts, Be ye holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet.
i. 15. There is a conversation necessary in trade; and there is a conversation
so foreign from the nature of Christ's kingdom, that it is represented in the
similitude of one man pushing another with a warlike weapon, There is that
speaks like the piercings of a sword. Prove. xii, 18. Now in all our concerns
it is necessary that the leading of the spirit of Christ be humbly waited for
and faithfully followed, as the only means of being preserved chaste as an holy
people, who in all things are circumspect. Exodus xxiii. 13, that nothing we do
may carry the appearance of approbation of the works of wickedness, make the
unrighteous more at ease in unrighteousness, or occasion the injuries committed
against the oppressed to be more lightly looked over.

WHERE morality is kept to, and supported by the inhabitants of a country,
there is a certain reproach attends those individuals amongst them, who
manifestly deviate therefrom. Thus, if a person of good report, is charged with
stealing goods out of an open shop in the day time, and on a public trial found
guilty, and the law in that case put in execution, he therein sustains a loss
of reputation; but if he be convicted a second and third time of the like
offense, his good name would cease amongst such who knew these things. If his
neighbor, reputed an honest man, being charged with buying goods of this
thief, at a time when the purchaser knew they were stolen, and on a public
trial is found guilty, this purchaser would meet with disesteem, but if he
persisted in buying stolen goods, knowing them to be such, and was publicly
convicted thereof a second and third time, he would no longer be considered as
an honest man by them who knew these things; nor would it appear of good report
to be found in his company buying his traffic, till some evident tokens of
sincere repentance appeared in him. But where iniquity is committed openly, and
the authors of it are not brought to justice, nor put to shame, their hands
grow strong. Thus the general corruption of the Jews shortly before their state
was broke up by the Chaldeans, is described by their boldness in impiety; for
as their leaders were connected together in wickedness, they strengthened one
another, and grew confident, Were they ashamed when they had committed
abominations? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush. Jer.
vi. 15, on which account the Lord thus expostulates with them, What has my
beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many, and the
holy flesh is passed from thee, when thou do evil, then thou rejoicest. Jer.
xi. 15.

NOW the faithful friends of Christ, who hunger and thirst after righteousness,
and inwardly breathe that his kingdom may come on earth as it is in heaven, he
teaches them to be quick of understanding in his fear, and to be very
attentive to the means he may appoint for promoting pure righteousness in the
earth; and as shame is due to those whose works manifestly operate against the
gracious design of his sufferings for us, a care lives on their minds that no
wrong customs however supported may bias their judgments, but that they may
humbly abide under the cross and be preserved in a conduct which may not
contribute to strengthen the hands of the wicked in their wickedness, or to
remove shame from those to whom it is justly due. The coming of that day is
precious in which we experience the truth of this expression. The Lord our
righteousness. Jer. xiii. 6, and feel him to be made unto us wisdom and
sanctification.

THE example of a righteous man is often looked at with attention. Where
righteous men join in business their company gives encouragement to others; and
as one grain of incense deliberately offered to the prince of this world,
renders an offering to God in that state unacceptable; and from those esteemed
leaders of the people may be injurious to the weak; it requires deep humility
of heart, to follow him faithfully, who alone gives sound wisdom and the spirit
of true discerning; and O how necessary it is, to consider the weight of a holy
profession!

THE conduct of some formerly, gave occasion of complaint against them, Thou
have defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the
iniquity of thy traffic. Ezekiel. xxviii. 18, and in several places it is charged
against Israel that they had polluted the holy name.

THE prophet Isaiah represents inward sanctification in the similitude of being
purged from that which is fuel for fire; and particularly describes the outward
fruits, brought forth by those who dwell in this inward holiness they walk
righteously, and speak uprightly. By walking he represents the journey through
life, as a righteous journey; and by speaking uprightly, seems to point at that
which Moses appears to have had in view, when he thus expressed himself, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor speak in a case to decline after
many to wrest judgment. Exodus xxiii. 2.

HE goes on to show their firmness in equity; representing them as persons
superior to all the arts of getting money, which have not righteousness for
their foundation; They despise the gain of oppressions: and further shows how
careful they are that no prospects of gain may induce them to become partial in
judgment respecting an injury; They shake their hands from holding bribes.

AGAIN, where any interest is so connected with shedding blood, that the cry of
innocent blood goes also with it; he points out their care to keep innocent
blood from crying against them, in the similitude of a man stopping his ears to
prevent a sound from entering his head, They stop their ears from hearing
blood; and where they know that wickedness is committed, he points out with
care, that they do not by an unguarded friendship with the authors of it,
appear like unconcerned lookers on, but as people so deeply affected with
sorrow, that they cannot endure to stand by and behold it; this he represents
in the similitude of a man shutting his eyes from seeing evil.

WHO amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly.
He that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding
of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil. Isa. 33.15.

HE proceeds in the spirit of prophecy to show how the faithful being supported
under temptations, would be preserved from that defilement that there is in the
love of money; that as they who in a reverent waiting on God, feel their
strength renewed, are said to mount upward; so here their preservation from the
snare of unrighteous gain, is represented in the likeness of a man, borne up
above all crafty, artful means of getting the advantage of another, They shall
dwell on high; and points out the stability and firmness of their condition,
His place of defense shall be the munition of rocks; and that under all the
outward appearances of loss, in denying himself of gainful profits for
righteousness sake, yet through the care of him who provides for the sparrows,
he should have a supply answerable to his infinite wisdom, Bread shall be given
him, his waters shall be sure. And as our Savior mentions the sight of God to
be attainable by the pure in heart, so here the prophet pointed out, how in
true sanctification the understanding is opened, to behold the peaceable
harmonious nature of his kingdom thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty:
and that looking beyond all the afflictions which attend the righteous, to a
habitation eternal in the heavens, they with an eye divinely open shall behold
the land that is very far off.

He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks,
bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the
king in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off. Isa.
xxxiii. 16.

I OFTEN remember, and to me the subject is awful, that the great Judge of all
the earth does that which is right, and that he before whom the nations are as
the drop of a bucket is no respecter of persons. Happy for them, who like the
inspired prophet, in the way of his judgments wait for him. Isaiah xxvi. 8.

WHEN we feel him to sit as a refiner with fire, and know a resignedness
wrought in us, to that which he appoints for us, his blessing in a very low
estate, is found to be more precious than much outward treasure in those ways
of life where the leadings of his spirit are not followed.

THE prophet in a sight of a divine work amongst many people, declared in the
name of the Lord, I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come
and see my glory. Isaiah lxvi. 18. And again, from the rising of the sun to the
going down of the same, my name shall be great amongst the gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering. Malachi
i. 11.

BEHOLD here how the prophets had an inward sense of the spreading of the
kingdom of Christ; and how he was spoken of as one who should take the heathen
for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession.
Psalm. ii. 8. That he was given for a light to the Gentiles; and for salvation
to the ends of the earth. Isaiah xlix. 6.

WHEN we meditate on this divine work, as a work of ages; a work that the
prophets felt long before Christ appeared visibly on earth, and remember the
bitter agonies he endured when he poured out his soul unto death, that the
heathen nations, as well as others, might come to the knowledge of the truth
and be saved.

When we contemplate on this mavelous work, as that which the Angels desire
to look into. i. Pet. i. 12. And behold people amongst whom this light has
eminently broken forth, and who have received many favors from the bountiful
hand of our heavenly Father; not only indifferent with respect to publishing
the glad tidings amongst the Gentiles, as yet sitting in darkness and entangled
with many superstitions; but aspiring after wealth and worldly honors, take
hold of means to obtain their ends, tending to stir up wrath and indignation,
and to beget an abhorrence in them to the name of christianity. When these
things are weightily attended to, how mournful is the subject?

IT is worthy of remembrance, that people in different ages, deeply baptized
into the nature of that work for which Christ suffered, have joyfully offered
up their liberty and lives for the promoting of it in the earth.

POLICARP, who was reputed a disciple of St. John, having attained to great
age, was at length sentenced to die for his religion, and being brought to the
fire, prayed nearly as follows, "Thou God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom I have received the knowledge of thee! O God of the angels and powers
and of every living creature, and of all sorts of just men which live in thy
presence. I thank thee! that thou have graciously vouchsafed this day and this
hour to allot me a portion among the number of martyrs, among the people of
Christ, unto the resurrection of everlasting life; among whom I shall be
received in thy sight, this day, as a fruitful and acceptable sacrifice,
wherefore for all this, I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee through the
everlasting high Priest, Jesus Christ, thy well beloved son; to whom, with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all glory, world without end. Amen.

BISHOP LATIMER, when sentence of death by fire, was pronounced against him, on
account of his firmness in the cause of religion, he said, "I thank God most
heartily! that he has prolonged my life to this end; that I may, in this case
glorify him by this kind of death." Fox Acts and mon. 936.

WILLIAM DEWSBERY, who had suffered much for his religion, in his last
sickness, encouraging his friends to faithfulness, made mention, like good old
Jacob, of the loving kindness of God to him in the course of his life, and that
through the power of divine love, he for Christ's sake had joyfully entered
prisons. See introduction to his works.

I MENTION these, as a few examples, out of many of the powerful operation of
the spirit of Christ, where people are fully devoted to it, and of the ardent
longings in their minds for the spreading of his kingdom amongst mankind. Now
to those, in the present age, who truly know Christ, and feel the nature of his
peaceable government opened in their understandings, how loud is that call
wherewith we are called to faithfulness; that in following this pure light of
life, we as workers together with him, may labor in that great work for which
he was offered as a sacrifice on the cross; and that his peaceable doctrines
may shine through us in their real harmony, at a time when the name of
Christianity is become hateful to many of the heathen.

WHEN Gehazi had obtained treasures, which the prophet under divine direction
had refused, and was returned from the business; the prophet troubled at his
conduct, queried if it was a time thus to prepare for a specious living.

Is it a time to receive money and garments, men servants and maid servants,
the leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave to thee and to thy seed forever.
ii. Kings, v. 26. And O that we may lay to heart the condition of the present
time! and humbly follow his counsel, who alone is able to prepare the way for a
true harmonious walking amongst mankind.

CHAP. IV. On divine Admonitions.
SUCH are the perfections of our heavenly father, that in all the dispensations
of his providence, it is our duty, in every thing, to give thanks. Though from
the first settlement of this part of America, he has not extended his
judgments to the degree of famine, yet worms at times have come forth beyond
numbering, and laid waste fields of grain and grass, where they have appeared:
another kind, in great multitudes, working out of sight, in grass ground, have
so eat the roots that the surface, being loosned from the soil beneath, might
be taken off in great sheets.

These kind of devouring creatures appearing seldom, and coming in such
multitudes, their generation appears different from most other reptiles, and by
the prophet were called God's army sent amongst the people. Joel ii. 25.

THERE have been tempests of hail, which have very much destroyed the grain
where they extended. Through long drought in summer, grain in some places has
been less than half the usual quantity When crops fail, I often feel a tender
care that the case of poor tenants may be mercifully considered.
; and in the continuance thereof, I have beheld with attention, from week to
week, how dryness from the top of the earth, has extended deeper and deeper,
while the corn and plants have languished; and with reverence my mind has been
turned toward HIM, who being perfect in goodness, in wisdom and power, does
all things right. And after long drought, when the sky has grown dark with a
collection of matter, and clouds like lakes of water hung over our heads, from
whence the thirsty land has been soaked; I have at times, with awfulness,
beheld the vehement operation of lightning, made sometimes to accompany these
blessings, as a messenger from HIM who created all things, to remind us of our
duty in a right use of those benefits, and give striking admonitions, that we
do not misapply those gifts, in which an Almighty power is exerted, in
bestowing them upon us.

WHEN I have considered that many of our fellow creatures suffer much in some
places, for want of the necessaries of life, whilst those who rule over them
are too much given to luxury, and diverse vanities; and behold the apparent
deviation from pure wisdom amongst us, in the use of the outward gifts of God;
those marks of famine have appeared like humbling admonitions from him, that we
might be instructed by gentle chastisements, and might seriously consider our
ways; remembering that the outward supply of life is a gift from our heavenly
Father, and no more venture to use, or apply his gifts, in a way contrary to
pure wisdom.

SHOULD we continue to reject those merciful admonitions, and use his gifts at
home, contrary to the gracious design of the giver, or send them abroad in away
of trade, which the spirit of truth does not lead into; and should he whose
eyes are upon all our ways, extend his chastisements so far as to reduce us to
much greater distress than has yet been felt by these provinces; with what
sorrow of heart might we meditate on that subject, Have thou not procured this
unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by
the way? Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee, know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord of hosts. Jerem. ii. 17, 19.

MY mind has often been affected with sorrow, in beholding a wrong application
of the gifts of our heavenly Father; and those expressions concerning the
defilement of the earth have been opened to my understanding, The earth was
corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. Genesis vi. 11. Again,
Isaiah xxiv. 5. The earth also, is defiled under the inhabitants thereof.

THE earth being the work of a divine power, may not as such be accounted
unclean; but when violence is committed thereon, and the channel of
righteousness so obstructed, that in our skirts are found the blood of the
souls of poor innocents; not by a secret search, but upon all these See a
caution and warning to Great Britain and her colonies, page 31.
. Jerem. ii. 34.

WHEN blood shed unrighteously remains unattoned for, and the inhabitants are
not effectually purged from it, when they do not wash their hands in innoceney,
as was figured in the law, in the case of one being found slain; but seek for
gain arising from scenes of violence and oppression, here the land is polluted
with blood. Deuteronomy. xxi. 6.

MOREOVER, when the earth is planted and tilled, and the fruits brought forth
are applied to support unrighteous purposes; here the gracious design of
infinite goodness, in these his gifts being perverted, the earth is defiled;
and the complaint formerly uttered becomes applicable; Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins; thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. Isaiah xliii.
24.

THE END.

