A LETTER To a GENTLEMAN IN THE Massachusetts General Assembly, Concerning
Taxes to support Religious Worship.

-- "I also will show mine Opinion." --

ELIHU. Printed in the Year 1771.

HONORED SIR,
IT has been often observed, that Men are apt to run from one Extreme to
another, and perhaps they do so as much in their treatment of Rulers, as in any
of their Affairs; for as long as they have hopes of Favors from them, their
Addresses will be filled with Compliment and Flattery; but when disappointed,
it is turned to Slander and Abuse: Examples of which, at this Day, in our
Nation and Land, are too conspicuous, and their Mischief too sensibly felt, to
need a Proof: Therefore I shall beg Leave to depart from this modern Road, and
attempt to follow the ancient Example before me, of avoiding flattering Titles
on one Hand, and false Accusation on the other, and speak out plainly some of
my Views of the Truth, concerning an Affair which has lately made considerable
Noise in this Province. In doing of which I shall first make a few Remarks upon
the chief Pleas I have heard, for civil Rulers exercising their Power to
support religious Worship; and then upon their late Treatment of the Baptists
in particular.

The leading Plea that I have heard made, for rulers exercising Authority in
the Affair is, that ancient Rulers did so; and the Church has a Promise, that
Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers. It is
readily granted that Rulers as well as others ought to be good Men, and to use
all their Influence in a Gospel Way, to promote Religion; but I am not
convinced that they have any Warrant to use the civil Sword to force any to
support religious Worship. I find that when the costly Furniture for Worship
was to be prepared in the Wilderness, though the great Lawgiver, if he had seen
fit, could have as exactly proportioned each Man's part, as to have given the
Pattern of what was to be made; yet instead of that, after letting the People
know what was wanted, he says, Whosoever is of a willing Heart, let him bring
an Offering to the Lord, Gold, Silver, etc. Exodus xxxv. 5. And when the Temple
was to be built in Canaan, with vast Cost indeed, David like a nursing Father
led the Way, and of his own proper Goods, offered very largely thereto; and
then exhorted his People to do the like, which had such Effect, that with
grateful Wonder he could say, As for me, in the Uprightness of mine Heart I
have willingly offered all these things; and now have I seen with Joy thy
People which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee. 1 Chronicles. xxix. 3,
17. And though particular Offerings of Money and other Things, were enjoined
upon every Man by the Law, for the Support of Worship, yet I cannot find any
Allowance, much more Commandment, for the use of any Force to collect it. As
plain an Instance, and the plainest, of their Method of proceeding, that I have
observed, is in 2 Chronicles. xxiv. 9, 10. When after a terrible Season of
Declension and Corruption, the King was stirred up for a Reformation, and the
Levites being negligent in the Affair, he caused a Proclamation to be made
through his Kingdom, to bring in to the Lord the Collection which Moses the
Servant of God laid upon Israel; and all the Princes, and all the People
rejoiced and brought in. They brought it themselves; and I cannot find but one
Intimation, in all their History, of the use of Force in such Affairs, and that
will hardly be pleaded as a Precedent for us now to follow. 1 Samuel vi. 16.

And if Force was not used under a Law given from infallible Authority, what
shall we think of it among those who profess to renounce Infallibility! The
Gospel expressly allows of the civil Magistrate's use of the Sword to execute
Wrath, in the Kingdoms of this World; but though the crafty Jews, when they
found that their Charge against Jesus of Blasphemy, would not avail with a
Roman Governor, they then tried to represent him as an Enemy to Caesar, yet
when Pilate enquired into the Case, Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this
World; if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight: -- But
now is my Kingdom not from hence. And goes on to show that his Kingdom does not
receive it is Support from earthly Power, but from TRUTH. Joh. xviii. 36, 37. If
so, then what is that Religion which it is Professors often say, would soon fall
if it was not supported by civil Power? How much more agreeable to our Lord's
Words, are Mr. Locke's Sentiments, than these Men's? He says, The Business of
Laws is not to provide for the Truth of Opinions, but for the Safety and
Security of the Commonwealth, and of every particular man's Goods and Person;
and so it ought to be; for TRUTH certainly would do well enough if she were
once left to shift for herself. She seldom has received, and I fear never will
receive, much Assistance from the Power of great Men; to whom she is but rarely
known, and more rarely welcome. She is not taught by Laws, nor has she any need
of Force to procure her Entrance into the Minds of Men. Errors indeed prevail
by the Assistance of foreign and borrowed Succors. -- The Care of Souls cannot
belong to the civil Magistrate, because his Power consists only in outward
Force; but true and saving Religion consists in the inward Persuasion of the
Mind, without which nothing can be acceptable to God. Letter on Toleration.


But upon this I hear some say, This relates to Liberty of Conscience, but we
hope you don't call Money Conscience! No; we trust we know the Difference
between them, and wish our Neighbors did too, who so often deprive others of
their just Rights; for as a late Writer well observes, To allow Mankind as
Individuals, the free Choice of their Religion, and yet to take by Force their
Estates from them to support a Religion or Worship which they do not choose, is
a piece of Oppression that would make even a moral Heathen blush; yet many
Instances of the same have we had, and still have. And what Work do these Men
make of our Lord's representing to Pilate, that he need not fear his Kingdom's
interfering with Caesar's, because his Servants were not to promote it by the
Sword, but with Truth? For now they tell us, that then the Rulers were
Heathens, but when they became christian, they ought to exercise Power to
support Religion: Which is no better than to make our Lord say to Pilate, You
need not sear my giving Trouble to the valiant Romans, for I have not Power to
do it, and am not likely to get the Sword into my Hand until long after Caesar
is dead!

Accordingly when Peter's pretended Successor had got the Sword into his Hand,
he did much more with it than to cut off Men's Ears, for he cut their Souls and
Bodies asunder in a hellish Manner; and though such an use of it is much out of
Credit among us, yet to use it in the very Language of Eli's Sons, is much
pleaded for, viz. If you will not give it me, I will take it by Force!

Another Plea for such Conduct is, they say, These Lands were given upon
Condition of supporting our Worship, and if you do not like the Condition you
may go off and leave them. -- By whom were they given? If by our Fathers, they
did not intend to take our Money for nothing, (as their Children now do) for
they intended to make us religious, as well as to support Religion: Accordingly
about the Year 1646, they made a Law to punish any that should turn their
backs, or go out of the place of Worship when an Infant was to be sprinkled.
And in 1651, as Mr. John Clark, Pastor of a Baptist Church in Newport, with his
Friends, were at Worship in their own Way, on Lord's Day July 20th. at the
House of Mr. Witter's in Lynn, they were seized, and forcibly carried to the
Parish Worship, and afterward sent Prisoners to Boston; where one was fined L.
20. and another L. 30. Not only for setting up another Worship; but part of
their Crime was, their not joining in the Parish Worship when they had carried
them there; and he that was fined L. 30 for refusing to pay it, was whipped 30
Lashes: And two of his Friends, for openly taking him by the Hand, and praising
God for his Courage and Constancy, were fined 40s. each, or to be whipped. Thus,
says Mr. Neal, the Government of New England, for the sake of Uniformity in
divine Worship, broke in upon the natural Rights of Mankind, punishing Men, not
for disturbing of the State, but for their differing Sentiments in Religion.
And though Dr. Mather pleads, that, This Separation of the Annabaptists (as he
calls them) was a manifest Violation of the Laws of the Commonwealth,
concerning the orderly gathering of Churches; yet, Mr. Neal replies, this Plea,
Condemns all the dissenting Congregations that have been gathered in England,
since the Act of Uniformity in the Year 1662. And, says he, Let the Reader
judge, who had most Reason to complain; the New England Churches, who would
neither suffer the Baptists to live quietly in their Communion, nor separate
peaecably from it? Or these unhappy Persons, who were treated so unkindly for
following the light of their Consciences? Neal's History of New England, Vol.
I. Page 299. -- 305.
When the account of these Proceedings got to England, Sir Richard Saltonstall,
wrote to his Friends in Boston, that he was grieved to hear of such Courses in
this Wilderness, as they went to prevent; and which tended to make Hypocrites:
To which Mr. Corton, (one of the most eminent Fathers of the Country) answers,
We believe there is a vast difference between Men's Inventions, and God's
Institutions: We fled from Men's Inventions, to which we else should have been
compelled; Here we see an Instance of the Force of Prejudice: For I believe it
will be generally allowed that the Baptists call many Things in the Church of
New England, "Men's Inventions," with full as much Propriety as Mr. Cotton
calls the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Old England, Men's Inventions.
And therefore his Argument is good for nothing.
we compel none to Men's Inventions. -- If it did make Men Hypocrites, yet
better to be Hypocrites than profane Persons. Hypocrites give God part of his
due, the outward Man, but the profane Person gives God neither outward nor in
ward Man. Massachusetts History, Vol. III. page 405, 406.
-- Thus they were in earnest to do us some good, and not get away our Money
for nothing; and though these Proceedings of their's are generally now
condemned, and by some exclaimed against at a great rate; yet I fear the Body
of the present Generation imitate them more, in these two, great est of all
their Errors, viz. assuming a Power over their Neighbors that did not belong
to them, and thinking that Hypocrisy does some good, than they do in any of
their Virtues! And if our Fathers erred in such Compulsions then, what are
those doing who bring these Errors to justify their own Compulsions now! If it
be said, that our Lands were given us by Charter, then it is well known that
the Charter gives general Liberty of Conscience, and gives others no more Power
to compel us to support their Worship, than it does us to compel others to
support ours.

When we come to this, some would bear us in hand, that we have actually as
much Liberty as the other Denomination; therefore to such I will suppose a
Case, that I heartily wish they may never experience: Suppose Episcopacy should
be established in New England, and yet should allow them a Toleration, but only
upon these Terms, that they must certify, not only concerning their
Church Members, but also of every Person in their Congregations, that they
believe them to be conscientiously of their Persuasion, or else have them all
taxed to support Episcopacy; yea, and to do this by such a certain Day every
Year, and (their Minister being one that must sign the Certificate) if any
Difficulty should happen between the Church and him, so as to prevent its being
done by the appointed Day, then to have their Church and all taxed to support
other Worship (as we have had such an Instance of a Church consisting of above
50 Members): Add to which, if the tolerating Laws should be attended with the
Corruption Mr. Lock describes, viz. Princes speaking or writing to their
Servants, in their ordinary Commands, are easily understood; speaking to their
People in their Laws, are not so. Essay on Understanding, P. III. Chap. 10.5,
12.
If these Laws should be so hard to be understood, as to cost them Hundreds, or
Thousands of Pounds from Year to Year, at executive Courts, to plead for their
Rights; and in their Trials, to have all their own Denomination taken off from
the Jury, and sometimes not so much as allowed to be Witnesses, but have their
Cases tried by Judges and Jurors, whose Interest swayed the other Way: If after
all this, the Episcopalians should tell these People, that they had as great
Liberty as themselves, could they help thinking, that either those Men were
blinded by Self-interest, or else did not believe what they said themselves!
And if after long Struggles in this Way, a perpetual Law should be made, which
cut off a Number of their Brethren from any shadow of this Liberty at all; by
Virtue of which, their Lands, which they had cleared with the peril of their
Lives, because of Indian Savages, should be torn from them to support others
Worship, and that at such a rate that 20 Acres, with a Building on it, and a
good Orchard, which is particularly valuable in a new Place, should all be sold
for 35 s. and after five Journies in a Year, of above an hundred Miles, to the
General Court, and long waiting there for Relief, should at last be told by a
Number of its Members, That they had good Right to make that Law, and to keep
these People under it as long as they pleased; which Law the King himself could
not disannul, if it was let alone another Year: And therefore they should make
a Motion toward applying to his Majesty before it was too late: Upon which an
anonymous Writer should artfully represent, in several Newspapers, that these
People complained without the least Cause, and challenge them to show any if
they could. If upon this a worthy Minister, lately come among them, should,
with Advice of his Brethren, publish a brief Sketch of their capital
Grievances; yet, instead of any fair Answer, should be treated with such Stuff
as this: -- There is a little upstart Gentleman, lately settled in Town, -- the
Youth discovers a most insufferable Arrogance: -- I very much suspect he is one
employed by the Enemies of America, to defame and blacken the Colonies; -- to
spread the Seeds of Discord among the Provinces, etc. etc. And yet that the
Writer of all this should have the Impudence to subscribe himself a Catholic
Member of this same Denomination of People!

Suppose all this, and more of like Nature, should happen, could all the Men
upon Earth, ever persuade them to believe, that they were allowed equal Liberty
with their Oppressors! Yet, without the least Exaggeration, this is the true
State of our Case; therefore I leave it, Sir, to your Judgment, whether this
last piece of Rodomontade, which appears in the Evening-Post of January 7th.
does not look much more like the Jesuitical Tricks of Roman Catholics, than
like a Catholic Baptist.

And though we have sufficient Evidence, that a principal Instrument of our
capital Grievance, is one who has been openly honored by the late Governor, for
his appearing in Opposition to those called Sons of LIBERTY; yet we have as
full Evidence, that we have suffered from the other Party, into which our
Country is so unhappily divided: So that we cannot justly lay the blame of all
our Troubles to either Side. And what I have seen has often reminded me of Mr.
Wright's Remark, sixty Years ago:

'Tho' Whigs and Tories be each others Foes,
'And act in diverse Circles, yet they close
'In this great Center, and at last do fall
'Upon the point of wishing SELF HAD ALL.'
Therefore I have made this Attempt to turn each Side to read an ancient Law,
which, though often forgotten by us, yet will be that by which we must all be
acquitted or condemned, after all earthly Law Books are burnt up; and Dr.
Watts's Comment upon it may doubtless be helpful in the Affair:

'Is Reason ever at a Loss?
'Call in Self-love to judge the Cause:
'Let thy own fondest Passion show
'How we should treat our Neighbor too.'
If this Law of Equity may but now have its proper Influence, both with Regard
to what we have already suffered, and with Regard to our future Liberty; then
if any of our People should interrupt the civil Peace of their Neighbors, or
of the Province, let them be complained of and welcome, and punished too
according to the demerit of their Crimes: But until that is done, all the Smoke
of Newspapers can never make us insensible of what we feel.

If an Answer to the Cambridge piece, wrote by one of our Brethren, who has
experienced much of these Things, had arrived in Town seasonably, it would have
prevented the Occasion that has been taken to abuse a Stranger; which, as it
confirms what I have wrote, and will serve farther to open the Truth: It is
inserted here, and is as follows:

To the PRINTER,
PLease to insert the following in your Paper, in Answer to a piece in your
Paper of Nov. 12. 1770. wherein the Writer tries to clear the Massachusetts Bay
from having oppressed the Baptists in the least Degree, and says, If any one
have suffered, let him appear.

To which I answer: At South-Hadley a Baptist Church was gathered some years
ago, who took Advice of one of the best Lawyers in the County, and carried in
their Certificate, yet they were rated to the Paedobaptist Minister, and their
Goods strained away: The Case was carried to Court, and they were cast, and had
the Charges of two Courts to pay, and then they gave the Town about twenty
Dollars to let them be free for the future; and so with a great Sum obtained
they their Freedom, who were truly free born.

In the District of Montague is another Baptist Church, who carried in their
Certificate by direction of a Lawyer, yet the Assessors put them into the
Minister's rate: The Constable made Distress upon one of the Committee who
signed the Certificate. -- When they came to Court, they were cast, because
(said the Judge) he witnessed for himself, when yet there were two more to
witness with him. They appealed to the Superior Court, and have attended two,
and the Case is hung up to the third, and all this time they are left in the
Hands of their Adversaries, who treat them in a most barbarous Manner, driving
away their Cattle and selling them at an Outcry, for their Minister's rate. At
Shutesbury, one Daniel Fisk, notwithstanding his Certificate, was seized by two
Constables at once, held under Keepers some Time; and though the Assessors met
and released him, yet no Recompense was made for his loss of Time and Charge.
At Colerain, Hezekiah Smith, and John Call, Members of the Church in Ash field,
were both seized in the dead of Winter to be carried to Goal; but after they
had put them to a great deal of Trouble and loss of Time, they let them go. --
At Chesterfield, one William White, also a Member of the Baptist Church in
Ashfield, yet is put into the Minister's rate; and when he petitioned in a
Town-Meeting to be released, they refused, and the Minister told the Constable
if he would not pay to strain upon him. All these Accounts I had from the
Persons own Mouths.

This Writer makes mention of Ash field, and says, What their Circumstances are
I know not, few are acquainted with them; it would be of public Service to have
an authentic Account given. Which I will endeavor to do, being fully
acquainted with the Affair from the very first. -- In 1761, a Baptist Church
was here settled, and I was ordained their Pastor, when there was but nineteen
Families in the Town, and twelve of them were Baptists: Afterward other People
came into the Town, and in 1763, settled another Minister, and forced me and my
People to pay our equal part of his Settlement, saying, 'The General Court had
ordered us to settle a Minister in the Town, and that a Baptist Minister did
not answer the Law.' When they had got him settled, then we must build their
Metting-House, and pay his Salary until that was done. So we were forced to
sell off part of our Lands under Price, to get Money to pay the Tax on the
rest; and some they sold at Vendue for a mere trifle. Being no longer able to
bear this cruel Oppression, in 1768, we laid the Matter before the General
Court, and cried to them as to the Fathers of our Country for help; and they
ordered us to notify the Town and Proprietors Clerks of our Petition, and that
they should suspend the Collection of Taxes from us until the Court sit again:
Yet a few Days after our Petitioner came away, they passed an Act impowering
the Paedobaptists to raise Money for their Minister and Meeting House, and
assess all the Lands, be they in whose Hands they would; and if any did not pay
to sell the Land for the Money. By Virtue of that Act they sold last April
about 400 Acres of our Lands at an Outcry. I paid all their Demands but about
22s. yet they sold ten Acres of the best of my Home-lot, which I got prized at
about L. 30 Lawful Money. One of my Brethren paid all but If any enquire why
these People did not pay all their Rates, seeing they paid a part? the answer
is, because the Assessors there, and in other places (contrary) to Law and
Equity) put their Civil and Ecclesiastical Rates into one; and they never
refused to pay their Civil Tax.
15s. yet they sold 20 Acres of his Home-lot, in which was a good Orchard, a
Dwelling House, and our Burying-Place, which is prized at above L. 100; and the
rest much after the same Manner, and not one Penny returned to us. Since which,
some of them have broke into our Fields, breaking down our Fences, measuring
off our Lands, tore up sixteen Apple Trees, and abused some who stood in their
Way. We have been at the cost of six Journies to Boston, to try to get that Act
altered by the General Court, but cannot obtain it.

This Writer says, There never was a Time since this Country was settled, when
Magistrates, Ministers and People were more universally averse to religious
Oppression, than at this day. To which I say, The aforesaid Accounts show the
minds of Assessors, Constables, and executive Courts in this County; and a
Number of the House of Representatives told me in College-Hall in Cambridge,
last Summer, That they had a Right to make that Act by which my Land is sold,
and to keep me and my Brethren under it as long as they saw fit. As to
Ministers, I asked the Minister of this Town to let me be free from his Rate,
he refused, saying, He would have his Money; and since has said in a public
Meeting, We must always pay his Salary as long as we live in the Town, and if
we did not like to pay we must go out of Town. The Minister of Chester field
told the Constable, 'If William White would not pay, to strain upon him.' The
Man that bought my Land told me, 'He was glad he bought it, and wanted another
Vendue that he might buy the rest' And is it not strange that there is so much
Oppression, and every Body averse to it! -- This Writer says, All possible care
has been taken to prevent our suffering. If so, I think it is high Time to seek
help of the higher Powers; for if the Authority here cannot stop our suffering,
I hope our gracious Sovereign can: What then have I now done in sending to him?
Is there not a Cause? I hope that Writer, when he has read these Accounts, will
be able to guess whence the News-Paper Complaints arose. The People of this
Province call themselves Sons of LIBERTY, but they treat me like Sons of
VIOLENCE.

I do not write in contempt of Authority, whom I desire always to honor; but
because I am called upon to answer for myself. Had that Writer but wrote his
Name, I might have sent him a private Letter; but now I know no way to answer
his Request, but in the Prints. -- I shall only add, that we were very loath to
send home, but we see nothing but Ruin for us if we did not. -- "Because of
Oppression, this Land mourns;" and the Cries of the Oppressed I believe have
entered into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, who is higher than the highest, and
does regard.

Ashfield, Dec. 5. 1770. EBENEZER SMITH.
N. B. If you want to see the Case of Ashfield-Baptists drawn to the life, read
Low's Preface to his Almanac for 1771, from the 1st to the 20th Line. Mr.
Low's Words referred to are those, My dear Countrymen, the last time I made my
public Appearance before you in this Character, I entertained a pleasing
Expectation, that by the return of this Year, the unhappy Difficulties
subsisting in the Nation would have been removed, a redress of Grievances
obtained, and we instated in the full Possession of those Rights and
Privileges, which as Britons we have derived from our Nativity; and on which
the signal Happiness and peculiar Glory of the Commonwealth depends. But how
often are our greatest Expectations disappointed, our raised Hopes dashed, and
our flattering Dreams vanished? Our Grievances, instead of being in the least
redressed, are rather augmented, and the causes of Complaint increased. We have
been stigmatized as rebellious and seditious, -- abused by the most flagrant
Misrepresentations, -- sustained the most intolerable Hardships, and endured
the most provoking Insults. -- Treated like Criminals condemned for the most
atrocious Offenses, the Ears of the Mighty have been deafned to the repeated
Cries, Remonstrances and Petitions, of as loyal and obedient a People as any in
his Majesty's Dominions.




A Friend to his Country desires Liberty here to add, That since America in
general do not ask it as a Favor, but claim it as their essential Right, to
give their Money, and not have it forced from them without their Consent,
either by themselves or their Representatives; and hundreds of Complaints and
Remonstrances have been sent to England against being deprived of this Right:
And they look upon themselves intolerably abused, because these Complaints are
not heard and regarded. Must it not be very astonishing that any of the same
Men, should at the same Time show worse Treatment to their Fellow Subjects
here, than what they complain of from the higher Powers! I say, worse; for what
they complain of, is having their Money forced away to support civil
Government, where the Magistrate is armed with the Sword as the Minister of
God, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. -- For this cause pay you
Tribute. Their Complaints therefore, are only against the undue use of Force in
civil Matters where Force properly belongs; yet they use it toward their
Neighbors, in ecclesiastical Affairs, where Force has no Right at all. For as
Mr. Lock, in his Letter upon Toleration, observes, To give Laws, to receive
Obedience, and compel with the Sword, belong to none but the civil Magistrate;
and upon this ground I affirm, that the Magistrate's Power extends not to the
establishing any Articles of Faith, or forms of Worship by force of Laws: For
Laws are of no Force without Penalties. -- The care of Souls cannot belong to
the civil Magistrate, because his Power consists only in outward Force: But
true and saving Religion consists in the inward Persuasion of the Mind; without
which nothing can be acceptable to God. And a late Writer says, "That Mankind
have a right to be free in the Choice of Religion, is a Truth (...) cannot be
denied, and is a Privilege dearer (...) sober Christian, than any civil
Privilege (...) ever; and no Authority on Earth have any (...) to take it away;
nor can, without being guilty of assuming that Power over others, which God
never gave them: And to allow Men as Individuals the free Choice of their
Religion, and yet to take by Force their Estates from them to support a
Religion or Worship which they do not choose, is a piece of Oppression that
would make even a moral Heathen blush; yet many such Instances have we had, and
still have!"

I think if these things do not cause some remorse in those who have thus
oppressed their Brethren, they must be more stupid than those who had been
cruel to Joseph; for when they met with like Treatment they said, We are verily
guilty concerning our Brother! yea, more stupid than a Heathen King, who,
though what he met with was by the hands of Men, yet said, As I have done, so
God has requited me. Judge. i. 7.

For if it be Oppression to take away from a People the right of giving their
Money, either by themselves or their Representatives, to support civil
Government, where Force belongs (as I believe it is) what must it be to deprive
them of a right that never can be conveyed to any Representative! For unless a
Man could constitute another to answer for him at the Bar of God, it is
impossible for him to convey to another a right to compel him or others to
attend, or support any Worship contrary to their Consciences.

What then shall we think of those Men who often accuse their Neighbors of
Covetousness, only because they plead with Moses, for Liberty to carry their
Substance with them, to help support the Worship they believe to be right,
while these Accusers act the part of Pharaoh, who when he could no longer hold
their Persons, yet said, Let your Flocks, and your Herds be stayed!

Thus, honored Sir, you have laid before you, and left to your Consideration,
a plain Representation of the true State of these Affairs, by one who has some
near Apprehensions of the Account we must all presently give of our Conduct,
before the great Tribunal; and who desires ever to approve himself a true
Friend to his Country, and in his Station a loyal Subject to all lawful
Authority, and ready to serve his Generation by the will of God.

A Countryman.
March 14. 1771.

