The Nature, Pleasure and Advantages of Church-Musick.

A SERMON PREACHED At a LECTURE IN THE First Parish of LANCASTER, ON Thursday
April 4th. 1771.

By ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in LUNENBURG.

Published at the Request of the CHOIR.

PRAISE ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely.

PSALM. 147.1. SPEAKING to yourselves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord.

EPHESIANS. 5.19. BOSTON: PRINTED BY RICHARD DRAPER. MDCCLXXI.

THE Nature, Pleasure and Advantages of Church-Musick.
COLOSSIANS, 3d. Chap. 16 Verse. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in
all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, hymns and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.


IN this chapter the Apostle exhorts the Colossians to a variety of duties, to
which they were strongly obliged by virtue of their knowing and professing the
gospel. In particular; he enjoins it upon them to be heavenly-minded; to seek
those things that are above; to mortify their members which are upon the earth;
to speak the truth one to another; to put off the old man with his deeds; to be
clothed with bowels of mercies and charity; -- to be peaceable and thankful.

AND in our text, in order to supersede the necessity of any more particular
instructions concerning their duty, he recommends it to them to become
intimately acquainted with the gospel of Christ: For if they were happily
possessed of this knowledge, it would be unnecessary for him, or any other
Apostle, to descend to a minuter detail of those virtues, which their
profession of christianity laid them under peculiar obligations to practice.
The word of Christ would itself sufficiently instruct them in these things; and
therefore he had nothing farther to do, than only to press it upon them, to
study it with diligence and care, and make it familiar to their minds. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, etc.

AND as the Apostle was persuaded that they would, by a careful and frequent
perusal of the Gospel, discover a rich profusion of divine grace, a wonderful
display of God's perfections in general, he would have them affect their hearts
with a grateful sense thereof: And as there is no better way to testify and
express thankfulness, than by singing hymns of praise; therefore he exhorts
them in the latter part of the verse, to teach and admonish one another in
psalms, hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in their hearts to the
Lord.

SINGING is expressive of thankfulness, as appears from the text, and from that
parallel place of scripture, Ephesians. 5.19. It also denotes joy and gladness, as is
evident from that direction of St. James, Is any merry? let him sing psalms. It
likewise indicates an hearty acquiescence in the dispensations of providence.
Lastly, it is a particular way of worshipping God; of blessing him for his
favors, and praising him for his unrivalled perfections. Hence it is a duty
proper at all times, and suited to all occasions. Accordingly, David declares
that he would bless the Lord at all times, and that his praise should be
continually in his mouth.

SINGING was much practiced by the Jews of old. they had "singing men and
singing women," persons particularly instructed in music, appointed to lead in
this part of divine service. And that it might be performed with the greater
variety and pleasure, they introduced all kinds of musical instruments into
public worship; not to supersede, but to be used in concert with the human
voice. The Jews doubtless delighted in music, and this delight, together with
its being a duty expressly enjoined, was the reason why such ample provision
was made by them for its being regularly and decently conducted. And if these
were reasons to them, why should they not be so to us? It is a duty now as much
as it was then, and we may presume that it is in general as delightful to us as
to them, to Christians as to Jews.

THAT it is a duty under the gospel none can question, who consider that
Christ, with his disciples early set an example of it; and that his Apostles
have several times warmly recommended the practice: And tho no mention is made
of organs or other musical instruments in the New Testament, yet it cannot from
thence be, with certainty, concluded that they would be either unlawful or
improper.

ACCORDING to the idea that mankind generally have of singing, it seems to be
more especially adapted to joyful occasions. But as it denotes submission to
the events of Providence, be they what they will; as music has a most happy
tendency to polish and refine the soul, to improve and perfect it in the
virtues of the divine life; and, especially, as there are tunes of different
airs, some cheerful, others solemn, fitted to joyful or mournful occasions; and
as the apostle assures us in the text, that there is a variety of subjects to
be set to music, (as appears from his using the several words, psalms, hymns,
and spiritual songs,) it must be concluded that it is never unseasonable, and
that it is a duty at all times to teach and admonish one another in psalms,
hymns, etc.

EVEN should it be granted that singing is expressive of joy and thankfulness
only, it would prove nothing against the constant fitness and propriety of the
practice; because we are required to "rejoice in the Lord always, and always to
give thanks for all things unto God in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." And
were this not expressly required; when can we be said to be so far destitute of
favors, as to be under no obligation to bless God, and sing praises to his
Name? Under the most afflictive circumstances we are constantly surrounded with
a thousand blessings, for which we are bound to give thanks, and consequently
to engage in this delightful service. Therefore if we consider the duty of
singing in this view only, it brings us to the same conclusion, and teaches us
that it should be perpetual. Even that the Lord superintends all things, and is
concerned in the government of the world, is matter of joy and gladness. "The
Lord reigns let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the isles be glad
thereof."

OF this constant and delightful duty of our holy religion, I shall now say
something more particular. And in my subsequent discourse on this subject,
shall speak of the two following things, viz.

I. OF the nature, excellency and advantages of Church-musick: And

II. OF the manner in which it ought to be performed -- with grace in our
hearts to the Lord.

THAT singing is a duty, and a part of instituted, public worship, none who
believe the divinity of the scriptures will pretend to deny: And that it was
not made our duty without reason and design, may appear form what follows.

MAN is the only creature on the earth that is endued with reason and a faculty
of speech. These superior powers are the gift of God; on him he depends for the
continuance of them, and therefore in his service and for his glory is he bound
to employ them. -- The glory of God is the principal end for which all
creatures were made; and this they are capable of declaring in diverse manners,
according to their different natures and capacities. Even the inanimate world,
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars in a silent, but expressive manner, proclaim
the glorious perfections, the wisdom and skill, the goodness and power of the
divine Architect. The brutal creation subserve the same design, and in their
way show forth the praises of him who made them. But then these several ranks
of creatures are only the passive instruments of the divine glory. Man, as he
is possessed of reason and a faculty of speech, is capable of being actively
employed in this delightful and honorable service; is capable of declaring
articulately to all around him the glories of his heavenly King. For this end
was his tongue given him, which therefore, in the psalms, is styled his glory.
Psalm 16.9. also 108.1.


AND shall he suffer so noble, so distinguished a faculty to lie dormant? Shall
other creatures, both animate and inanimate, live up to the laws of their
creation, declare the glory of God and show forth his handy work? And shall man
alone, though raised high in the scale of being, be silent in his Maker's praise?
Shall man, though his organs are framed to make articulate sounds, and his reason
sufficient to enable him to produce harmony, talk, notwithstanding, the
confused language of beasts, and chant the discordant songs of birds? No. His
improvements should be eminent, as his powers are superior. For harmony was he
made, and in melodious notes should he sign the praises of his God.

HARMONY consists in a continued coalessence of two, or more, sounds, though at
different distances from each other; and the proper ingredients thereof, are
concords. In the doctrine of concords, there is something absolutely
unaccountable by man. Voices at some certain distances from each other, how
pleasant soever in themselves, will grate and jarr; whereas at other different
distances (which are easily ascertained by fixed rules) they will mix and
unite, and, by their union, produce concords, from a continued combination of
which, springs harmony. Now why this is so, we are unable to say; neither does
there appear any natural aptitude in two sounds of a concord to give a pleasing
sensation more than in two of a discord; these different effects are by us
inscrutable, and must be resolved wholly into the divine will. All that we can
say is, that these things are in fact so; and upon this well known, though
unintelligible property of nature, the art of music is founded* the rules of
which may be learned by persons of common capacities without any great expense
of time or attention; and when learnt, may be reduced to practice by far the
greater part of mankind; and when practiced in that perfection the thing will
admit, by a proper choice and mixture of male and female voices, constitutes
one of the most pleasing and advantageous exercises in the world.

CONCERNING the pleasure of it, but little is necessary to be said: For they
who have a taste for music know by experience its delight; whilst others
cannot form any better conception of it, than a blind man can of colors.
Although harmony be founded in nature, some persons have their ears so oddly
constructed as to be incapable of distinguishing between jarring and concordant
sounds; they are all alike to them, alike insiped and indifferent. But they who
have their auditory nerves rightly strung receive the most refined pleasure
from music; and when they hear a select number of skilful voices, in concert
joined, hymning the eternal Father, are transported with joy and filled with
rapture. The clear and lofty notes of the Counter; the soft, but full sound of
the Tenor; the sprightly and acute consonance of the Treble; the manly, the
solemn and the grand echo of the Bass, all conspiring together, and uniting in
one charming symphony, give the soul such delight as is beyond description
glorious! Such harmonious sounds flatter our hopes, soften our cares, increase
our joy, inflame our love, dispel our fears, and excite the softest passions,
the tenderest emotions of the heart. I would not be understood to mean that
these different effects are all produced by the same strains of music. The
power of sounds is great, and the effects various according to the air, measure
and proportion of a tune, and the different keys on which it is constructed.
There is the grave and the acute sound; the joyous and the mournful, the
sprightly and the solemn mode; the flat and the sharp key, by a suitable choice
of which, almost any passions and feelings may be excited. Some strains of
music will melt us into softness and enervate the soul; whilst others will
rouse us into manly courage and make us undaunted in the field of battle: Some
will fill us with pleasing sensations; whilst others shall excite painful
commotions in the breast.

SOUNDS have an immediate and powerful influence on the nervous system; and, by
giving the animal spirits a brisk or slow, an equable or unsteady motion,
produce mirth or sorrow, hope or despair, rage or distraction. Accordingly
history gives an account that diseases have been cured, unchastity corrected,
seditions quelled, passions raised or calmed, and even madness occasioned by
tunes of different airs. It is storied that Timotheus could transport Alexander
into rage and fury by the Phrygian sound, and sooth him into indolence with the
Lydian. And of a certain musician in Italy it is said, that he was able, by
varying his music from brisk, to solemn, and so vice versa, to move the soul
so differently as to cause distraction or madness.

THESE are some of the various effects that are produced by different
compositions. Since therefore singing is constituted a part of divine service,
it is always supposed that no tunes of a light and airy kind; none that are
calculated to sensualize the mind and excite lascivious desires are introduced
into the public worship; but only such as are suited to mend the heart, to
purify the soul, to dispossess it of malignant passions, to strengthen its
faith, and raise its hopes to heaven.

OF this sort of music would we be understood principally to speak; and of the
divine effects of it, what cannot be said! it is difficult if not impossible to
say too much and to launch forth too far in it is commendation. Should we
describe it as capable of working miracles, I am not certain the scripture
would not authorize the description. This music is an enemy to all malice, to
impure imaginations and un-hallowed desires. This, and that grand adversary to
the souls of men, the Devil, who walks about continually seeking whom he may
devour, are, luckily, no friends: They cannot dwell together. Sacred harmony
which gives all pious souls the most sensible pleasure, fills that infernal and
envious fiend with torture: so that he had rather quit his delightful
possession of men's bodies and minds, than undergo the torment of it. For the
truth of this, witness king Saul, who, we are told, was troubled with an evil
spirit, and had it removed by the harmony of David's lyre. Whether by this evil
spirit we are to understand the Devil himself, or a spirit of malice and rage
which from time to time seized the king, it matters not; for they are near
akin, and what will remove one, will doubtless disposess the other.

PRAYER may, in a sense, be said to have an omnipotent power, as it prevails
with the Almighty, and brings down blessings from heaven to earth. But the
efficacy of sacred harmony is nothing inferior. This, if it proceeds from a
pious heart, makes delightful melody in the ears of Jehovah, and inclines him
to look down from his throne propitious to the sons of men. This raises the
soul to heaven, and fills it with that peace of God which passes all
understanding. This spreads a divine calm over the mind, hushes all tumultuous
passions, and prepares us to receive, with reverence, instruction from on high.
This sets all the springs of nature to work, fires the soul with divine love,
and diffuses joy and gladness through the heart.

ARE we at any time cast down, and filled with melancholy and disponding
thoughts? by the power of music the gloom is dispelled, and a ray of light
darted into the mind, which cheers and enlivens it. Are our breasts torn with
the passions of revenge, envy and malice? no sooner do we hear the voice of
melody, than the rage is suspended, and every baneful passion hangs its head.
Is the soul immersed in the pleasures of sense and voluptuousness? a sacred
song sung by skilful and pleasant voices will arouse it from its lethargy, and
make it ambitious of nobler and diviner joys. Is it careless about religion and
the things of futurity? when it hears the important truths of God, and another
world chanted forth in melodious accents, and considers that in such rapturous
strains a whole eternity will be employed by the blessed inhabitants of heaven,
it is immediately excited to work out its salvation with diligence and care,
with fear and trembling, that so it may be qualified for, and at last be made a
partaker of the delights and honors of the upper and better world.

THUS sacred music is a friend to the social and religious life; it advances
our happiness here and lays a foundation for the perfection of it hereafter.
Doubtless the experience of many now present can witness the truth of the above
assertions. Have you not received numerous advantages, as well as great
pleasure from closely attending on this part of divine worship, especially
since your late distinguished improvements in music? Are not some of you able
to say, that from hearing an agreeable piece of sacred harmony, you have had
your thoughts turned into a devout channel, and been led into some such
soliloquy as the following? If melody made by frail and imperfect men be so
ravishing, so transporting, how charming must that place be where God's praises
will be set to the harps of Angels, and ten thousand times ten thousand shall
join with sweet and sonorous voices to extol his unrivalled perfections? If we
feel such pleasing emotions of soul at hearing the harmony of earth, how
extatick, must be our joy, when we hear the angelick choir attune their voices
in their maker's praise, whilst the innumerable band of the spirits of just men
made perfect shall join the chorus, and without discord sing, "Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: great and marvelous
are thy works, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints; blessing and
honor and glory and power be unto him that sits on the throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever!"

IN a word; if the frequent hearing of church music, well performed, will not
infallibly make a person religious, it will do much toward polishing his
manners; and if to delight therein does not demonstrate a man to be devout, yet
it is for the most part an evidence that there is nothing in his nature that
inclines him to be flagrantly wicked. The lovers of harmony are seldom known to
be malicious and revengeful; but it has been said, and in some cases experience
will justify the assertion, that they who have no ear for music, no relish for
its charms, have dark and dreadful souls, strangely disposed for treasons,
massacres, bloodshed and war.

A FEW lines from an excellent poet shall conclude this head.

By music, minds an equal temper know,
Nor swell too high, nor sink too low.
If in the breast tumultuous joys arise,
Music her soft assuasive voice applies;
Or, when the soul is pressed with cares,
Exalts her in enlivening airs.
Music the fiercest grief can charm,
And fate's severest rage disarm:
Music can soften pain to ease,
And make despair and madness please:
Our joys below it can improve,
And antedate the bliss above. Pope.

II. I AM in the second place to show how this part of divine worship is to be
performed -- singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

NOW this expression (with grace in your hearts) may import the two following
things, viz.

1st. THAT we should sing gracefully, and in a manner acceptable to others; and
2dly, That we should sing with grateful minds, with pious and devout affections.

Some interpreters tell us that the greek words (en kariti) which are
translated, with grace, are equivalent to another greek word (viz. kaientoos)
which is most properly rendered, decently, acceptably; or so that our hymns may
be grateful to others, and be received with spiritual delight. But whether the
words are capable of this construction; or whether this were the sense of the
Apostle or not, evident it is that those who engage in and pretend to perform
this part of divine service, are obliged to use their best endeavors to sing in
the most regular and agreeable manner possible. Though the temper of the heart
be the thing that God principally regards in this, and all other religious
exercises, yet it cannot be supposed to be altogether indifferent to him,
whether we sing by rule, or irregularly, in a graceful, or in a barbarous
manner. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, and he expects that
all things should be done decently and in order, especially in all the churches
of the saints. 1 Cor. 14.33 and 40.
As certain then as the great Jehovah is self-satisfied, and pleased with his
own perfections; so certain is it that harmony is more acceptable to him than
discord, regularity than confusion. Therefore they who perform church-musick
the most by rule, and make the compleatest melody with their voices, as well as
in their hearts to the Lord, bid the fairest to obtain his approbation and
favor. As God is the author of nature, they who come nearest to her unerring
standard, are advanced to the greatest perfection, and must certainly please
him the best. Since then harmony is produced by a close attention to the laws
of nature, those who make the finest music are evidently most observant of her
rules, and consequently must be, in this respect, the most acceptable to
nature's God.

This being so undeniably the case, it is somewhat wonderful that any persons,
and still more surprising that any who pretend to the least share of reason and
goodness, should set themselves to oppose the laudable endeavors of such as
have of late attempted to make the singing in our public assemblies regular;
to retrieve the credit of our psalmody, and rescue it from that barbarism and
uncouthness, that ridicule and contempt into which it had very unhappily, and
almost universally fallen. It is well if all such persons do not at last, to
their sorrow, find that, in making such opposition, they were fighting against
God.

As regular singing is the most pleasing to the Diety, so it is also to the
greater part of mankind; to all who have their senses, as the Apostle expresses
it, exercised to discern good and evil. Now as it is, in the general, the most
grateful to our fellow men, this suggests another very substantial reason why
we should endeavor to sing by rule: For that music, which gives the greatest
satisfaction, will probably produce the most beneficial effects, inspire the
warmest gratitude to God for his favors, enkindle in our hearts the divinest
love, excite the purest desires, and raise the soul on contemplations wings to
heaven.

THIS duty of singing gratefully to others, implies the two following things.

1st. THAT we should select out of that variety of tunes with which we are
favored a few of the finest compositions; those that contain the greatest
number of perfect concords, those whose air and time shall be found to be most
pleasing to a correct ear; whose notes are properly adapted to the words, and
whose "sound shall seem an echo to the sense." A neglect to use the sound of
the notes to the sense of the words which answer to them, is doubtless the
greatest deficiency in our Church music. Some superior compositions done by
great masters of song, are now in our hands. But is it not apparent that there
is a gross failure in this regard? And does not this defect render our psalmody
too unmeaning a thing? An exact correspondency between the sound of the notes
and the sense of the words that are set against them; between the general air
of a tune, and the nature of the subject matter to be sung, would give life and
energy, beauty and force to the performance; and therefore in order to render
singing acceptable to others, the chorister would do well, always to adapt his
tunes as much as possible to the complexion of the psalm: That is, for a
penitential hymn, or psalm of mournful contents, a tune constructed on the flat
key, and of a grave and solemn tone, should be given; whereas hymns of praise
and thanksgiving should be always sung in tunes of a brisk and sprightly air.

IT is as beautiful to suit the tune to the nature of the psalm, as it is to
adapt the psalm to the occasion, be it what it will. They who are the most
observant of this rule are the likeliest both to please, and to profit. Now to
be able thus to accommodate tunes to different subjects and occasions, it is
necessary that the choir should be acquainted with, and have at command a
considerable number of them; and this is also necessary upon another account,
viz. to prevent a disagreeable repetition. If the number of tunes which are
sung in public be very small, they must needs recur frequently; and if they
are often sung, their sound will grow familiar, and if familiar it will pall
upon the ear; and if it once grows dull, it will soon be offensive and
displeasing. And all this may take place, not only with indifferent
compositions; but also with the finest pieces of music. Such is the
constitution of man, that pleasure itself will not long please: Much of our
happiness results from variety; and novelty has its peculiar charms. New and
strange things do we love, and after them will we go. Now this passion for
variety should be gratified in all cases where it can be done with safety; and
to please it in the case before us (in which certainly there can be no danger)
it is of importance, not only to have the number to which we are at any time
confined somewhat large; but also to leave out old and introduce new tunes from
time to time, as may be found to be necessary to avoid a dull identity, and to
give to this part of divine service all the charms of novelty. But then we
should be always careful, that our humor for introducing new pieces of music
does not exceed our capacity for learning them, lest, under a notion of making
our psalmody more pleasing by a variety of tunes, we really spoil it by our
inability to sing them.

WHICH brings me to say in the 2d place, that the duty of singing gratefully to
others, implies not only that we introduce the best musical compositions into
our churches, but also that we get a perfect knowledge of them, and are able to
sing them with all their graces.

THERE is not only a difference in the tunes, with which we are favored, but
also a diversity in our manner of singing them; and the excellency of the
performance is the joint-result of the Composition, and the manner of its being
sung. An excellent tune but indifferently sung shall not appear so agreeable,
as an indifferent one regularly and gracefully performed. Hence then if we
would sing gratefully to others, we must have respect both to the tunes in
themselves, and to the method of performing them. The apostle Paul exhorts us
to sing not only with the spirit, but with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15.
at least he virtually injoins such a method of singing; and the Psalmist in so
many words requires all to sing praises with understanding; or, as it might as
properly be rendered, all that have understanding to sing praises to God. Psalm
47.7.
To this purpose it is necessary that we should teach and admonish one another,
as we are directed in the text. Instruction in psalmody is as necessary as in
any other art or science. No man is born with the knowledge of music, though
some persons have a genious particularly turned to make surprizingly rapid
improvements therein. It is in vain for us to pretend that we need no other
instructor than nature in this matter, and that it would be sufficient for
every man blindly to follow her uncultivated dictates: For besides that in this
extemporaneous way, we should not hit upon ten notes out of a thousand that
would be melodious; besides that our humors and fancies are different, which
would inevitably lead us into different turns, trilloes and rolls in singing,
and draw us out into diverse lengths of sound: Besides these things, I say, not
being acquainted with the same pieces of music, and not used to sing in
concert, no harmony could be produced, but such a jarr and discord as would be
absolutely intolerable to a nice and delicate ear. Such singing, if it may be
called by that name, would "Rend with tremendous sounds your ears asunder,
Like gun, drum, trumpet, blunderbuss and thunder."


HENCE the indispensable necessity of an acquaintance with the rules of music,
and of a joint-knowledge of those tunes that we pretend to introduce into our
public assemblies. Hence also the necessity of singing-masters to teach and
instruct the young, the ignorant and the unlearned.

TIME and money expended for this purpose are profitably laid out. Instruction
brings back the aged to the rule, from which they gradually, and in a course of
years widely depart; and enables the rising generation regularly to employ
their tongues in their Maker's praise. How beautiful is it to see, under the
benefit of kind and faithful Tutors, even children skilfully using their
tongues in singing loud Hosannahs to the Son of David! Such an appearance
brings to mind and seems to be a fresh confirmation of this passage in sacred
writ, "out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise."
Math. 21.16.
How much better is it for youth to spend their leisure hours in learning so
pleasant and profitable an art, than to pass them, as is too often done, "in
rioting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness," to the disgrace of
human nature, the destruction of their characters and estates, their health,
and their souls. But

IIdly. SINGING with grace in the heart, intends that we should sing with pious
and devout affections, with grateful minds full of the sense of the divine
favors. This, in the sight of heaven, is the principal thing; and to have our
hearts rightly tuned, is, in a religious consideration, infinitely preferable
to the finest modulations of the voice. To what avail is it to have our tongues
sing in grateful accents, unless our souls catch the sacred fire and glow in
gratitude to heaven. The melody of the heart is what the Apostle has seen fit
particularly to recommend, as that which in the sight of God is "of great
price," and with which the melody of the voice is not worthy to be compared.
The first is the weightier matter of the law which ought always to be made,
whilst the latter should never be omitted.

IF we would make melody in our hearts to the Lord, we should endeavor to
affect them with what we are employed about. Are we singing a psalm of praise
and thanksgiving? we should be careful that our souls are filled with
gratitude, and expanded with love to the supreme Benefactor. Are we engaged in
singing those psalms which describe the man after God's heart, and teach us
what we ought to be? It will be the fixed resolution of him who sings devoutly
to comply with these demands and answer to this description. Are we singing a
penitential hymn? Sadness should set upon our faces, and contrition possess our
hearts. And so in all other supposeable cases. To sing with grace in the heart,
then, implies that the words of the song are religious, as well as the notes of
the tune harmonious; and that we diligently attend to, and understand the sense
and meaning of the psalm or hymn, or whatever it is we are singing.

IN this service we should have in view not so much the praise of men, as the
glory of God. We should sing to the Lord, have respect in this as well as in
every other part of worship to his will, and to the honor of his name and
religion. "Whatever we do in word or deed, we should do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father, by him," as it follows in the
verse immediately after the text. We should be solicitous to please him, and
fearful lest we offend him in the manner of discharging this duty, knowing that
the acceptance of our praises is through him, and the recompense of them will
finally be from him.

UNLESS these are our views and purposes; unless this be the temper and
disposition of our hearts, though our singing may please and profit others, it
can be of no lasting spiritual benefit to ourselves; Our oblations will be
offensive, and with all the music and harmony of our voices, we shall be
deemed by God, who searches the hearts and weighs us in an even balance, as
"sounding brass and tinkling cymbals." Though in a sense we may be said to "offer
praise, yet we shall not glorify God," nor, in this way shall we ever "see his
salvation." Harmony will not supply the place of devotion, neither will the
correctest music, atone for the want of piety. Should we therefore be ever so
celebrated for our superior seize in this art, it will signify nothing if
our hearts are discordant and not right in the sight of God. It seems to be the
more necessary to mention, and insist on this, because young persons are too
prone to neglect their hearts, whilst they are cultivating their voices, and to
seek the praise of men, rather than that favor which comes of God only. But if
the applause of men be the only thing they have in view, verily they shall have
their reward; they shall receive the empty compliments and fulsome panagyricks
of their fellow-mortals and nothing else. To guard you against a mistake so
pernicious, be persuaded to carry your views forward and consider how terrible
it must needs be to go, at death, from praising God on earth, to be associated
with damned spirits who spend their hopeless hours in blaspheming that
venerable Name which all should worship and adore.

BUT if you are sincere in your devotions to God now, then may you humbly hope
to join, at last, with Angels round the throne in singing anthems of praise and
hallelujahs to God, and the Lamb that lives and reigns for ever and ever.
Having learnt the song of Moses and the Lamb here on earth, and in temples made
with hands, you shall, when your tongues grow cold and motionless in death,
through grace, be received to heaven to "join the general assembly and church of
the first born," and, in temples not made with hands, sing in more exalted
strains, without interruption or fatigue, the high praises of your God and King
through interminable ages.

A FEW reflections on what has been said shall conclude the whole.

SINCE music is so pleasant an exercise, how thankful should we be to Almighty
God, that he has constituted it a part of divine worship; herein making our
duty and pleasure perfectly coincident: An evidence, among a thousand others,
that God is not a hard master, that he has consulted our happiness in all his
laws, and that he does not delight in the torment and misery of his creature
man. In token of our gratitude to our supreme Benefactor for his goodness in
this regard, let us be excited to cultivate and improve our musical talents, to
"stir up the gift that is within us," to teach and admonish one another in
psalms, and hymns, that so we may make our tongues, in this way, instruments of
the divine glory. Some persons are shamefully negligent, and therefore highly
culpable in this matter; they suffer those organs to rust away, which ought in
all reason to be worn out in the immediate service of their maker. Indeed there
are a few who have no talents for music, neither ear nor voice; and whose
endeavors to learn the art, much more to excel in it, would be, of
consequence, to no purpose. Such persons must content themselves to sing with
the spirit, and to make melody in their hearts only, as they are unable to do
it with the understanding and the voice, always remembering for their
consolation, that God requires of men only in proportion to what he has given
them; and that, if there is first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
what a man has, and not according to what he has not. But they, who are
furnished with musical organs, and either do not improve them at all, or
misimprove them by singing profane and vicious songs, are chargeable with
guilt; "to them it is sin."

To the honor of many it may be spoken, that they seem to have a juster sense
of their duty in this matter, and that, of late, they have been fired with a
noble ambition to excel in this art: We rejoice to see that their endeavors
have been crowned with abundant success; and that, under the advantages of good
Instructors, they have, in the compass of a few years past, carried vocal
music to a degree of perfection unknown in this part of the world till now. It
must needs give to all sincere lovers of harmony and Zion, great pleasure to
see this spirit spreading from place to place; and particularly it is matter of
heart felt joy to many that you, my young friends in this place, have imbibed
so large a proportion of it, and, under the auspices of the most high, have
made such distinguished improvements in vocal music. Suffer me, with modesty,
to say it is much to your honor: May it be to the credit of religion, and the
interest of your souls.

It is presumed that all here present, will heartily join with me in fervently
wishing you the divine blessing and presence. -- May you be encouraged to
persevere, and may prosperity attend you. May your worthy examples be imitated
by others: May your numbers daily increase, and the glorious, the ethereal
flame be propagated hence, and catch from town to town, till by the prevailing
harmony of our music, the natural asperity of our tempers is taken away, and
the soft, the benevolent affections become predominant; till from loving and
practicing harmony here, we are qualified to dwell in that place where love and
joy, peace and pleasure go hand in hand.

Lastly, IF music be so pleasant and profitable, and the late improvements add
so much to its excellency, then it is matter both of grief and surprise that
reformation in our singing should, in any place, meet with resistance and
opposition. Although perhaps, it would be no breach of charity to attribute
much of this opposition to the ignorance and prejudices of those who make it;
yet as all may be conscientious, and think they have good reasons for their
conduct, we will consider these reasons and give them all the weight they
deserve. -- Some object and say, "that they cannot but oppose these
improvements in music, because they take it entirely out of their hands and
place it above their reach." And tho they would not be supposed to act upon the
same principle the fox did in the fable, who called those grapes sour which he
could not reach, yet they persuade themselves that this is a very sufficient
reason why they should discountenance this new method of singing. They were,
perhaps, once famous for their skill in psalmody and for the part they bore in
this service, but now are obliged to set entirely mute, not only to the
disparagement of their musical skill, but also to their great mortification, as
they once took delight in "making their voices to be heard on high." This seems
to be an objection in some men's minds; and if any part of it proceeds from
pride, we are truly sorry for it; but if it proceeds from this, that these
improvements render them unable to comply with what they suppose is their duty,
we say that probably they may have wrong notions of their duty in this
instance. -- It would be very agreeable to see the whole assembly join as one
in praising God for his common bounties; but this is a sight we can never
expect to see in this world; and were it possible, it would not be worth
purchasing at the expense of our psalmody. If our music has at any time got to
a very low ebb, and cannot be reformed without leaving a part of the
congregation behind, it is, notwithstanding, a duty to attempt a reformation:
For regular singing must be more acceptable both to God and man, tho performed
by only a part of the assembly, than that which is grovelling and indifferent,
tho all should be engaged therein. Therefore if there be any who, through age,
or other infirmity, are unable to keep pace with others in the necessary
improvements in music; instead of opposing them, they ought to attend on it
with all the delight and profit possible; remembering for their comfort that the
benefit of singing is not confined to whose who perform it, but may extend to
all who, tho they cannot sing with the understanding and voice, endeavor to
make melody in their hearts to the Lord. If I mistake not, the hearer has the
advantage of the singer in this respect; for the first has nothing else to do,
but to excite and cultivate his devotion; whereas the latter must attend to the
harmony of the voice, as well as to the melody of the heart. Let not any then,
who are destitute either of voice or skill, imagine themselves to be
unconcerned in this part of divine worship, but rather let them closely attend
to both the subject and the song, that they may sing with the spirit and make
melody in their hearts to the Lord.

AGAIN, others there are, who, though they approve the music, object to the
ceremonies with which it is preformed, and particularly exclaim against the
Pitch-Pipe, and the motion of the hand. With what propriety these are called
ceremonies, I know not. There is certainly a wide difference between ceremonies
strictly so called, and those circumstances which are necessary either to the
being or well-being of any particular performance, action or thing Ceremonies
properly so called ought never to be encouraged; because it is well known they
corrode the vitals of religion; and that in proportion as they flourish, true
and undefiled Christianity withers and decays. But what is all this either to
the Pitch-Pipe, or the Hand. These are said to be circumstances necessary to
the decent and regular performance of vocal music: The one enables us to begin
and set the tune at a proper height or pitch, that so the notes of it may be
within the compass of different voices; and the other, to keep exact time and
sing in perfect consonance. For want of some such expedients or helps as these,
how often have we known the most melodious compositions spoiled in the
performance, and converted into harsh and grating dissonance. Inasmuch,
therefore, as these things give no disturbance to the congregation, and are in
so great a degree necessary to the beautiful and regular discharge of this
duty, why should they be opposed, especially by those who esteem regular
singing? To esteem the one and find fault with the other is just as consistent,
as it would be to extol a regular face, and exclaim against those features on
which its beauty depends.

Lastly. OTHERS oppose the present regular method of singing because they say
it is an innovation, and an introductory step to Popery: Two charges, if true,
that ought to determine all serious and good men to oppose it. But there is no
sort of foundation for these assertions. An innovation it is not, and to popery
it cannot tend. Regular singing is not a new practice even in this part of the
world; for however the inhabitants first began to sing, we know a reformation
once took place, which occasioned then as it does now, too much disturbance.
And as there is no foundation for the charge of innovation, so it gives no
occasion for that terrible outcry which some persons make, as though popery was
advancing with haughty strides upon us. This is the mear bugbear of folly, or
the offspring of ignorance, or what is worse, the wicked craft of some
designing men to bring this reformation into discredit and stop the progress of
it. For no person of common sense can see the least connection between popery
and the late improvements in our church-musick.

To conclude. IT is much to be lamented that christianity is so little
understood, and that the meek and condescending spirit of the gospel is so
seldom discovered by those who call themselves the disciples of Christ. If
superstition, bigotry and ignorance were not so prevalent, we should not see
such fierce contentions about trifles to the neglect and detriment of the
weighter matters of the Law. May toleration and charity be more universally
practiced. "May we look not every one on his own things, but every one also on
the things of others. May the ignorant be less prone to speak evil of the
things which they understand not, and may the strong bear the infirmities of
the weak."

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. 18 2 the bottom read kariento^^. 21 18 for use read adapt. 3^ 21
(...) read example.


