The Ungodly Condemned in Judgment. A (...)ERMON Preached at Springfield,
December 13th 1770. (...) Occasion of the Execution of William Shaw, For Murder

By MOSES BALDWIN, A.M. Pastor of the CHURCH in PALMER.

Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. GENESIS ix.6. Woe unto
the wicked, it shall be ill with him: For the reward of his hands shall be
given him. ISAI. iii 11. BOSTON: (...) and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to
the Treasurer's Office in Milk-Street. MDCCLXXI.

PSALM I.5. First Clause. -- Therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in the
Judgment. --


THE sacred Penman of this Psalm sets forth the way and end of the righteous
and wicked: The happiness of the one, and the misery of the other: The great
difference in the temper of their minds and conduct in the world, and the great
difference, which will be made betwixt them in the future judgment. The godly
and ungodly, the righteous and unrighteous, are in sacred writ opposed to each
other. Godliness signifies piety toward God; and righteousness, equity toward
man. But godliness and righteousness, being so often put for one and the same
thing, they may, separately taken, hold forth the two branches of the good
man's character, piety toward God, and equity toward man: So the ungodly and
unrighteous, being often used for one and the same person, separately taken,
may signify men impious toward God, and unrighteous toward man; the real
character of the wicked.

By the ungodly then, we may understand a sinner under the guilt and power of
sin; disobedient and rebellions against the sovereign authority and righteous
law of a holy God, and unrighteous toward man. This is the man, who, among
others, must die and come to judgment. Being a sinner, death must be his
inevitable portion; and as death leaves him, so judgment will find him! Being
found in judgment ungodly, impious toward God, and unrighteous toward man, he
cannot stand in judgment. By his character, it must appear before the righteous
and impartial Judge* that he is an unbeliever, out of Christ; that he has not
hence a righteousness which will answer the law: When therefore he appears in
the judgment, not only without the righteousness of the law, but without so
much as a personal righteousness, and his deeds produced before the
judgment seat as witnesses to prove him ungodly, he cannot in justice be
justified and acquitted, but must fall, and be justly condemned. The ungodly
shall not stand in the judgment. The propositions suggested, and to be
illustrated, upon this solemn occasion, are -- I. There will be a future
Judgment. II. The ungodly shall not stand in Judgment.


1. There will be a future Judgment. The certainty of this I shall endeavor to
establish, and then give a brief account of the nature and design of it. May
the attention of all be serious and solemn, and every heart be affected with
truth, as the weight and importance of it require!

The certainty of a future judgment is sufficiently established in the divine
word: For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil. Eccl. xii.14. He has appointed a day, in the which
he will judge the world in righteousness. Act. xvii.31. We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ. 2 Cor. v.10. That there is therefore a day
appointed for a future judgment, and that all men must appear before the
judgment seat for judgment, is as true as the word of God. No man then, unless
he be a profane and impious Deist, or a Rebel-infidel, will presume to call the
truth of it in question. -- Besides, as God is a Being infinitely righteous and
holy, both in himself and in all his proceedings with his creatures, it appears
rational that there must be a judgment-day to justify the innocent, or to
manifest their innocence, and to punish the wicked; this not being fully and
always done in the present state. Though God at times overthrows the ungodly
for their ungodly deeds; yet this being not a state of retribution, but of
trial, he often forbears to execute sentence against evil works, and does not
"punish the wicked according to their deserts." Eccl. viii.11. The ungodly are
often, in the course of providence, exalted, and the godly cast down. A wicked
Dives fares sumptuously every day, and a godly Lazarus lies full of sores;
distressed with poverty, and is denied the crumbs that fall from the rich man's
table. And is there not often wickedness in the place of judgment? Iniquity in
human Courts of Judicature? The innocent condemned, and the guilty go free? The
Son of God was wickedly arraigned, accused, condemned, and executed. Many, of
whom the world is not worthy, suffer cruel bonds and imprisonment, and are
persecuted unto death. The hearts of many are fully set in them to do evil. The
ungodly will trample upon the laws of God; despise his authority; reject the
gospel with contempt, and crucify the Son of God afresh. Shall such things lie
in eternal silence? Nay, these things show that God will judge the righteous
and the wicked: For the Judge of all the earth will do right. The holiness and
justice of God call for a day of judgment, when his righteous government of the
world shall be fully vindicated, and right fully take place. -- Again,

The voice of conscience gives its testimony to the certainty of a future
judgment. The consciences of men with, and without, a revealed law, excuse or
accuse, according as they do good or evil, and that in reference to a future
state of rewards and punishments. To this purpose, when St. Paul reasoned
before Felix, of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, we find he
trembled. This arose from a conscience convinced of a future judgment, when he
must account for his unrighteousness and intemperance. Upon the same principle,
many, when they have been best prepared to judge of truth, have professed their
belief, and dread of a future judgment. How many, who have put far away the
evil day, and braved it out against death, and the terrors of God's holy law,
have at length, with horror, professed that they were going to that dreadful
judgment of the great God, which they had neglected to prepare for? How many
Atheists, Deists and Apostates, who have braved it out in a day of prosperity,
have found in a day of distress, that they could stupify conscience no longer,
but have been obliged to fall before God, and acknowledge not only his being
and word, but a future and terrible judgment? Great then is the force and
evidence of this truth, and it shall prevail.

The account we have of the nature of this future judgment, is this, viz. that
it will be a solemn, righteous, exact and critical, universal and final
judgment. Must it not be the most solemn day, that ever angels or men have
known, when the supreme Judge shall come forth with a shout! With the voice of
the Archangel, and trump of God! The dead are raised! The judgment seat is made
ready, and the Judge has took his seat! A countless multitude stand before
this seat for justice: The sentence of absolution, with a "come ye blessed of
my Father," is pronounced upon the godly in accents of inconceivable grace; and
the sentence of condemnation is passed in accents of inconceivable wrath, and
executed upon the ungodly! This will be a righteous and an impartial judgment.
God will judge the world in righteousness by Jesus Christ. No partial favor
will be shown here. The persons of princes will not be accepted for their
grandeur; nor will the rich be regarded for their riches; nor will the poor be
despised for their poverty: But with righteousness, and without partiality,
will the just Judge distribute rewards and punishments to high and low, rich
and poor. This will be a judgment most exact and critical: Secret things are
all to be laid open, tried and judged! The weighty matters of the eternal
judgment are not to be hurried over. Some think the day of judgment will take
up as long a time, as the world will stand: Let this be as it will; the
searcher of hearts will let no case escape, without the most exact and critical
examination and trial. This will be an universal judgment: "We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ;" righteous and unrighteous, men and devils
must obey the universal summons, and come to trial. This will be the final
judgment. No appeal from the judgment seat of Christ; the final sentence is
there given. This sentence is, like the laws of the Medes and Persians,
unalterable: It is a sentence for eternity, and the execution of it is
unavoidable.

The great ends and designs of this future, final and eternal judgment are, for
the manifestation of the honor and glory of the great Judge, and for the
vindication of his righteous providence and government of the world; for the
manifestation of his mercy and grace, in the complete salvation of the saints,
and for the display of his justice, in the full destruction of the ungodly. I
now proceed to say,

2. That the ungodly shall not stand in judgment. The proposition is fairly
proved in the text. Peter gives us another proof, 2 Pet. iii.7. The heavens and
earth -- are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men. Jude another, 14, 15, verses, The Lord comes -- to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed. These are threatenings of God, founded
on the unchangeable perfections of his nature: As God therefore is not man that
he should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent; so sure he will fulfill
the threatenings of his word: Nothing then can be more plain, than that the
ungodly shall not stand in judgment. But further, to confirm and set home a
truth so interesting and important, let me observe,

I. The ungodly shall not stand in judgment, because they have not the
righteousness of the law; and so being found guilty in the eye of the law,
strict and impartial justice will not acquit, but will condemn them in
judgment. The divine law is what God has stated as the rule of proceeding
toward man. Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill the law. That man
therefore may stand in judgment, be acquitted, and find acceptance unto eternal
life, he must have a righteousness, which the law requires, and will accept.
What is the saints security, that they shall stand in judgment? They have the
righteousness of the law. Not, that they imperfect sinful men ever did, or ever
can in their own persons, answer the demands of the law: Nay, but this has
been fulfilled for them in the person of Christ their surety; which
law-fulfilling righteousness has been received by faith, placed to, and
accepted on their account. So though they are saved by a new covenant, and by
grace; yet they have a righteousness, which will answer the law; justice will
not then condemn, but will acquit them upon trial. Can any ungodly sinner have
any just pretense to this righteousness? He is an unbeliever, and without
Christ: He has then no part in him, nor his righteousness. This is the only
righteousness, that will be accepted in judgment.

When therefore it is found upon fair trial, that the ungodly has not this,
must he not, when weighed in the balance, be found wanting? Yea, guilty in the
eye of the law? Will not God then mark iniquity against him? How then shall he
stand? Strict and impartial justice will require his blood. This is a reason,
why men cannot stand in human Courts of Judgment. They are not, upon a fair
trial, found righteous and innocent, but guilty in the eye of the law. This
being the case, a righteous Jury cannot, in conscience, justify the guilty, and
declare them innocent, but must bring in their verdict guilty; and a just Judge
must acquiesce in their report, and pass the sentence accordingly. Let me
observe,

II. That the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, because the grand evidence
improved before the judgment seat of God, will be their own practice or works;
according to which evidence their state will be determined. These evidences
will not be made use of to settle a determination in the mind of God, what the
eternal state of the ungodly ought to be; but such a procedure will demonstrate
to men's own consciences, and to the world the righteousness and equity of the
final judgment Though there may be many witnesses in the day of judgment, in
order to inhance the condemnation of the ungodly, yet there will not need a
train of witnesses; for facts themselves will be produced as evidences for or
against men, and there is no room left to dispute plain matters of fact. This
is according to the representation which the Judge gives of his proceeding in
the last judgment, Matt 25. latter end, where the sentence is passed on the
saints according to, though not for, their works; and the sentence passed upon
the ungodly, is according to their works. We have also a representation of the
last judgment, Rev. xx. 12, etc. The dead are here said to be judged out of
those things, which are written in the books, according to their works. It is
evident by this, that the deeds of the ungodly are all upon record in the book
of God's omniscience; that he will reveal them in the day of judgment, and make
them revive in the book of the sinners own conscience, as well as manifest them
before the assembled world. When this is done, and by their deeds they are
proved ungodly, they fall in judgment. They cannot deny or extenuate their
crimes before the judgment seat; they appear in their true and real light; they
cannot have any objection against evidences summoned; they are their own deeds,
which they will be convinced of: By the evidence then of their ungodly deeds,
they will be condemned in judgment.

As in human Courts of justice, it is the fact substantially proved against the
criminal, for which he is condemned, and for which he dies: So ungodly deeds,
produced as witnesses against the ungodly in the final judgment, according to
evidence, they must fall inevitably, under the righteous condemnation of God,
and be justly sentenced to death eternal, and have the just sentence in its
full length and breadth, depth and height, executed upon them. But, --

III. The ungodly shall not stand in judgment, because they have no meet
qualification to fit them for the presence of the just and holy Judge. They
have no external righteousness to recommend them: Naked and guilty then, they
cannot stand before a just and holy Judge, but must fall with shame and
blushing confusion. They have no internal holiness, but are unrenewed,
unsanctified and unholy, and so have not the meet qualification to appear with
Christ in judgment, and to see him as he is: "For without holiness, no man
shall see the Lord." Holiness is a qualification absolutely necessary to fit
men for the right hand of the Judge; for the glory, holy society, employments,
entertainments and enjoyments of his heavenly kingdom. They shall not stand
then in judgment, but will be spurned from the presence of the Judge, and
sentenced to dwell forever with the unclean, unholy and abominable, in that
fire never to be quenched.

Let us now attend to the APPLICATION. Hence, --

1. Is the certainty of a future and final judgment so great, and the evidence
so full, that the ungodly shall not stand in judgment; "what manner of persons
ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?" Though Christ has
wrought out a complete redemption, and brought in an everlasting righteousness;
yet it is in vain for any to expect to appear with safety in the day of God,
unless they by faith receive Christ, with the benefits of his purchase; partake
of his spirit, and are holy, even as he is holy. To stand in the final judgment
is a matter of such everlasting consequence to the souls of men, that our call
to be actually ready to stand before the judgment seat, and to receive a
sentence for eternity, is immediate and loud. Should not the state of our souls
be settled and determined, without delay? Should not the light and evidence
about our safe appearing be so bright and clear, as to put the matter out of
all present doubt? Then shall we be like the servant, that waits for his Lord's
coming, and loves his appearing, and with him receive the blessed euge and
crown of righteousness. Permit me,

2. To close the Discourse by way of Address and Exhortation.

And now, with all seriousness and solemnity, I shall first take liberty to
address myself to you, unhappy Man! who are just going to judgment, and to
receive a particular sentence for eternity. -- When I considered you as one of
the precious souls committed to my charge; and as bearing a special relation to
a number of respectable families among my people, let me say, with trembling, I
consented to prepare a final Sermon for you. Sensible of my great inability to
deal with men in your situation, nature recoiled at the thought; and, had I
consulted only the dictates of flesh and blood, I must have utterly refused:
But Providence called; with the call of Providence I complied; and at your own
Election I come forth to speak.

Permit me now, as a faithful watchman, in duty to God, and in compassion to
your soul, to warn you of your danger, with all plainness, that having done my
duty, I may shake my raiment, and say, "I am pure from the blood of your soul."
Though it may, to you, possibly seem cruel to rehearse over the evil deeds of a
dying man, or reproachful; yet let me say, far be it from me, from having any
desire of such a nature: Any desire to reproach you, or to give your enemies
occasion to rejoice in your misery. Believe me, whatever I may say upon the
evil of your conduct, shall be with an hearty design, by the blessing of God,
to bring you to a sense of the evil of your sins, and to convince you of your
immediate necessity of Christ, and his salvation; knowing, "that the whole does
not see his need of a physician, but he that is sick."

And now were not you conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity? Are you not by
nature a child of wrath even as others, and an enemy to God by wicked works?
Has not your conduct been notoriously wicked? The character of the ungodly man
in full; impious toward God, and unrighteous toward man, been your character?
Have you not repented, there are but a few moments left you to reflect; to
settle your accounts; to have your peace made with God, and to seek preparation
for a neverending eternity! But to be particular, let me appeal to your
conscience in the sight of that God, before whom you are presently to appear,
whether you have not, to an extreme degree, been guilty of the sin of
intemperance? Have you not hereby dishonored God, and abused his bounty and
goodness? wronged your own soul and body? Wasted your substance? Brought your
self and family to poverty and distress? Have you not followed this practice,
until you became deaf to all warnings, regardless of all reproof, and even lost
to all sense and expectation of death and judgment to come? Has not this been
an inlet to a train of evils of the blackest nature? A source of lying and
profane swearing? Abuse and grief to your own parents? Abuse to your own wife
and children? A great grief and trial to your relatives and friends? Quarreling
and contention with others? Know then, if you are not a very humble penitent
indeed, God will not hold you guiltless at his righteous bar, nor suffer you to
inherit his kingdom; but will give you your portion in the lake of fire and
brimstone. Besides, by the verdict of the Jury, upon what I called, being
present, a fair and impartial trial; in the judgment of the Court and
Judicious, that attended the trial, with impartiality, you are verily guilty of
the crying sin of MURDER. And let any friend to truth and justice but weigh
with impartiality, the variety of reports you have yourself made of the
tragical affair; and how they will be able to pronounce you innocent, I cannot
see. At one time you make report, that you was writing, and knew nothing of the
affair; -- again owned that you threw him down with your foot; -- again owned
that you did seize him by the neck; -- at other times report, that you was
asleep, and as ignorant about any thing done to the man deceased, as the child
unborn: When it can be, and has to me been sufficiently proved, that you was in
reality awake. So many shifts and falsehoods argue guilt: For truth will bear
its own weight, and is always consistent with itself. These things, with an
evident disposition to deny, conceal and extenuate other crimes of an
attrocious nature; together with the hand of providence, appearing evidently to
frustrate every measure concerted for your help and escape, do not to me
bespeak innocence, but guilt. To me, then, as a dying man, it appears, you
ought to acknowledge the justice of God and man, in your condemnation; and with
David, say, I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. With
penitential brokenness, and submission to God, say, Against thee, and thee
only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: That thou might be
justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. If a man be
guilty, it is not the time to deny and plead not guilty, when he is going to
the judgment seat of an all-seeing Judge, to answer for his guilt. If you die
in peace, you must have a clear conscience; a conscience, void of offense
toward God and man. Do you hope for acceptance at the bar of God, die not
concealing your guilt: For if you die with a guilty conscience, and lies in
your mouth, you never will be renewed unto repentance, nor washed in the
Redeemer's blood: And unless you are in time washed in the blood of Christ, and
clothed in his righteousness, you will not have a righteousness in which you
can, with safety, appear before God; but your guilt, with all your evil works,
appearing in judgment against you, in justice, you cannot stand. And consider,
to day you are in a state of trial, and there is a grain of hope yet left; if
you now believe in Christ, and repent of your sins, you shall have mercy. --
Consider also, that today you must appear before God, in judgment; and if
found an impenitent in your sins, you fall at once under an eternal curse
without repeal, and the execution of it will immediately follow, and without
any reprieve for days. Jesus Christ, the Prince and Savior, now sets on a
throne of grace, a seat of mercy; But will you not this day find him on a
throne of justice? How then shall you, a sinner by nature and practice, this
day appear with safety before a just and holy Judge? Let me say if you find
acceptance in judgment, you must by faith receive Christ, the Prince and
Savior, and have his blood and merits, his law-fulfilling and magnifying
righteousness transferred to you by a gracious imputation; otherwise, so sure
as thou art now condemned by the law, so sure as thou have already began to
fall before justice, so sure thou shall not prevail, but shall surely fall
before a just and holy God. -- And what an awful state is a long, long eternity
of misery! Your duty and business is now then to be deeply sensible of, and
bewail your sins of nature and practice, until you are truly sensible of your
wretched, undone and helpless condition, and absolute and immediate necessity
of Christ, and salvation by him, that you may, under this conviction, essay to
commit your precious and immortal soul into the hands of the blessed Redeemer,
in whom alone there is help found for lost sinners. You should be very earned
for a true sight of your present state, and plead with God in his abundant
grace and goodness, to discover to you, an ill-deserving and hell-deserving
sinner, the Savior, as being suited to all your wants, miseries and dangers;
that he would give you a heart willing to renounce all other lords and lovers;
all other hopes and dependencies; willing sincerely and in good earnest, really
to choose and embrace him as offered in the gospel, and to venture your soul
wholly upon him for eternal life. You should plead that "Christ of God may be
made unto you wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption;" that you
may be found in him, having that righteousness, which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: That as you are going to
judgment this day, you may be introduced with acceptance before the Judge: So
that though you die as a condemned criminal, yet being in Christ, you may be
pardoned of God, and acquitted in the final judgment. You should plead for a
true sight and sense of sin, not merely as exposing you to public justice, and
the wrath of God, but as opposite to the pure nature, odious and offensive in
the sight of a holy and merciful God, that you may loath and abhor it, and have
that godly sorrow for sin, that works repentance unto life never to be
repented of.

You should be earnest for a heart to love God supremely, and his Son Jesus
Christ, as one altogether lovely; for a heart to love the divine law, and to
hate sin; to love and forgive your enemies, knowing that without these things,
you must be denied the presence and glory of God in the coming world. And let
me tell you, that the greatest sinners are not shut out from the saving
blessings of the new covenant, if they will repent and believe the gospel. Not
Menassah, who filled the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood -- not the
Jews, who crucified the Lord of glory -- not the Gentiles, who were slaves to
their lusts, and guilty of the most abominable practices; gave themselves up to
work wickedness with all greediness: Free grace has triumphed in the salvation
of such sinners as these. And it is now a faithful saving, and worthy of all
acceptance, "that Christ Jesus came into the world to save the chief of
sinners:" That "he who was dead, but is alive again, and ever lives to make
intercession," is as able to save all that will come to God by him. Now then,
poor Man! who have nothing to recommend you to God; no good works to boast of;
who have been a great and notorious offender, let me bid you once more come
under a sense of your sinful, miserable and helpless estate; come sensible how
infinitely just God is, and will be, shall he execute his wrath eternally upon
you; come sensible that there is help in the Lord, and surrender yourself up to
Jesus Christ, the mighty Prince and Savior, and trust your soul wholly upon
his infinite merits for justification and eternal life. His blood is
all-sufficient for the pardon of your great sins, and can wash out your stains
of the longest continuance. The Spirit of Christ can create anew an old
transgressor, and fit you for heaven. -- All things are possible with God.
These things, with the example of the dying thief, who obtained mercy in the
last hour, forbid you utterly to despair of salvation. Art thou now a child of
wrath, as you was born? Have you been an old transgressor, and long sinned
against light and love? long hardened your heart against counsel and reproof?
But are you at last deeply sensible of your guilt? Are you inclined no longer
to harden your neck, but to day -- this last day, to hear the voice of God? Are
you disposed to be made a new creature before you die, and to accept
deliverance upon the very borders of hell? With infinite ease Christ can
deliver a dying sinner from death eternal. But now to press all home, and to
excite you immediately to comply with the instructions given, consider, if you
are lost, what an awful account you will have to give to God, and how clear
your condemnation will be? Will not all the counsels and instructions that ever
you have had? Will not the ministers that have been dealing with you since
under a sentence of death, with all their solemn and weighty instructions, both
in public and private, rise up in judgment against you? Will not the gospel,
your own conscience, and all your evil works, rise up against you, and
aggravate your just condemnation? If you now perish, better for you that you
never had been born; better for you, that you had been executed on the day
sentenced to die: For all the time given you, with all your respites, being
sinned away, instead of being any benefit, has only given you an opportunity
to fill up the measure of your iniquities, and to make an intolerable hell
seven times hotter. O for Christ's sake, and in mercy to your own soul, I
beseech you to linger no longer, but fly from the wrath to come, to the city of
refuge! As a prisoner of hope, turn to the strong hold. Flatter not yourself
that God is altogether such an one as yourself: For he is a just and an holy
God. Deceive not yourself, by thinking yourself something, when you are
nothing. Believe, unless you are in Christ, you cannot stand in judgment. Know,
unless you are born again, are a new creature, have all old things done away,
and all things become anew, you cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Improve
your few remaining moments in earnest and importunate breathings of soul, that
God would show mercy to a dying sinner. In your last moments cry with the dying
thief, "Lord Jesus, remember me in thy kingdom!' And say unto my poor soul,
"this day shall thou be with me in Paradise." What more can I say, but the Lord
pity and have mercy on your soul! --

And now, my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the ministry of our Lord Jesus,
let us, by this desperate instance before us, be stirred up to cry aloud, and
spare not to show sinners their sins, and warn them of their danger; that
whether they will hear or forbear, their blood may not be required at our
hands. Let civil Magistrates, who are powers ordained of God, and not to bear
the sword in vain, exert themselves, by authority, example and endeavors, to
bear down vice, and prevent, if possible, men from running to such lengths of
wickedness, that they may not, for their overmuch wickedness, come to an
untimely end. Let masters of public houses, take warning by this sad spectacle
before you, to hold your hand from men of this character, lest the hungry and
distressed cries of their wives and children, rise up to the ears of the Lord
against you; and the blood of such men as die before they have lived out half
their days, by this means, cry at your doors, and rise up in judgment against
you. Let the dreadful example made of this poor criminal, be a warning to men
of intemperance, especially to his own companions in wickedness. See the fruits
of love to strong drink! Let me lift up my voice, and cry aloud in the ears of
all this solemn assembly, Behold the dreadful effects of drinking to excess! --
And O let the voice of this alarming example sound in the ears of drunkards in
accents of thunder, and deter you from your horrid practice, even as though you
heard the trump of God sound, and the voice of the Son of God, saying, that the
judgment of the wicked is come! Let this instance before us be a solemn warning
to men of passion, who in their passion quarrel and smite with the fist of
wickedness. O lay hands on no man, lest murder be committed, and you share in
the fate of this poor man! Let young people take warning in season to guard
against the sins of intemperance and contention. Let the solemn instance before
us, with what we have this day heard, sound an awakening alarm in the ears of
every ungodly sinner. The solemn, righteous, impartial, critical, universal and
final judgment, will come. The ungodly shall appear, but shall not stand in
judgment. O Sirs, above all things, be concerned about the weighty matter of
death, judgment and eternity! Prepare without delay to meet your God, the great
Judge of quick and dead. And now let us all in undissembled woe drop a tear
upon this sorrowful occasion.

O the distress of the aged Parents, this day berest of their only surviving
son after this sort! He that should be the staff and comfort of their old age,
bringing their gray hairs with sorrow down to the grave. Say ye that are
parents, could you bear up under such a trial as this, without an extraordinary
measure of grace? What Tongue can express the distress of this poor man's wife
with her eleven children, and all his relatives and friends? Pity, pity them, O
ye people, and recommend them in your daily addresses at the throne of grace,
to the abundant grace of God! But especially pity the poor man now to die by
the hand of justice; and while you are attending the execution, lift up your
hearts in the most earnest prayer, that he may be a monument of God's rich,
free, sovereign grace and mercy. Finally, let me caution all present upon this
sorrowful occasion, to let your behavior be with all decency and moderation.
It is not a day for rioting and vain merriment. Such an occasion as this calls
much rather for fasting, humiliation and prayer. -- Let me entreat old and
young to stand off from every thing rude and vain: To let your behavior be
with sobriety and good order, and in due season, to retire to your respective
homes. Remember your need of grace to keep you from falling, and let him that
stands take heed lest he fall. "And now may the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make us all perfect to do his
will; working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ: To whom be glory forever and ever. AMEN."


