Mr. GAY's SERMON Preached in the First Parish of HINGHAM, December 6. 1770. A
Day of Thanksgiving and Prayer.

THE Devotions of God's People adjusted to the Dispensations of his Providence.

A SERMON PREACHED IN THE FIRST PARISH OF HINGHAM, December 6, 1770.

THE Day observed throughout the Province as a Day of public THANKSGIVING and
PRAYER.

BY EBENEZER GAY, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in HINGHAM.

Offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving with Leaven.

Amos, 4.5. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High.
And call upon me in the Day of Trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

Psalm, 50. 14.15. BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, MCCLXXI.

THE Devotions of GOD's People adjusted to the Dispensations of his Providence.
JEREMIAH XXXI. 7. FOR thus says the Lord, Sing with Gladness for Jacob, and
shout among the Chief of the Nations: Publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord,
save thy People, and the Remnant of Israel.


IN this Chapter, as in the foregoing, the Prophet foretells the Restoration of
the Jews from the Babylonish seventy Years Captivity: -- that they should
return into their own Land, rebuild their Cities and Houses; plant their
Vineyards, and eat the Fruits thereof, and be happily resettled in their former
State of Freedom and Plenty; in which they should be adorned with signal Marks
of the divine Favor, and all the Signs of religious and civil Joy -- For thus
says the Lord, Sing with Gladness for Jacob, and shout among the Chief of the
Nations: etc. when you see the Dawning of those blessed Times, express your Joy
for the Restoration of Jacob's Posterity, in the most public Manner that can
be, in the Sight of the Chiefest of those potent Nations, from whence you are
to be delivered. Publish ye, Praise ye -- Publish those good Tidings with the
highest Expressions of Praise and Glory to God, -- and say, O Lord, save thy
People, the Remnant of Israel, -- likewise pray earnestly that God, who has
begun so glorious a Work, would go on to complete and perfect it.

THE Words afford us this seasonable Instruction; That the joyful Praises of a
People for Mercies received, should be accompanied with fervent Prayers unto
God to save them from Judgments which are still felt, or feared, by them.

WHEN the Jews Deliverance from the Miseries of a long Captivity in Babylon was
begun, in the first Steps of their Return from among the Nations which
oppressed them, they were to sing for Gladness, and shout for Joy, to publish
with the Voice of Praise and Thanksgivings the great Favor of God toward
them: And at the same Time to pray with all Earnestness that God would still
deliver his People from the Calamities they were yet under, or might expect to
meet with in their Journey to, and after their Arrival in their own Land. And
what the Lord said unto them in the Words of the Text, he speaks unto us, and
all the People of this Province; teaching us to observe this Day of public
Thanksgiving as a Day of solemn Prayer also: -- That while we sing for
Gladness, and shout forth the Honor of God's Name, publishing with the Voice
of Thanksgiving the Salvation, he has showed our Nation and the People of this
Land, in the Course of the Year past, and praise him therefore, we likewise make
this fervent Prayer unto him, O Lord, save thy People.

GOD's Dispensations toward his People, and Mankind in general, to which we
should accommodate our Devotions, are mixed of Mercies, and Judgments. In the
Administrations of his moral Government He dispenses both, in such Measure and
Manner, as his Wisdom directs his Justice and Goodness. The Condition of a
People in this World is not at any Time altogether prosperous, nor quite
desperate. Their State is usually such as is elegantly described by the
Prophet, Zech. 14.6.7. It shall come to pass in that Day, that the Light shall
not be clear nor dark. But it shall be one Day, which shall be known to the
Lord, not Day nor Night: But it shall come to pass, that at Evening-time it
shall be Light. Throughout the Day of Man's Life on Earth, the Light is neither
clear nor dark -- it is neither Day nor Night with him: -- understanding by
Light and Darkness, by Day and Night, Good and Evil. This is true of a People,
during their continuance as such. Their Condition here is never perfectly and
purely good, nor so thoroughly bad, as to be void of all Comfort. In Heaven the
Light is clear, without any Darkness at all: In Hell there is the blackness of
Darkness for ever. In Heaven it is all Day, there is no Night there; but
nothing else in the Dungeon of Hell. But Light and Darkness, Good and Evil,
Peace and Trouble, which are perfect and separate in the other World, are, in a
lesser Degree of them blended in this. In this World there is a Day of
Prosperity, and a Night of Adversity; and yet neither Day, nor Night: -- Not a
Day without the Evil of it, nor a Night of unallayed Affliction. Sometimes the
Light may prevail above the Darkness, but does not wholly dispel it; sometimes
the Darkness prevails above the Light, but does not wholly exclude it. The
brightest Day of Prosperity is not without Clouds, nor the darkest Night of
Adversity without Gleams of Consolation. Good and Evil, as to the Degrees of
them, succeed each other; and they are curiously interwoven into one Web, by
the Art of divine Providence. So God tempereth his Dispensations, intermingles
Comforts and Crosses, and the Work of his Providence is chequered.

To convince all, that verily he is a God that judges in the Earth, and engage
our dutiful Regards to him, as the great, the wise, the just, and good Governor
of the World, the Lord uses a Variety and Mixture of Dispensations toward Men
in their present probationary State. In no other imaginable Way of dealing with
such Creatures as we are, could there have been so suitable a Display of his
glorious Perfections, to excite our due Acknowledgment of him in this high
Relation he sustaineth to us. If there were only Afflictions to be met with in
this World, Sinners would have no Knowledge of the Goodness of God from his
Providence, nor Invitations therefrom to Repentance. But he is the Lord that
exercises Loving kindness in the Earth, and shows his Bounty to his
offending Creatures, that they might be induced to remember and return to him
He makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the
Just and on the Unjust. He leaves not himself without Witness to any, in that
he gives Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling their Hearts with
Food and Gladness. All the Gifts of God's common Bounty, which are
promiscuously scattered abroad on every side, are so many Witnesses sent to
attest the divine Care and Goodness, which leads Men to Repentance. And were
it not for the Judgments God executes in the Earth, the Righteousness of his
moral Government would not appear, and no ill Consequence of persisting
impenitent in Wickedness would be dreaded by Men. Ps. 55.19. God shall both
hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old: Because they have no
Changes, therefore they fear not God. Uninterrupted Prosperity would banish all
fear of God out of the World. God makes himself known, as infinitely worthy of
our highest Regards, by the Mercies and Judgments he dispenses, according to
his own Declaration, in Isai. 45.6.7. That they may know from the rising of the
Sun, and from the West, that there is none besides me, I am the Lord, and there
is none else: I form the Light, and create Darkness: I make Peace, and create
Evil: I the Lord do all these Things.

To prevent the Excesses which People are apt to run into in both States,
prosperous and adverse, the Dispensations of Providence are mixed of Mercies
and Judgments: That we might not surfeit on Prosperity, nor despond in
Adversity, -- wax wanton, nor become desperate. Did Men always enjoy a
flourishing Prosperity, would they not be corrupted, and destroyed thereby?
Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked: -- then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Did they meet with nothing but Disappointment and Trouble, would they not be
swallowed up of Sorrow? I had fainted, says the Psalmist, unless I had
believed to see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. A Mixture
therefore of providential Dispensations is necessary to prevent Men's being
ruined by uninterrupted Prosperity, or overwhelmed with perpetual Adversty: And
to teach them Moderation in all things; to weep, as though they wept not; and to
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and to use this World, as not abusing it,
since the Fashion of it passes away. Cor. 7.30, 31.
God wisely dispenses Good and Evil to Men, that they might not in their
Prosperity say, their Mountain stands strong, and they shall never be moved,
but rejoice with trembling: Nor in their Adversity say, they shall never be
delivered, but hope still in God. The most prosperous Condition here is
deficient in some Conveniences, and blended with some Troubles, that Men might
not be excessive in their Rejoicings: And the most adverse Condition has
somewhat of Good in it, to compensate for its Evils, and Hope lies at the
bottom of it, that they should not be immoderate in their Griefs. Some Evil
there always is in our State on Earth, to show that we are not past Danger: and
some Good, to show that we are not shut out from all Hope. As a wise Pilot
takes in so much Burden, as will ballast the Ship, and not sink it: So in the
midst of the Favors with which we are encompassed in this World, God lays
such a Burden of Affliction upon us, as might serve to keep us steady, when
the Wind of Temptation fills the Sails. The Scales of Providence are even,
and God weighs out Good and Evil in due Proportion; puts that into one
Condition, which may reduce it to some Balance with another. He so allayeth
the Sweetness of Prosperity, and the Bitterness of Adversity, that we might
preserve an equal Temper of Mind in both, and not be puffed up with one, nor
cast down by the other.

THE Dispensations of Providence being for wise and good Reasons mixed of
Mercies and Judgments, our thankful Praises should be accompained with our
fervant Prayers. When we sing for Gladness, and shout for Joy, publishing God's
Mercies and praising him for them, we should say, O Lord, we beseech thee, save
thy People. Our devotional Addresses to God should be conformable to his
Dispensations toward us. We have this Direction given us for them in
Scripture, Phil 4.6. In every Thing by Prayer and Supplication, with
Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known unto God. -- In every Thing that
occurs, in every Condition, and on every proper Occasion, let Prayer be mingled
with Thanksgiving, -- offer your Petitions with your Thanks to Almighty God. So
in 1. These. 5.16. Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing. In every thing give
Thanks: For this is the Will of God concerning you in Christ Jesus. It is his
Will declared in the Gospel, that Christians should be always rejoicing,
praying, and giving of Thanks, whatever their Circumstances may be -- never to
cease praying, nor in any thing to omit Thanksgiving. These Duties may be well
performed together without Interference, or justling one another: There is
always room and occasion for both.

1. THERE is always Room and Occasion for Praise and Thanksgiving, even in
Circumstances of greatest Affliction and Distress. We are never encompassed
with such Troubles and Sorrows in this Life, as not to have greater Cause of
Thankfulness, than Complaint. We should consider what Proportion there is
between the Mercies and Judgments dispensed to us in the Administrations of
Providence, and not be discomposed, and put out of tune by the latter for
singing with Gladness, and praising God for the former. We are too apt to pore
only on the Afflictions we suffer, and to overlook the Blessings we enjoy. It
is our Weakness, and Sin, that a small Inconvenience attending us, hinders us
from rejoicing in, and praising God for many and great Comforts. One dead Fly
causes all our Ointment to stink. One disagreeable Circumstance of our worldly
State, marreth the grateful Relish of the whole. So long as there was one Man
at Court, who would not cringe to him, all Haman's Honors, Riches, royal
Feasts, and the like Accommodations, availed Him nothing. (...). 5.13.
The Possession of a Kingdom would not keep Ahab from being heavy and
displeased, when he could not get a small Vineyard he coveted. 1. King's 21.4.
The imaginary want of that pinched him in all his Affluence of Wealth, and
took away his Stomach, so that he might have starved in the midst of his royal
Dainties. Had we a due Consideration of the innumerable and inestimable
Benefits God has done unto us, we should in any Afflictions we suffer be
disposed to say as Job did in his, shall we receive Good at the Hand of the
Lord? and shall we not receive Evil also? Do we not receive more good than evil
Things in this Life? The least of the former is more; the greatest of the
latter is less than we deserve. Are our Afflictions worthy to be compared with
our Mercies? Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of
his Sins? A Man still among the living, and conscious that his Lot might justly
be among the dead, should praise the God of his Life. He enjoys the most
desirable thing in this World, and for the sake of which, had he every other,
he would part therewith. He should therefore resolve as David, While I live,
will I praise the Lord: I will sing Praises unto my God while I have any being.
Whatever our Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions be, we are, in Comparison of what
is due to us, very favorably dealt with. Should a Creditor exact but a small
part of our Debt to him, should we not be much pleased, and ready to thank him?
And why should we not be so with respect to God, dealing thus graciously with
us? He might justly deprive us of all good Things: Strip us of all our
Comforts, and separate us to all evil, and only evil: It is plainly therefore
our Duty to be thankful in any Condition on this side the Grave and Hell. We
must acknowledge with the afflicted Church, It is of the Lord's Mercies that we
are not consumed, -- they are new every Morning: Great is thy faithfulness Lam.
3.22, 23.
Even in Judgment inflicted on us, who might have it without Mercy, there may
be more Mercy in it than Judgment: In which Sense that is true which the
Apostle says, Mercy rejoiceth against Judgment, -- Jam. 2.13.
boasts itself -- triumphs over it. God, as the Sun (says one) when he seems
most to infest and scorch us, does even then dispense useful and salutary
Influences upon us. There is not indeed any thing in Nature so venomous, but
that from it by Art and Industry may be extracted some what medicinal and of
salutary use, when duly applied. In most apparent Evils lies enclosed much
Good, which if we carefully separate, we may find Benefit and taste Comfort
from. There is nothing so thoroughly bad, as being well ordered and improved,
will not yield us more good. It is good for me, says David, that I have been
afflicted. There is nothing commonly more necessary, more wholesome, and
beneficial to Men than Adversity. Affliction is the School of Wisdom, in which
we learn God's Statutes. It is the Furnace of the Soul, in which it is tried
and refined. It is the Means of reclaiming them from Sin, and improving them in
Grace, and preparing them unto Glory. Why then should they be dumb to God's
Praises in it, bear it with sullen Silence, or break forth into Words of
Impatience under it? They have reason to sing of the Wisdom, the Goodness, and
Faithfulness of God, in his chastising them: Not only to be contented with, but
thankful for the Troubles, Disasters, and Disappointments they meet with in an
evil World, as they prove on many Accounts advantageous to them. We should
return Thanks to God, not for our Food only, but also for our Physic, which,
though distasteful to our Palate, is profitable to our Health. Whatever proceeds
from good Intention, and tends to a happy End, -- is designed, and
effectually conduces to our good, is a fit Subject of Thanksgiving. If we
consult Experience, we shall find, that, as many have cause to mourn that they
have enjoyed so much Prosperity, and received their Consolation here; so many
have cause to rejoice that they have suffered Adversity, and tasted so deep of
the bitter Cup. Periissem, risi Periissem.


2. THERE is likewise Room and Occasion for Prayer and Supplication even in
Circumstances of greatest Prosperity and Peace. In such the Lord's People
should beseech him to save them -- to deliver them from the Evil still
incumbent, or to which they are exposed -- to lengthen out their Tranquillity --
to complete and perfect their Salvation. With their thankful Acknowledgments of
Mercies received, they are to make their humble Addresses to the Throne of
Grace for all which they farther need. If we sincerely praise God for any
Tokens of his Favor which he shows us, we shall be so affected with the
Tokens of his Anger which there still may be, as earnestly to desire the
removal of them. And if we are truly thankful for his Blessings, we cannot but
be desirous of their Continuance and Increase. We may seem highly gratified
with some Instances of God's Bounty to us, greatly pleased with the Smiles of
his Providence in some Respects, and yet our rejoicing in them, and praising
God for them may arise from carnal Self-love; or because Provision, we may
vainly imagine, is made for our Lusts, and we are Heaven's Favorites, who are
so bountifully dealt with; if we, at the same Time, take no Notice of the Marks
of God's Displeasure upon us in other Respects, causing us to rejoice with
trembling, and in our praising God to pray unto him for his Salvation.

THE Memory of past Benefits, and Sense of present, which there is in
Thanksgiving, confirms our Faith, and nourishes our Hope of future. The Mercies
of God are to be thankfully received and entertained by us, as Pledges of his
Love, and so Encouragements to trust in him, and seek unto him for all we
farther need. And a truly grateful Sense of Benefits done unto us, is the best
Preparation of the Heart to ask for more. It is the Disposition to which our
divine Benefactor has special Regard, in the Bestowment of them. He is ready
to give, wherever he sees a Disposition worthily to entertain his Blessings:
So that the most thankful Receiver of them, is the most successful Petitioner
for them. When therefore we are most sensible of our great Benefactor's
Goodness in those Effects of it which we with Hearts glowing with Gratitude
acknowledge; our ardent Petitions breathed out to him with our thankful Praises
will (we may hope) be accepted and granted by him. Fervent Prayer, mingled with
Thanksgiving, avails much. If we thus make known our Requests to God, he will
be so far from stinting his Hand to us, that he will rejoice over us to do us
good, and be as ready and as highly pleased to multiply his Benefits upon us,
as we can be to ask and receive them.

IN every thing that we give Thanks, there is need of Prayer also, that it may
be to us Matter of Thanksgiving: -- that it may prove advantageous unto us,
that our Blessings may not be cursed, nor our Afflictions be unsanctified to
us; but that all Things of different Qualities mixed and dispensed by the
skilful Hand of Providence, may, either in their present and immediate, or in
their future and more remote Consequences, work together for our good.

THERE being always Room and Occasion in all Conditions and Circumstances for
Thanksgiving and Prayer, these are Duties which should always accompany one
another.

MY BRETHREN,

WE see the Expedience and Propriety of appointing this Day to be observed as a
Day of public Thanksgiving throughout this Province: and that the Purpoposes of
a public Fast, (which some may think would have been more seasonable) may be
answered thereby, if the People, as they are exhorted, accompany their devout
Praises for the many great and undeserved public Mercies, which amidst the
various Tokens of his Displeasure, God has bestowed on us, with their fervent
Prayers to him, that those Judgments which we labor under may be removed --
that those we have reason to fear may be averted -- and that we may be prepared
suitably to receive every Token of Divine Favor which it may please a merciful
God to bestow upon us. The religious Service of the Day being in the
Magistrates Order for it so clearly pointed out to us, the Minister should
direct and urge the sincere Performance of it. -- Suffer we therefore this Word
of Exhortation, sing for gladness, -- publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord,
save thy People. Let us offer our united Praises for the Favors conferred upon
us in the Course of the Year past, which has not indeed been withouts it is
Troubles, and such as have been complained of as the greatest ever met with in
the Country. We have yet Cause to celebrate our annual solemn Feast, and
rejoice before the Lord. An Expression in the Prophets occurs to my Thoughts;
Offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving with Leaven. Am. 4.5.
Leaven was forbidden in other Sacrifices, Lev. 2.11.
but required in this of Thanksgiving, C. 7. V. 13.
to teach us (says Ainsworth) to temper our Joy with Sorrow and Affliction in
this Life. Our Joy on this Day of the Gladness of our Hearts, should be
tempered, but not stifled, with a sorrowful Sense of the Affliction which the
Province is in. Notwithstanding which, there are many and great public Mercies,
which call for our thankful Acknowledgments. Particularly, the Peace which we
have in the Peace of our Nation with foreign Enemies, by His Majesty's Care
preserved to all his Dominions. It is for a Lamentation, that we have been no
more at peace among ourselves. Pray we for the Peace of Jerusalem. -- The
general Health we have been and still are favored with, demands our public
Thanks; and we shall heartily render the same to God, unless the Commonness and
Continuance of so great a Blessing has abated and enervated our Gratitude. We
have not been visited this Year with infectious, or any epedemical Diseases,
which have sometimes carried People away as with a Flood: Though some (alas!)
have been driven from Light into Darkness, and chased out of the World, by the
Violence of stormy Winds, and of human Hands. While our Souls bless the Lord,
who heals our Diseases, and redeemeth our Lives from Destruction, who
stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of their Waves, and the Tumult of the
People; let us pray, that the People may be forgiven all their Iniquity, and so
the Inhabitants of this Land may not say, we are sick: nor have Occasion, or
Color, of Complaint, that their Blood is shed like Water -- poured forth
without Pity or Remorse -- too often the sad Consequence of intestine Jars and
Quarrels. Let us beseech the Lord, who rules the raging of the Sea, to
restrain the Wrath of Men, which is cruel when it breaks out in mobbish Fury,
or military Resentment.

THERE is the Joy of a plentiful Harvest, in which we are to sing with
Gladness, and shout forth the Praises of Him that has given us fruitful
Seasons, and crowned the Year with his Goodness so that we have all Things
necessary and convenient for Life and Godliness still given us richly to enjoy,
though so much of the worldly Substance of many, especially in this and other
maritime Towns, has been destroyed by the raging Tempest, and swelling Tide.
By whatever Means our Estates have been dimished, or our thriving in them
obstructed, -- whether by impoverishing Events of divine Providence, or
oppressive Measures of human Government, or our own Imprudence, yet the good
Increase of our Land (free from Parliamentary Taxation) certainly calls for the
Observation of this anniversary Solemnity. In which, while we with Hearts full
of Food and Gladness give Thanks to the Author of our Plenty, let us take heed,
and pray, that our Table may not become a Snare before us, and what is designed
for our Welfare be a Trap -- that we may not abuse the good Things our great
Benefactor with so liberal a Hand bestowed on us, to Intemperance and
Sensuality, Irreligion and Forgetfulness of God. Let not the Feast of
In-gathering be made by any of us the Season, nor prove to any the Occasion of
riotous Excess, and sinful Extravagance. May the Lord save his People in this
Land from such Gluttony and Drunkenness, and voluptuous Living, as he charged
his People Israel with in their affluent Circumstances, and, which was an
Aggravation of their Sins, they most indulged themselves in on the solemn
Feast-days appointed and set apart on purpose religiously to commemorate the
Blessings and Benefits they had received from God, and to return him due Thanks
therefore. "Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow
strong Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame them. And the Harp
and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts, but they
regard not the Works of the Lord, nor consider the Operation of his Hands,"
Isa. 5.11, 12.
-- i. e. the Works of God in Memory of which those Feasts were kept. Their
only Care and Thought was to feed and pamper their Lusts with the Produce of a
fruitful Land, and not to bless God who gave it them for an Inheritance, and
therefore he cut them short as he threatened, -- Yea, ten Acres of Vineyard
shall yield one Bath, and the Seed of an Omer shall yield an Ephah, V. 10.
-- the Harvest should produce but the tenth part of the Seed.

OF the enumerated public Mercies which we are called upon this Day thankfully
to acknowledge, there is none, perhaps, to which People find their Hearts so
indisposed, as that of the Administration of civil Government; which has been
loudly complained of in our Mother Country, and in this. And it might only
increase the Clamours of some at it, to exhort them to sing with Gladness for
it, and to bless God with those Tongues that have been used to curse Men, made
after his Image. I don't suspect there are any such among my Hearers; and may
therefore safely put them in Mind of Paul's Exhortation to Christians, under
greater Oppression from bad Rulers, than we suffer at this Day; that
Thanksgivings, as well as Prayers, be made for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority. 1 Timothy 1.1, 2
Magistrates are the Ministers of God to us for good, and when they faithfully
discharge their Office, and answer the End of their Institution, they are to be
reckoned among the greatest Blessings of God to the World. With all their
superior Abilities and Advantages to promote the common Wealth, they have the
natural Infirmities of other Men, and far beyond other Men are subject to
Temptations, which too often mislead them into pernicious Courses of
Administration, and they do the People much hurt. And when the Wicked bear
Rule, the People mourn. -- And if it should admit of a doubt, whether Mankind
receive Good from civil Government, sufficient to make amends for the Evil they
suffer, through the Mistakes, Follies, and Tyrannies of those who manage it;
yet they must be worse Rulers than are known in Old England, or New, from whose
Administration People do not receive more Benefits, than they suffer Mischiefs:
And they should accept the former with Thankfulness to God, while they groan
under, and in lawful Ways seek Deliverance from the latter. What the Proportion
between these has been in the late difficult Times, among us, I Am not about to
compute: Would only observe to you, that the religious Privileges, for the Sake
of which principally, our pious Ancestors came into this Land, are hitherto
enjoyed by us: and it is not pretended to be more than the Beginning of
Encroachment on our civil Rights, that has so justly alarmed our Fears of
losing them all. By the Blessing of God on the Government over us, we continue
as yet possessed of the most valuable Liberties and Privileges belonging to
Englishmen, and Christians, and do lead our Lives so comfortably as we do. We
have still Rulers that will not oppress us themselves, nor, if they can prevent
it, suffer others to oppress us. -- Those exercising Authority over us, whom we
may justly call Benefactors; and for whom we owe our Thanks to him whose
Ministers they are to us for Good.

IF the late Disturbance of the public Peace, is to be imputed wholly to
oppressive Acts of Government, (which are apt to make a wise People mad,) yet
this with all it is bad Consequences is to be regarded as a sore Judgment of God
upon us; and the Joy of this Day be mixed with Sorrow on account of it. By
leaving us to fall into ruinous Contention among ourselves -- into a most
unquiet State, in which Men's Minds have been extremely discomposed, and
exasperated; their Mouths filled with evil Speeches, bitter Invectives, and
horrid Execrations; and their Hands stretched out in base injurious Deeds of
Violence -- the public Counsels have been divided -- friendly and profitable
Commerce interrupted, -- Tumults raised -- Outrages committed -- Blood shed, a
righteous God has punished us for our Iniquities. His holy Anger has been
testified against us in all our Troubles, whoever were the most active, faulty
Instruments of them. Let us therefore, in the exercise of godly Sorrow, which
is consistent with spiritual Rejoicing, beseech the Lord to save his People out
of so sinful and calamitous a State. Let us hope continually in God, pray to
him without ceasing, and praise him more and more. If we are truly thankful for
any Tokens of the divine Favor toward us in the Administrations of
Government, our fervent Prayers accompanying our devout Praises to the great
Governor of the World, who has the Hearts of all Kings and Rulers in his Hand,
may avail to procure his Blessing on the public Counsels, so as that they shall
be directed to such Measures as shall promote our lasting Welfare and
Tranquillity. We must not expect the Perfection of Happiness under the best
human Management of our public Affairs, and that all things will proceed
according to our Minds. Nor must we faint, and be discouraged, though our
Grievances be not all at once redressed. For the Exercise of our Faith and
Patience Things may remain still in doubtful uncertainty, and we not be able to
say whether they tend to Ruin, or Establishment. The late Time of Trouble and
Distress in the Land, has been spoken of as the darkest Day that ever passed
over us. Be it so, yet who knows but that the present is the Evening Time of
such a Day, when God has said it shall be light? Let us rejoice in Hope, and
pray in Faith, that we, and our Children to the latest Posterity, may enjoy
such Peace, Freedom, and Felicity in the Land which our Fathers have left us
for an Inheritance, as God promised to give his oppressed People, the Remnant
of Israel, in their Restoration to their former happy State, for which they
were to sing with Gladness, and shout among the Nations, to publish, praise,
and pray, as in the Text. Jer. 30.18. -- Thus says the Lord, I will bring
again the Captivity of Jacob's Tents, and have Mercy on his Dwelling Places,
and the City shall be built on her own Heap, and the Palace shall remain after
the Manner thereof. And out of them shall proceed Thanksgiving, and the Voice
of them that make merry: And I will multiply them, and they shall not be few; I
will also glorify them, and they shall not be small. Their Children also shall
be as aforetime, and their Congregation shall be established before me, and I
will punish all that oppress them. And their Nobles shall be of themselves, and
their GOVERNOR shall proceed from the midst of them.

AMEN.

