Dr. Eliot's SERMON At the Annual DUDLEIAN-LECTURE. May 8. 1771.

A DISCOURSE ON NATURAL RELIGION DELIVERED IN THE Chapel of HARVARD COLLEGE IN
CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND May 8.1771. AT THE LECTURE FOUNDED By the Hon. PAUL
DUDLEY, Esquire By ANDREW ELIOT, D.D.

BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND, for NICHOLAS Bows in Cornhill.
M,DCC,LXXI,

ACTS XVII. 27. That they should seek the LORD, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him.


BEFORE we can undertake to determine the proper use and improvement of the
principles of Natural Religion, we must know what Natural Religion is, and what
those principles are, which we are to use and improve.

It was justly observed by one Mr. GAY
who has gone before me on this subject, that "the belief of God's existence
is most essentially fundamental to all religion." -- If we could suppose an
intelligent creature to do every thing that we call right, and to forbear what
we call evil; yet, if he did not act from a sense of the Being and Perfections
of God, we should not pronounce this religion, whatever else we might call it.

It is the opinion of many great and good men, that there is an essential and
immutable difference between moral good and evil; and that this difference
arises from the very nature of things, so as to be entirely independent on the
will of God. I shall not determine whether these sentiments are true or false
but allowing that they are true, and that some superior minds are influenced by
this abstract and unalterable fitness of things to act agreeable to it, without
any other consideration; we may call them wise and virtuous; but if there is no
regard to a Deity, they cannot be denominated religious, because a respect to a
Deity is necessarily implied in the very notion of Religion -- If there is no
God, there is, there can be no Religion -- The sacred writings lay this down as
a fundamental principle, "He that comes to God must believe that He is" --
This is the foundation of all Religion both Natural and Revealed.

THE first thing therefore in discoursing on Natural Religion is to establish
this great, this fundamental, this essential truth -- That there is a God.

ALLOWING the Being and Perfections of God, we are next to prove that there is
such a thing as Religion.

IN the last place we shall show in what respects this Religion may be called
Natural or the Religion of Nature.

THE first thing before us is, to prove the Being of a God, or that there is a
Deity of infinite perfection -- I shall not take up much of your time upon this
head, as I am not able to offer any arguments, but such as will easily occur to
your minds without any help of mine.

"The high priori road" is, I fear, too intricate for men of common
understanding, either when they attempt to find it out themselves, or to travel
in it when discovered by others -- These exalted reasonings become men of such
prodigious reach of thought as the late Dr. Clark, but even with the help of
this clear and consummate Reasoner, the most are rather puzzled and confounded,
than enlightened and established by such abstract speculations -- "The argument
a posteriori", says that very great man, "is indeed by far the most generally
useful argument, most easy to be understood, and in some degree suited to all
capacities".

THAT every Effect must have some cause is as plain and undeniable a truth as
any axiom in Euclid. That the whole sensible universe is an Effect, we have all
the evidence that the nature of the thing will admit. If it is not the effect
of some cause, it must exist from Eternity: Now, says Dr. Clark, "whatever
exists from Eternity and without any external cause, is self-existent: Whatever
is self-existent, must exist necessarily, by an absolute necessity in the
nature of the thing itself. It follows evidently, that unless the material
world exists necessarily, by an absolute necessity in its own nature, so as
that it must be an express contradiction to suppose it not to exist; it cannot
be independent, and of itself eternal. Now that the material world does not
exist thus necessarily, is very evident. For absolute necessity of existing,
and a possibility of not existing, being contradictory ideas; it is manifest
the material world cannot exist necessarily, if without a contradiction we can
conceive it either not to be, or to be in any respect, otherwise than it now
is. Than which, nothing is more easy. Every thing in it, both the whole and
every one of its parts, their situation and motion, the form and also the
matter, are the most arbitrary and dependent things, and farthest removed from
necessity, that can possibly be imagined". We rationally conclude therefore
that the universe is the effect of some powerful cause.

THE structure and constitution of the world, the accurate adjustment of its
various parts, and the uses and ends to which they are mutually adapted, prove
this cause to be intelligent, wise and good.

THE two first of these attributes, I conclude, will readily be allowed.
Possibly some may dispute, whether the Goodness of God can be justly argued
from the state of things in this world, where there is such a mixture of
sorrow, distress and misery. But there is certainly a large share of good
communicated, enough to preponderate the evil there is in the universe, so far
as it is known to us, and even if we leave out all consideration of a future
state. The most enjoy a great degree of comfort, and would enjoy much more,
were it not for their own irregular passions, and the faults and follies which
are the consequence of them. As bad as things are, there are very few, who are
reduced to such a state of extreme misery, as to be willing to exchange it for
a state of nonexistence, if this were in their power. Who then can reasonably
dispute the goodness of God? especially when we consider, that so great and
wise a Being as God is, has without doubt a large and extensive plan; and
possibly, at the winding up of the drama, those things which are at present
dark, may have a quite contrary aspect.

IT would not be difficult to prove the other moral perfections of the Deity,
by arguments fetched from those we have mentioned; or perhaps, though we are
obliged to think and speak of them as distinct attributes in God, there is but
one principle of action in him; all may be reduced to boundless intelligence or
wisdom; or, as Mr. Wollaston calls it, "Divine Reason, which, as it exerts
itself upon this or that occasion, is by us variously denominated" Justice,
Mercy, Truth, or whatever else goes to constitute moral perfection, or perfect
moral conduct. An infinitely pure Being must always propose to himself the best
end in acting, and must know what are the best means to accomplish that end; He
can have no temptation to act contrary to what his wisdom dictates; He cannot
be under any undue influence, either from prejudice within, or deceit without;
and if this allwise Being is also infinite in power, He must be an object of
the highest confidence, or the greatest fear; according as we have reason to
think, He is our friend or our enemy; engaged to promote our happiness, or
determined to make us miserable.

To say that God has exerted his power or his wisdom, ad ultimum posse, so that
He can proceed no farther, is to say a great deal too much: But we may with
reason assert, that he has discovered infinite wisdom and infinite power; or in
other words, that none but a Being possessed of these perfections in the
highest possible degree could have created this stupendous universe. "The
arrangement necessary, for the production of the smallest plant, requires in
the cause a degree of power, intelligence and wisdom, which infinitely
transcends the sublimest exertions of human ability. What then shall we say of
the choose that produces an animal, a rational soul, a world, a system of
worlds, an universe? shall we say, that infinite power and wisdom are not
necessary attributes, of that universal cause, though they be necessary
attributes of the cause that preduces a plant"? Professor Beattie's essay on
thenature and immutability of truth in opposition to for histry and skepticism.


THAT we do not discern more wisdom, power and goodness in the works of God, is
not owing to any defect in them, but in us. The more we study and know of them,
the more do we see of these perfections in their production. This is true not
only of men whose capacities are weak, and who have but small advantages to
search out the works of God, it is equally true of men of the most sublime
genius, who have the best opportunities to look into nature and to inquire
after truth. The effect of their inquiries is, a deeper sense of their own
ignorance, and a more exalted thought of the Divine Excellence. This would be
the case, if we should contemplate the works of God through numberless ages,
even to eternity. The reason we do not discern Infinite Perfection in the works
of God, is, because we cannot comprehend Infinity. The Apostle speaking of the
heathen says, 1 Romans 20.
"The invisible things of God from," or ever since, "the creation of the world,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and godhead, so that they are without excuse". His eternal power
and godhead are understood by the things that are made, so far as they are
understood; men are capable of understanding, of forming right conceptions of
the nature and perfections of God from the things which He has made, if they
duly consider and attend to them. But though we might form right conceptions of
Him by an attentive consideration of his works, yet this great and glorious
being can never be comprehended by a finite mind.

THE evidence of the Being and Perfections of God from his works, is not only
conclusive, but clear and level to the meanest capacity. It strikes the mind
with conviction, almost as soon as it is proposed. The rudest barbarian, is no
sooner put upon thinking and reflecting, than he feels the absurdity of
supposing, that he himself and evey thing around him, were produced by chance,
that is by nothing, a mere nonentity, that they were effects without a cause.
He assents to the existence of some powerful and designing mind, who made and
preserves all things; and the more he looks into himself, contemplates the
curious workmanship of his body, the nature of the human soul, and the
surprising union which subsists between these two very different substances, so
much the more satisfied he is that the conclusion is just. While he looks
abroad and surveys the universe, wonders of wisdom and power multiply upon him,
and his faith continually gathers strength. Evident marks of these Divine
Perfections are to be seen in the adjustment of those vast heavenly bodies,
which present themselves to the wondering sight. With what exact order, harmony
and beauty do they perform their several revolutions, and discharge their
appointed functions! Or if we only traverse the globe on which we dwell, and
observe, how it is variegated with hills, valleys, plains, rivers, seas, which
all have their particular use; the tribes of different animals with which it is
stocked; the surprising variety of trees, plants, and vegetables with which
every part abounds, new scenes perpetually opening to the enquiring mind, it is
impossible to doubt, the couclusion is irresistible, that there is One, and
only One, great and adequate cause of all, and that this cause is God. There
needs only common sense and understanding to make this deduction -- But there
is this peculiar advantage attending this argument, that the more closely we
examine the constitution of the universe, and the greater discoveries we make
of the works and laws of nature, the reasoning from them grows stronger and
approaches nearer to demonstration -- A sure evidence that it is founded in
truth.

THE Being and Perfections of God being once established, it is not hard to
prove that there is such a thing as Religion -- when I say there is such a
thing as Religion, I intend, that there are duties incumbent on man toward the
Deity, which God has a right to require of us, and which we are under
obligations to perform. I observed in the beginning of the discourse, that the
very notion of Religion implies a regard to God: If we should allow that moral
good and evil do not depend on the will of God, yet there is nothing of
religion in the best action, unless we have respect to God in doing it, unless
we do it because it is conformable to his will. God is a Being of infinite
excellency, the fountain of understanding and wisdom; all creatures, received
their being from Him, and depend constantly upon Him; they derive from his
goodness all the benefits of which they partake, and it is He only that can
supply their wants, or satisfy their desires. On these accounts He has an
absolute right of government, and it is the duty of the whole intelligent world
to obey, serve and honor Him.

GOD, having given us our respective capacities, and placed us in such
particular circumstances and relations, has hereby intimated to us, that it is
his will we should act agreably to them. A wise and good Being would not have
conferred these capacities, and constituted these relations, without some wise
and good design; and what design could He have, but to point out to them that
method of conduct, which would be proper for them, and agreeable to Him? And
what makes it quite evident, that this was his design, is, that while we act
agreably to the circumstances in which He has placed us, we promote our own
felicity, whereas a contrary conduct tends to bring misery on our selves, and
to introduce disorder into the world. This therefore is the constitution of
nature, or rather of the God of nature, from whence arises fitness and
obligation.

IT is fit and right that we should act in conformity to the will of an all
perfect Being, whose will is rectitude itself, and who requires nothing of us,
but what tends to make us like himself, who is the standard of excellence. And
to act otherwise is wrong.

IF it be asked; what is it that makes this conformity a duty? may we not as
well enquire why two and two make four? why one quantity is greater than
another? The understanding determines both. If men are skeptical in these
points, arguments will not cure them. A long series of reasoning will not make
it clearer, after all, the mind is no more satisfied, and we are obliged often
to return to the point from whence we first set out. Right in this case is a
kind of simple perception. Reason and conscience dictate that God is to be
obeyed -- We feel their authority. To renounce it is to offer violence to our
understanding -- "Right implies duty in its idea. To perceive that an action is
right, is to see a reason for doing it. Now, this perception, this acknowledged
rectitude in the action, is the very essence of obligation; that which commands
the approbation and choice, and binds the conscience of every rational being".
A creature to whom his Creator has granted the powers of reason and reflection,
if he does not improve these powers, or act agreably to the dictates of reason,
does not act as the being he is; he rebels against his Sovereign and Lord, and
does what he can, to defeat the design of Heaven in bringing him into existence.

THERE are a variety of ways in which God may make known his will to us;
whatever way He chooses, the obligation is the same, it is our duty to act in
conformity to it. He who made us and conferred so many benefits upon us, has
an unlimited right to our homage and obedience; as it is quite certain, that a
Being of such absolute rectitude can never require any thing, which is not
agreeable to his own perfect nature, or in other words, which is not right and
fit.

IT cannot be indifferent to this All-perfect Mind, whether his creatures act
agreably to his will or not. "The righteous Lord loves righteousness". The
same rectitude, which influences his will and directs his requirements from his
creatures, necessarily causes Him to be pleased when they do right, and
displeased when they do wrong. And being possessed of uncontrolable power, it
is reasonable to conclude, that He will evidence his approbation and dislike,
by rewarding those who do his will, and punishing those who do it not. This is
what we call his moral government, which is his rendering to men according to
their actions, whether they be good or evil. Something of this we see in this
life, in the tendency which moral piety has to produce happiness; and in the
evils which are often consequent on our acting contrary to the nature and will
of God. It Is true, in the present state, this distinction is not uniformly and
constantly maintained, according to men's moral or religious conduct. There is
frequently a promiscuous dispensation of things, without any apparent regard to
the merit or demerit of characters. Virtue and goodness fail of their proper
genuine effect; while vice and wickedness not only escape the punishment, which
the general nature and disposition of things would lead us to expect, but seem
to triumph and prosper. From this view of things, it is a just and unavoidable
conclusion, that there will be a future state, when the perfection of God's
moral government will be displayed; all the present inequalities will be set to
rights; and He will appear to be holy, wise and good, beyond all dispute and
contradiction.

THE whole of this reasoning is founded on the supposition that man acts
freely; and upon any other supposition, it is idle to talk of moral government,
of rewards and punishments, or indeed of religion or virtue. "That", says Mr.
Wollaston, "which has not the opportunity or liberty of choosing for itself,
and acting accordingly, from an internal principle, acts, if it acts at all,
under a necessity incumbent ab extra. But that, which acts thus, is in reality
only an instrument in the hand of something which imposes the necessity; and
cannot properly be said to act, but to be acted. The act must be the act of an
agent, therefore not of his instrument. A Being under the abovementioned
inabilities is, as to the morality of its acts, in the state of inert and
passive matter, and can be but a machine; to which no language or philosophy
ever ascribed morals". "What is moral agency, and what is implied in it? This
at least must be implied in it, that we ought to do some things, and not to do
others. But if every intention and action of my life is fixed by eternal laws,
which I can neither elude nor alter, it is as absurd to say to me, you ought to
be honest to morrow, as to say, you ought to stop the nature of the planets to
morrow. Unless some events depend on my determination, ought, and ought not,
have no meaning when applied to me. Moral agency further implies, that we are
accountable for our conduct, and that if we do what we ought not to do, we
deserve blame and punishment. My conscience tells me, that I am accountable for
those actions only that are in my own power; and neither blames nor approves,
in myself and in others, that conduct which is the effect, not of choice, but
of necessity. Convince me that all my actions are equally necessary, and you
silence my conscience for ever, or at least prove it to be a fallacious and
impertinent monitor: You will then convince me that all circumspection is
unnecessary, and all remorse absurd." Professor BEATTIL's essay on truth.
The scheme of necessity in the actions of an intelligent being, or that all
our volitions, determinations and actions proceed from God, as infrustrable
effects from their proper cause, has hitherto been embraced by a very few,
except insidels, and those of the most malignant class, who have very
consistently given up the doctrine of future punishment. In this they discover
that they have more just and honorary thoughts of God, than those Christians,
who first make God the author of sin, and then represent him as inflicting
eternal punishment on men for it; for that which is originally, and in strict
construction his own act. Mr. How calls it, "a black conception of God, that
He should be supposed irresistibly to determine the will of man to the hatred
of his own most blessed self, and then to exact the severest punishments for
the offense done. "We should rather choose", says he, "to have our sight,
hearing, and motive power, or what not besides, disputed or even torn away from
us, than ever suffer ourselves to be disputed in to a belief, that the holy and
good God should irresistibly determine the wills of men to, and punish the same
thing".

IT is a conclusive argument against such a fatal necessity as some men plead
for, that it is contrary to the perceptions of the human mind, -- we have a
consciousness of liberty, we perceive no external influence, we have a moral
sense, we pass a judgment on our own actions, approve or disapprove our selves
and others. It shows the difficulty, to which a very sensible writer Essays on
the principles of morality and natural religion.
of the present day is reduced, who allows this inward perception, that we are
necessitated to think ourselves and others free; and yet denies the reality of
liberty. God has, according to him implanted a delusive sense in us, our
feeling is deceitful, the God of truth does continually by a positive influence
deceive and delude us. What strange notions have some men of that glorious
Being, all whose ways are truth, and who is righteous altogether! Is it not
better to set limits to our enquiries, and to suppose there may be a mistake in
some curious speculations, than to entertain sentiments so dishonorable to God,
and so entirely subversive of all moral government? I admire the modesty, as
well as goodness of heart, discovered by the great Mr. Lock, in one of his
Letters to Mr. Molineux, "I freely own" says he, "the weakness of my
understanding, that though it be unquestionable, that there is Omnipotence and
Omniscience in God our Maker, and I cannot have a clearer perception of any
thing, than that I am free; yet I cannot make freedom in man consistent with
Omnipotence and Omniscience in God, though I am as fully persuaded of both, as
of any truths I most firmly assent to, and therefore I have long since left off
the consideration of the question". Lock's works Vol 3. page 527.


IF some of our modern reasoners, who have not a tenth part of his
understanding, had a little more of his humility, the world would be free from
those angry disputes about fate and free will, liberty and necessity, which
puzzle the heads, but seldom mend the hearts, of those who engage in them.

I have said -- There is a God -- That there is Religion -- I am now to
consider in what sense this Religion is called Natural. And it is thus
denominated, not because men discover it in the sole exercise of their natural
faculties and powers; but because it has its foundation in the Perfections of
God, and in that constitution of nature which he has established, or which
arises from the mutual relation between God and His creature Man. God having
made us the beings we are, intelligent rational creatures, and having fixed our
particular situation, there arise certain fitnesses and obligations, which
constitute the law of our nature. This is the law of Him who is the author of
our being; to act agreeable to that, is therefore to obey God, which constitutes
it Religion. And to obey a law, which results, not from the positive will of
God, but from the nature He has given to man, is to him natural religion. This
religion is immutably the same, the law of our nature can never cease to
oblige, nor can it ever be right to act in contradiction to it. "The nature of
God is unchangeable, the original relations wherein we stand in to Him are also
unchangeable, and the duties thence resulting are still owing to Him, and ever
will be. Man must ever be bound to own his glorious perfections, to pay Him
veneration love and praise, on account of them, and to endeavor after a
resemblance to Him in his moral excellencies". Having received our being from
God, and entirely depending upon Him, we are bound to own Him as Maker,
Preserver; Lord and Ruler; to make the utmost returns of gratitude and love; to
pray to Him for what we want, to praise Him for what we enjoy; to commit
ourselves and our affairs to his disposal; to be resigned to his will, submit
to His government, and yield obedience to his commands, whenever, and however,
He is pleased to signify his mind to us. These duties arise from the necessary
relations between a Creator and a creature; between a being who is continually
conferring benefits, and one who is as constantly receiving them.

THE Religion of Nature, does not depend on the conceptions we may form of God,
or the apprehensions we have of our duty to Him. Men may have very false and
unworthy notions of a Deity, they may make many mistakes in religion, or about
the duties which God requires of them. But the mistakes they make do not alter
he nature of things. God is the same, whether we conceive aright of Him or not:
Religion is the same, whether we form just notions of it or not: The
obligations we are under to obey God are the same, whether we obey Him or not.

THE Christian Religion is contained in the book we call the Bible; it remains
the same whether men attend to it or not, whether they understand it or not,
whether they act agreably to it or not. The Bible is the standard; the rule to
which Christians are to appeal, in all differences of opinion and practice. In
like manner, the religion of nature is written in the book of nature, in the
works of God; man may read there the being and perfections of God. "The heavens
declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handy work; day unto
day utters speech; and night unto night shows knowledge; there is no speech
nor language where their voice is not heard". The truths which the heavens
declare are always the same, the religion they teach does not alter and change
according to our apprehensions and prejudices; it is quite independent of our
notions and perceptions; and remains steady and permanent, whether we attend to
it or not. Indeed, every thing in religion, which approves itself to the
unprejudiced reason of man, is undoubtedly a part of natural religion; but
there is such a thing as truth and duty, whether they are discovered to us or
not, whether our reason is exercised about them or not. This religion, which is
taught by the natural order and constitution of things, all men are capable in
some degree of knowing, of embracing and practicing. "The Gentiles which have
not the law, are a law unto themselves, which show the work of the law written
in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing or else excusing one another". 2 Romans 14, 15.
What the apostle Paul evidently intends, is, that all intelligent creatures
are subjects of law; that reason implies duty; that man has a capacity to
distinguish between good and evil; and is conscious that he is bound to
practice the one, and to avoid the other. "What is intended," says the pious
Mr. Hallyburton, "may be reduced to these two assertions, viz. That men are
born with such faculties, which cannot, after they are capable of exercising
them, but admit the obligation and binding force of some, at least, of the laws
of nature, when they are fairly offered to their thoughts. And that man is so
stated, that he cannot miss occasions of thinking of, or coming to the
knowledge of those laws of nature. The Gentiles, all of them, do by nature
those things, that is, the material part of those duties, which the law of
nature enjoins; which shows the work of the law, or some part of it, at least,
to be written in their hearts, since they do some things it enjoins: I do not
think that this writing of the law imports innate ideas, or innate actual
knowledge; neither the apostle's scope nor words oblige us to this". nor does
it imply, that the will of God in it is full extent is immediately clear and
evident to men.

ONE would imagine by the exalted terms in which some men speak of the light of
nature, that the whole system of moral truth arose spontaneously in the mind of
man, without any help at all; that he had need only to open his eyes, in order
to have a right discernment of the perfections of God, and a complete view of
all the duty we owe him.

IT is doubtful, whether the original progenitors of the human race, however
perfect in their kind they are represented, had such an entire acquaintance
with moral truth, as to need no instruction from their Maker. It is hardly
probable, that they had such exalted powers, and such a comprehensive view of
divine truth, as some have ascribed to them. There is no accounting for their
so easy defection from their original state, if we suppose this to be the case.
Perhaps we shall carry our thoughts of human nature, in it is first
constitution, as high as the scripture warrants; if we suppose, that the
understanding and other powers were adjusted to the law, under which man was
placed. He had the same passions and appetites that men have now; but being
free from all moral blemishes and defects, he was able to restrain and govern
them, and to make them conducive to the enjoyment of greater good. His reason
was sufficient, with the helps he might expect from his Creator, to direct his
moral conduct, and to raise him to that exalted happiness, which his rank in
the scale of beings qualified him for. But he was to come to the perfection of
his nature by degrees; and had he stood the trial appointed by his Maker, he
would have constantly improved, in the knowledge of God and of the divine law;
and have made continual approaches to that glorious Being, who is the standard
of perfection.

MAN is evidently at present in a state of degradation, we see only the ruins
of an excellent and noble creature. If we had no help from revelation, it would
be a rational deduction from the state in which we find ourselves, that human
nature is not in all respects the same it once was; that mankind are in a
fallen, as they certainly are in a weak and depraved state. Man is still an
intelligent creature, he is capable of thinking and reflecting, of judging of
truth and falsehood, of distinguishing between right and wrong; but the candle
of the Lord gives but a dim and feeble light. Man, through inattention and
corruption, or some other cause, if left to himself, would certainly attain to
very little knowledge of God or his duty. Reason is blinded by a thousand
passions, and we often act in direct contradiction to it. Yea, so great is the
darkness which has overspread the human mind, that we sometimes "call evil
good, and good evil".

THOSE men, who talk in such high strains of the light of nature, and who
affirm with so much confidence, that all, "even the most ignorant and
illiterate of the human race, have naturally and necessarily a clear and
intimate perception of the whole of religion and their duty", Christianity as
old as the Creation.
forget that they were once children, and by what gradual steps they arrived to
the degree of knowledge, to which they have attained, and of which they are so
ready to boast. The most acute Philosopher at his first entrance into life, had
scarce any ideas or consciousness at all. He who afterward makes the most
distinguished figure among the great and wise men of the earth, is, when born,
as much an infant in knowledge and understanding, as in stature and in speech.
He knows not the use of the various parts of his body, is incapable of
considering the objects around him, or of providing for his own necessities;
much less is he capable of contemplating the works of God, of forming any
conceptions of his Being and Perfections. Most of the knowledge he gets is by
the help of others, and from the tuition and instruction he receives in
society. Many truths, which are communicated by others, and which we see to be
quite agreeable to reason, we might never have thought of, if we had been left
wholly to our selves, and had received no assistance or instruction from
abroad. We necessarily assent to mathematical truths, when we see them
demonstrated; and yet we have not any innate knowledge of them, they do not
arise spontaneously in our minds, and only a very few have any acquaintance at
all with them.

THE great truths of Religion are founded in the reason and nature of things.
Man has natural powers capable of seeing and approving these truths; by a
diligent use and improvement of these powers, he may make great proficiency in
knowledge, not only of the things of nature, but of the things of God and
Religion. The powers of human nature have never been carried to their highest
pitch: It is very possible it may arrive to higher degrees of perfection, than
any mere man has ever attained to. But whatever men's natural powers are, or
whatever they are capable of attaining to, if they do not exercise these
powers, and have no assistance from those about them, their knowledge will be
confined within a very narrow compass. We may be ignorant of self-evident
truths, if we do not attend to them; much more may we be ignorant of the truths
of Natural Religion, if we do not exercise our minds about them. If we are of
our selves capable of discovering these truths in their full extent, a point
not so clear as some think it, they must be discovered, not by intuition, but
by close application and a course of reasoning. Men are bound, by diligent
study and enquiry, to endeavor to know what God requires of them, and to
practice the whole of their duty. They ought also to improve all those
assistances and helps which are afforded them. A neglect, which proceeds from
voluntary ignorance, is as really a crime, as if we had known our Lord's will
and did it not.

BUT whatever powers man is possessed of, and how agreeable soever the truths of
religion are to pure and unprejudiced reason, it is impossible to determine,
how much or how little acquaintance man would have had with moral truths, by
his own natural light, without instruction. Certainly many of the heathen lost
some which we esteem among the first principles of Religion. "They changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and
to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things". 1 Romans 23.


IT is by no means fair to conclude, that man would, by the mere strength of
reason, have investigated all that we can now prove to be rational. Nor does it
follow, because we are capable of finding out a truth, that therefore we should
certainly have found it out. The corruptions of the human heart often, where
they have the ascendant, make them indolent with respect to the improvement of
their minds; at least, they might have kept us from searching out such truths
as would be disagreable and unpleasant to us; or if we had, by the exercise of
our reasoning powers, discovered something of the nature of moral virtue, if we
were brought to see the difference between right and wrong; it is likely they
would have been mere speculations. Reason alone could scarce have set moral
truths before us, in so strong and amiable a light, as to have captivated our
souls with its charms, overcome our corruptions, and brought us to a universal
conformity to the nature and will of God. Mere conjectural discoveries, or
surmises built on subtle speculations, are not firm enough to establish such a
persuasion of truth as would influence the mind to universal and constant
holiness, in opposition to its own corruptions, and the enticements and
temptations of an evil world. It must be a full satisfying and abiding
conviction of the truth, that has such powerful effects; a conviction too
clear to be produced by unassisted reason however improved.

BUT if we suppose, that we might, by the exercise of reason, arrive at the
clearest view of the moral beauty there is in right action, or the fitness
there is in the practice of virtue, yet I much question, whether according to
the present constitution of our natures, any abstract ideas of the fitness or
unfitness of things would produce a right moral conduct. A sense of moral
beauty, or of the excellency of holiness, is of great use to a good mind; but
it never was designed to be our only principle of action, in this state of
trial. I own our natures would be more excellent, if a love of goodness were
alone a sufficient incitement to do right; it is likely this is the case with
some of the creatures above us; and possibly our natures may rise to this. We
are capable now of discerning the intrinsic fitness of things, and of being
moved by it; this capacity may gradually increase, till it swallow up all other
motives. The more we see of God, and converse with him, the more we shall
become like Him in his holiness and his happiness. At present, our nature is
very much constituted of appetites and passions, which move us to action. So it
was at first, "The woman saw", says the sacred Historian, speaking of Eve,
"that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes". The
motives to obedience, which God saw fit to propose to Adam, were addressed to
his hopes and fears. "In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die".
The threatening implied a promise, that if he did not eat, he should live -- and
certainly we do not need such arguments less in our present state, than man did
in a state of innocence.

IF man was so constituted in his primaeval state, as to be influenced by his
hopes and fears, we are not to suppose he will be governed by higher motives
now; at least not by higher motives only. But if we take man without a
particular revelation from God, what is there to excite his hopes? -- Let us
allow, that by the strength of his own powers, and without any communications
from above, he has conceived just notions of God and of his law; for if his
notions are not just, all inferences from them are but idle imaginations; but
if his notions are just, the least reflection will convince him, that he has
in many instances transgressed the law of his nature, which is the law of God;
that he has exposed himself to the just displeasure of a Being, whose arm none
can resist. And what reason has he to think God will pass by his offense and
receive him into favor?

IF from the promiscuous dispensation of things in the present state, he infers
that there will be a future state of retribution, wherein a difference will be
made according to men's moral conduct, yet reason alone could not make it
certain, that God would reward any obedience which man now yields; as he yields
none, that is not mingled with a great deal of imperfection and sin. All are
sinners, all may therefore expect to be treated as sinners; they who have
sinned more than others, may justly expect greater punishment. But how any can
upon the principles of reason be certain of a reward, because they have not
been so bad as some others, I cannot see. The light of nature cannot assure us,
that God will forgive a sinner upon his repentance; of consequence he has no
encouragement to repent; and if he has no encouragement to repent, there is no
reason to suppose he will repent. It is more likely, that, if he reflects on
his state, he will sink under a sense of his guilt, and an apprehension of
punishment. Such would probably be the case, if men had just sentiments of God
and his law, without any intimation from Him, that He would pardon their
transgressions and restore them to favor.

You will say perhaps, that the Heathen have had some persuasion of a future
state of rewards and punishments; but I fear, if the light of nature will
afford no better evidence of future rewards than the Heathen have had, moral
virtue or religion will receive but little assistance from it. Alas! what dark
and confused notions have they entertained! how gross and sensual their
representations of future happiness! such as we evidently see to be unworthy of
God, and no way calculated to convey rest to the mind of man. Their good men
after this life, remember their griefs, and are afflicted with the enmities
they contracted here; their exercises and enjoyments are suited to a bodily
state, rather than to a state of pure spirits.

If here and there an eminent Philosopher had more rational conceptions of
these things, yet no one acquainted with the history of the world, even of the
politer nations, will pretend, that this was the case with the body of the
people. Even their wisest Philosophers had rather a suspicion, than a full
persuasion of a future state; and "yet stedfastness seems of absolute necessity
in this case, since a respect to the recompense of the reward must be always
prevalent, in order to influence to a steady pursuit". Agreably you seldom find
their best and wisest men fetching any consolation from the state of rest which
remains for good men; their exhortations to virtue are not enforced by this;
if they believed the doctrine of future rewards themselves, yet they did not
think it worth while to persuade others into a belief of it. For want of this
argument, how frigid and jejune are all their exhortations to virtue! Even the
discourses of a Seneca or a Cicero have not a tendency to warm our hearts, like
the unadorned addresses of a plain unlettered Christian, who is acquainted with
the sacred scriptures, and the powerful motives of the Gospel. How much better
notions of morality has a common Christian, who at all attends to the precepts
of the Gospel, or even a modern Deist, who is acquainted with the Bible, than
the wisest sages of antiquity! How much clearer his views of a future state!
The Gospel makes that certain, which, without it, is but a dark conjecture.

BESIDES, the revelation with which God has favored us, teaches how He can be
just and yet justify the sinner; it opens the mysteries of redeeming love and
grace; it contains the most gracious declarations of God's readiness to pardon
the penitent believer; it offers the most gracious assistance, and promises the
most glorious rewards. By the help of this, we know many truths, which
unassisted reason never would have taught us; and we understand the truths of
natural religion, much better than we could have understood them without this
help. By means of revelation, we are capable of making a much better use of
reason, than we could have made without it.

THERE is nothing in Christianity that is contrary to reason. God never did, He
never can, authorize a religion opposite to it, because this would be to
contradict himself. The Gospel is not designed to abrogate the Religion of
Nature, it always supposes an eternal rule of righteousness, from which man had
deviated, and by which he was condemned. Man had rebelled against his Maker and
Lord; had renounced his dependence on God, and set himself up in opposition to
Him; in all which he acted contrary to the Religion of Nature. The design of
the Gospel was to reduce him to a right state, to bring him to live on God, to
submit to his authority, to resign to his will, and to rely upon him for every
good thing.

UNDER this dispensation God appears in a new character, in a new relation, as
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as a God pardoning iniquity
transgression and sin. This was a character in which the Deity could not
appear, till man had sinned, it was a discovery of something in his nature,
which neither Men nor Angels had before any conception of. From this new
character, or new relation, arise new obligations, and new duties; duties which
there could be no place for, while man was in a state of innocence, but which
are perfectly adapted to his state as a sinner. This is by no means contrary to
the Religion of Nature. It is perfectly agreeable to it, that we should conform
to every new discovery which God makes of himself, and attend to every new
intimation of his will.

To give credit to a divine testimony; to submit to a messenger sent by God; to
accept of pardon in his way, which is most wise and good, and approves itself
to the reason of man, all this is perfectly agreeable to every principle of
Natural Religion. Nothing is more contrary to truth, than to represent faith
and repentance as positive duties, they are founded in reason, they are the
result of that relation in which we stand to God and Jesus Christ, and are
exactly suited to our present apostate state.

THE Religion of Nature then, is the same it ever was, and "Christianity is
this very Religion, with some wise and merciful additions, accommodated to the
state of mankind as sinners". The Gospel adopts the whole law of nature, it
explains it, enjoins conformity to it, adds new obligations to obedience; and
at the same time provides and offers the kindest helps, to the performance of
what it requires.

SOME may possibly object, that I am discoursing of Revealed Religion, when my
business was to treat of that which is Natural. But how is it possible to give
you any tolerable view of Natural Religion, without recurring to Revelation?
"Who is there, says Mr. Lock, that ever did or undertook to give the law of
nature to us all entire, as a law, no more, nor no less, than what is contained
in, and had the obligation of, that law? who ever made out all the parts of it,
put them together, and showed the world their obligations? where was there any
such Code, that mankind might have recourse to, as their unerring rule, before
our Savior's time". Locke's reasonableness of the Christian Religion.


BESIDES, what is "the proper use and improvement of Natural Religion", the
subject expressly appointed for this Lecture by the pious Founder, but to lead
you to that which is Revealed? To what purpose should we discourse of the
obligations of Natural Law, if we could not lead you to the merciful
discoveries of the Gospel? this would be to throw discouragements in your way.
He that reasons justly upon the principles of Natural Religion, and goes no
further, I will not say, must despair, but must have many doubts and suspicions
of ever obtaining the divine favor. In this respect "the law is our
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ". The doctrine of the atonement and of
justification by the merits and righteousness of Christ, not only sees the
divine character in the clearest light; but gives the greatest encouragement to
repentance and obedience. "If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who
shall stand? but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared."
130 Psalm. 3, 4.


FURTHER, If Natural Religion is no more than has been found out by the natural
powers of man, if we are not to include any thing that has come to us by
revelation, who is able to draw the line, and to show exactly which truths have
been discovered by reason, or the mere light of nature, and which have come to
us by revelation? It is probable at least, that God first instructed men in the
principles of religion, or taught them the law by which they were to be
governed; and that their descendants, in all parts of the world, have received
by tradition and education, some degree of that light and knowledge, which was
communicated to their progenitors from the Deity himself. And if this was the
case, and no one can determine it was not, then we must say, that there is no
natural religion at all, or that its being revealed does not make it cease to
be natural. If a law is founded in nature; and God, instead of leaving us to
find it out by study and application, is pleased kindly to make it known to us
by revelation, will that make it cease to be a law of nature? if we may call
that natural religion, which we receive by instruction from our parents and
others; why may we not call that natural religion, which we are taught by our
Heavenly Father? "Nature is nothing but the settled Divine constitution, fixing
the way in, and the means by which He conveys his grace, or which is the same
thing in which He exerts his creating and supporting power, and whatever order
He sees fit to establish for this purpose is nature, and that constitution is
the Law of Nature". A view of the Law of Nature, written, it is said, by Dr.
Ricaltoun.




HOWEVER Christianity comes to us; or however supernatural the way in which it
was originally communicated; it so far coincides with the Religion of Nature,
that it is founded in the perfections of God, and is perfectly consonant to the
reason of man.

I KNOW it is said, that "were we not capable of distinguishing good from evil,
or knowing from the consideration of the invariable perfections of God, what
the divine goodness could command or forbid his creatures, antecedently to any
external revelation, we could not distinguish the true instituted religion from
the many false ones". Christianity as old as the Creation.
But this reasoning is founded upon a mistake, it supposes that when men have
once corrupted religion, they are left entirely without remedy. The capacity of
thinking and reasoning, with which God has distinguished man, however it has
been neglected or perverted, will, whenever he is led to make a proper use of
it, enable him to distinguish between true and false religion. There is no
necessity of such a previous comprehensive knowledge of God, or of good and
evil. It is not of so great importance, whether men have antecedently reasoned
justly or not, or indeed whether they have reasoned at all. If they are
awakened to attend to a religion proposed to them, and to examine it with
impartiality and care, they are capable of distinguishing between right and
wrong, and of perceiving whether this religion is worthy of God. A revelation
from God may set many truths and duties before them, which were before unknown,
and yet when presented to their minds, may appear perfectly agreeable to their
reason and understanding; otherwise when men have once formed wrong notions of
religion, it is impossible they should correct their errors, and reason becomes
for ever unprofitable.

BUT what shall we say of the Heathen, who have no written revelation? By what
rule will they be judged? and what will be their state after this life? such
inquiries are too bold and presumptuous, "secret things belong unto the Lord
our God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our
children". It is certain the most ignorant have some rule, however they came by
it, and they will be judged by the rule which they have, and not by that which
they have not. It is evident that the Heathen have some notion of expiation and
forgiveness, as well as some knowledge of God, and of the distinction between
virtue and vice; both are imperfect, and it may be said of them, that "they
hold the truth in unrighteousness", and with such a mixture of ignorance and
uncertainty, as that it can afford but little rest to their minds. But we may
assure ourselves that the Judge of all the earth will do right; and that He
will so order things, that none of mankind will have any reason to complain. If
the Heathen have no hope of the salvation, which the Gospel promises; neither
are they exposed to that damnation, which it threatens to those who despise and
reject it. Instead of puzzling our selves with such curious inquiries, let us
fear lest this should be our "condemnation, that light is come into the world,
but we have loved darkness rather than light, because our deeds have been evil".

WE, in this favored land, are lift up to Heaven, with respect to our spiritual
privileges; we have many and great advantages to know our Master's will; we
have the scriptures which are able to make us wise unto salvation; we have
singular helps to understand them; we have line upon line, and precept upon
precept. As to means nothing is wanting. We ought often to think of that most
equitable rule, by which our Savior assures us the Great God will conduct
himself. 12 Luke 48.
"Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required".

You, my Young Friends, who are so happy, as to have your education in this
Seat of Learning, have a most valuable price put into your hands, an
opportunity not only to furnish your minds with human literature, but to
acquire spiritual and divine knowledge -- All will be insufficient, unless "God,
who caused the light to shine out of darkness, shine in your hearts to give the
light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". We take pleasure in
your literary accomplishment, these things are well worthy your attention and
diligent application. But while you aspire after an acquaintance with the
various branches of learning, we show unto you a more excellent way. "This is
life eternal, that ye know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent". "Wisdom is
the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get
understanding. Exalt her and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to
honor, when thou do embrace her".

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 9 line 9 from the Bottom dele Possibly. p. 10. l. 9. read, an
infinitely wise Being. p. 19. marg. l, 6, r. stop the motion.

A List of the Gentlemen who have preached the DUDLEIAN Lecture.
1755. The Rev. President Holyoke. 1756. Mr. Barnard of Marblehead. 1757. Dr.
Wigglesworth, Professor of Divinity. 1758. Mr. Appleton of Cambridge. Mr.
Prince of Boston was first chose, but declined on account of his ill state of
health. 1759. Mr. Gay of Hingham. Dr. Sewall of Boston first chose, but
declined on account of his Age. 1760. Mr. Wigglesworth of Ipswich. 1761. Mr.
Foxcroft of Boston. 1762. Dr. Chauncy of Boston. 1763. Mr. Clark of Danvers.
1764. Mr. Abbot of Charlestown. 1765. Dr. Mayhew of Boston. 1766. Dr. Pemberton
of Boston. 1767. Mr. Cook of Cambridge. 1768. Mr. Barnard of Salem. 1769. Mr.
Mather of Boston. 1770. Mr. Adams of Roxbury.
Several of these Sermons were printed. It is desired by many, that the public
may be favored with the others, which are carefully preserved in the Archives
of the College.


