Mr. Forbes's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

THE Dignity and Importance of the Military Character illustrated. A SERMON
PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 3d. 1771. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

By ELI FORBES, A. M. Pastor of the Second CHURCH in BROOKFIELD.

LET us be of good courage; and let us play the men for our people, and for the
cities of our God: And the Lord do that which seems him good.

Major General JOAB. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, in
Newbury-Street. M, DCC, LXXI.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire Captain General and Governor in
Chief, etc.
SIR,
AS the following discourse was designed to do honor to the military character,
and revive the true martial spirit; and as it was delivered at the first
Anniversary after our most gracious Sovereign, as a fresh instance of his
paternal care, was pleased to appoint you to the first military, as well as
civil office, within this Province, I hope I may with the greater propriety beg
leave to send it abroad under your Excellency's patronage, as the best means of
rendering effectual its primary design, and as expressive of that general
felicity which your appointment has diffused through the hearts of the good
people you command, in which no one claims a larger share, or relishes the
favor with a more grateful sensibility, than

Your Excellency's most dutiful, most obedient, humble Servant, ELI FORBES.
BROOKFIELD, 20th JUNE, 1771.
WHEN I wrote the following discourse, I was indifferent about its being
printed; but as it has been misunderstood by some, the partiality of my friends
persuaded me to send it abroad into the world to speak for itself. And I beg
leave to observe to the reader by way of preface, that my capital design in
this sermon was to do honor to the military character, without keeping up those
dividing names, or party distinctions of British and American when applied to a
general character; and that I might revive the true martial spirit, which is
sunk in this province much too low, for the present day.

IN illustrating the importance of the military character, I consider the
troops raised in Europe and America as joined in one British victorious Army,
-- enlisted under one head, -- engaged in, and pursuing one common cause, --
the mutual interest and safety of the whole.

WHEN I speak of the skill or courage of any European troops or commanders, I
do not mean to derogate any thing of the military honors of my dear
countrymen, or any of his Majesty's troops raised in America; -- their native
courage has been too often tried to leave any room to dispute it, or to doubt
of its being equal to any that can be found throughout the British dominions;
and their improvement in the military arts, has been as great as could perhaps
be expected, considering the infancy of the country; -- the vast demand of
laborers in the arts of agriculture and trade; -- and the very little use we
ever had for regular troops on this continent, till the last war.

WHEN I speak of the preservation of the public tranquillity, as connected with
the military character, well supported, -- I do not mean to intimate as if I
thought the keeping an armed force, within our thick inhabited towns or cities
in a time of peace, was either safe or necessary to the preservation of the
public peace: But that the state should be able on every emergency to send an
army of well-disciplined troops, men of valor, expert in war, either into the
field, or to the seacoast or frontiers, to withstand or repel a foreign enemy,
or if need be, aid, under the direction of the Laws, the civil powers at home,
when the public peace is endangered or disturbed by the sons of violence.

IT is a hard question, how wars became necessary? -- But instead of puzzling
ourselves about the origin of war, let us unite in ardent prayers to the Prince
of peace, that he would hasten the happy time, according to the prophecy and
the promise, when he shall erect one universal kingdom of peace under the whole
heavens, and reign from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth.

AN Artillery-Election Sermon.
EXODUS XV.3. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.


WAR is a political evil, which is become necessary, upon the introduction of
natural and moral evil: And will remain necessary so long as they are allowed
to prevail in this degenerate world: Therefore the man of war is become an
interesting and important character: -- And though it connects a train of very
gloomy ideas, in the human breast, especially when inspired with the genius of
the gospel, yet, from its importance, and the noble principles by which alone
it can be supported, it is become truly honorable.

THE honor of this important character, cannot rise higher, nor gain an
attitude more sublime, than that which it assumes in the style of my text. The
Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.

FROM which words I shall endeavor to vindicate the dignity and importance of
the military character.

AS the words are found in that celebrated song of Moses, which he inscribed to
the Lord, who triumphed gloriously over Pharaoh and his host at the red sea; so
they are to be understood poetically. And the divine personage, who is called a
man of war, whose name is Jehovah, is probably the blessed Messiah, then in the
form of God, under whose special protection and guidance, as the constituted
Lord of providence, Israel passed from a state of bondage in Egypt, through the
red sea, safe, as on dry-land, while Pharaoh's chariots, and his pursuing hosts
sank amidst the closing billows to the bottom, as a stone, and were drowned in
the mighty waters.

THE military character, in this connection stands in a very amiable, as well
as eminent point of light.

THE dignity and importance of this character, has, I know, been the common
professed subject of this day; yet, I will not say, it has been exhausted: For
the dignity originates in him whose perfections are infinite, and, its
importance keeps pace with life, liberty, religion and happiness.

THE subject remains inexhaustible, and furnishes still, with new matter to
stimulate, direct and facilitate the duties of this Anniversary: And will
continue to do so, till the blessed Millennium shall take place, when the
nations shall, with one consent, beat their swords into plow-shares, and their
spears into pruning hooks, and shall learn war no more; but form under the
gentle reign of the Prince of peace, one grand universal Monarchy of harmony
and love.

TO be like our Father who is in heaven, or to resemble the blessed Immanuel,
in those characters which he assumed for our instruction and imitation is the
highest honor, and the truest felicity we can aspire to.

AND though the divine Being seems to glory in the title, God of love and peace;
and though the blessed Jesus, his incarnate son is emphatically the " prince of
peace," and came to make peace, and has left it in command, as the leading
precept of christianity, "follow peace with all men:" Yet sin having entered
and fired the passions of men, and bid lust, ambition and fell discord, spread
wild disorder through these regions of mortality; -- since stern tyranny and
cruel oppression, twin-brats of hell, extend their iron bands to enslave the
freeborn mind, saying, "bow down your souls that we may go over you;" -- the
God of peace sounds an alarm and calls to arms! -- to arms! And his divine Son,
the meek and lowly, assumes the character in my text, the man of war.

AND as a mighty Prince of meek majesty, he places himself at the head of his
numerous hosts, and girds on the sword upon his thigh, with his bow and crown
he marches on, conquering and to conquer. And to his enemies he proclaims What
have I to do with peace! I am not come to send peace but a sword, and cursed be
he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, cursed be he that withholds
his sword from blood: -- Blessed are they who do to their enemies as they have
done to them -- blessed is he, who takes and dasheth their little ones against
the stones. -- I shudder at these last expressions: -- I would not misrepresent
the sacred text; nor do I mean to represent the Divine Being, as laying aside
the amiable character of the God of love, or as if he ever acted in opposition
to it; or as if the compassionate Jesus, that friend of mankind, delighted in
blood and slaughter: An idea this, most abhorrent of the Deity, and infinitely
remote from the character, or from being any essential part of that character I
mean to honor. But when war becomes necessary, through the lusts of men, God
for the vindication of his own honor, and the defense of his peoples rights,
consecrates the sword to religion, and his right hand takes hold on vengeance;
-- and having commissioned his eternal Son, to do all his dreadful work of
judgment; He, as captain of the Lord's hosts, takes the field, and connects the
man of war, with the christian Hero, and makes the fidelity of the good
soldier, an essential part of that religion which is founded on the immovable
basis of moral virtue and christian grace -- a part of that religion which
unites love to God with benevolence to men.

THIS divine personage assumed and supported the military character, especially
in the theocracy of the Jews, his own people, to whom he stood in a political
relation, as their Prince and governor, as well as redeemer and Savior.

AND that he might strengthen their faith, animate their courage, and secure to
himself their allegiance, he stipulated with them the Sinai-covenant, and under
the economy of that covenant frequently appeared to them in human form, to
anticipate his future incarnation.

AND He chose to appear sometimes under the military character, that he might
support its dignity, as in that remarkable instance, to Joshua, near the well
of Jericho. For it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, he lift up his eyes
and looked, and behold their stood a man over against him, with a drawn sword
in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or
for our adversaries? And he said, Nay, but as captain of the host of the Lord
am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and
says unto him, What says my Lord unto his servant? And the captain of the
Lord's host said unto Joshua, loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place
whereon thou stand is holy; and Joshua did so. Now that this was a divine
Personage who appeared to Joshua is obvious to all: He could not be a good
Angel, for he expressly required a token of submission; -- put off thy shoe, --
and urged it with this consideration, that the ground on which he stood was
holy -- consecrated by his presence; and he admits of an act of religious
homage, "for Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship," which a
good Angel would neither have required, or admitted. He could not be an evil
Angel; for the appearance was in favor of Joshua, and his military operations,
and so Satan would be divided against himself, contrary to his settled
principles of policy: -- He could not be one of the human race, for his
appearance was supernatural, and his aspect wore such evident marks of divinity
that Joshua does not hesitate to call him his LORD ( Heb.) ADONAI, -- supreme
governor of all things.

AND it is equally evident, that this divine person was the Son of God; for he
not only assumes the title Jehovah, but the leader and conductor of all the
hosts of Jehovah, especially the armies of Israel, whom he had taken under his
peculiar care and protection; for he is constituted head over all things,
especially those that pertain to his Church and Kingdom; -- and the Apostle
Paul expressly says, that he who conducted Israel through the wilderness, and
supported them in their wars with the Canaanites was Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.

AND he frequently appeared to others on great and special occasions, as to
Abram, when he was about to call him from a state of idolatry, and to
constitute him head of the faithful -- to Jacob when he was in danger of being
swallowed up by his envious brother; -- to Moses in the burning bush; -- and
after his resurrection and ascension, to Saul in his way to Damascus; -- and to
his disciples when in great fear of the Jews, etc.




AND as captain general of all the hosts of heaven and earth, He mustered
martialed, and marched them to the field of battle, when he pleased, for the
defense and salvation of his chosen people: -- And under him they always proved
successful, and came off more than conquerors; for he formed visible or
invisible guards round about them that feared him, or were faithful in their
allegiance to him.

AS captain of the hosts of the Lord, he promised his people that he would
fight all their battles for them, so long as they steadily adhered to him: --
He would be as a wall of fire round about them, and the glory in the midst of
them: He therefore forbid them making those warlike preparations which
otherwise would have been absolutely necessary for their defense and safety.

UNDER this character he has all nature at command; -- no clerk of the
muster-roll can call over the list of his forces: for the number of his armies
is countless. The heavenly hosts: -- the angelic legions are his chosen troops:
-- The chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand; thousands of Angels. If but
one of these take the field under the direction and commission of his divine
leader, the camp is spread with more than an hundred and eighty thousand slain:
-- Next to these the starry legions, which belong to his alarm-list, muster,
march, and fight in their courses, under his command, and discomfit the enemies
of his people. The clouds, winds, storms, tempest, thunder and hail, are but
different battalions, and compose his army of observation, which he "reserves
against the day of battle and of war."

AND there is not an element, insect or reptile, but, when commissioned by him,
who is the Lord of hosts, may style itself God's host, and become "terrible as
an army with banners:" As that reptile and insect-army did, the grand and
figurative description of which, we have in the 2d Chapter of Joel. -- The
prophet Habakkuk describes the military maneuvers of this mighty warrior in a
style peculiar to himself: -- He came from Teman, and the holy one from mount
Paran, and he went forth for the salvation of his people. He marched through
the land in indignation; -- He threshed the heathen in his anger; -- the
stubborn nations were cut in sunder -- the everlasting mountains were
scattered, the immovable hills bowed, -- the river's rapid stream passed on in
silence, -- the deep uttered her voice: -- the sun stood still, amazed: -- the
moon hid her pale face: -- the pillars of heaven shook for fear, and the earth
trembled to her center, while the God marched on in martial pomp, and displayed
the honors of the man of war.

THOUGH this divine man of war, has long since droped the political relation
which he bore, as a prince or political Father to the Israelitish nation, which
relation terminated with the Sinai-covenant, yet he continues to sustain the
military character with equal dignity, under the milder dispensations of the
covenant of grace. Here indeed he appears under the form of a servant; -- the
gentle Lamb of God: And in his general deportment he breathed nothing but love;
and peace, and goodness; yet such rays of meek majesty broke forth through the
cloud of humanity, as proclaimed him the Son of God with power -- the King of
Zion, who had more than twelve legions of Angels at command, and all nature
obedient to his will.

WHEN he was about to close up the vision, and to make an end of prophecy, he
showed himself to his ancient apostle John, under the most magnificent titles
of a victorious commander: -- In one point of view, we behold him mounted on a
war-horse, with his bow and with his crown, to denote his martial skill and
royal dignity, and he rides on victorious, from one conquest to another;
imparting the ensigns of victory to his faithful followers. In another point of
light, he is represented as leading forth the armies of heaven against the
enemies of his church, while on his robe and on the sword upon his thigh, is
wrote " King of Kings and Lord of Lords;" to signify universal empire over all
princes and potentates in earth and heaven. -- Thus he raised the military
character to the highest dignity, which was the first thing I had in view: --
The next, is to illustrate the utility and importance of this character to
public happiness.

THIS point is established by the former: For if the military character is of
such dignity, that, the incarnate Redeemer, who is the brightness of the
Father's glory, has seen sit to assume and act under it, through the varying
modes of the theocracy, when in the form of God, and supported it through the
state of his incarnation, when in the form of a servant, and still continues to
honor it, as the Lord of Sabbath, and will, till he has gained the final
conquest over all the powers of earth and hell, when he will resign the kingdom
unto the Father, and God shall be all in all; then certainly, it must not only
be a character of the highest honor, but of the greatest utility and importance
to public happiness: For happiness is the great good; -- to insure and promote
this, was the beneficent design of his mission, and the leading characters he
assumed and acted under; -- the grand point in view was, that he might defend
the rights of his people, and bless the world with peace and happiness. But
that I might animate your hopes and invigorate the true principles of heroism
implanted in your generous breasts, give me leave to point out to you, a few
particulars, wherein public happiness stands connected with the military
character, well supported.

AS the military, is not an original character; -- it became necessary and
important upon the introduction of sin; so it must be useful and important as
long as sin corrupts the world; -- fires the passions of men, and disturbs the
public tranquillity.

IT is necessary and useful for the defense of our lives, our liberties,
property and peace. If these are dear and important, the military character is
so, as by that, these, under God are defended and preserved to us.

IT is necessary, to withstand the powers of hell; -- to resist the boundless
ambition of tyrants; -- to curb the lawless pride of nations, and the impetuous
lusts of men. To these, where the military character has been wanting or not
well supported, life and liberty, states and kingdoms, have fell, devoted
victims.

IT was the military character well supported, that contributed very much to
raise ancient Rome to her glory and opulence; and the want of this exposed the
world to the ravages of the Pompies, the Caesar's and the Alexanders.

IT was skill in arms, and the well improvements of that skill, which gave the
appellation of the " thundering Legion" to the christian battalions in defense
of their natural rights, when invaded by the powers and malice of the infidel
world. In short, it is this, under Providence, which has saved Great Britain
more than once, from impending ruin; and transmitted down to us both our civil
and sacred rights.

AND we can not so soon forget of what importance or how useful the military
character has been to us, British-America, especially in the late war when the
British arms were made to triumph over more than half the globe: -- From Lake
Superior to the Manillas.

WHAT distress were the British Colonies in, soon after the opening of the last
war, when we saw a potent, subtle and treacherous enemy at the head of almost
all our commanding waters, aided by savages, the hardy sons of the wilderness,
whose tender mercies are cruelties.

WE attempted to repel force by force, but the want of a thorough acquaintance
with the art military, obstructed the councils of war at home, and the want of
disciplined troops, who were bred to war, and who could well support the
military character in the field, rendered our first attempts abortive; -- the
consequence of this was, we saw our fortresses, taken from us; -- our frontiers
were depopulated and burnt, our wives ravished and then butchered; -- our
daughters deflowered and led away captive, and our children confined in savage
dens; -- our brethren slain in the encounter, and left scalped, mangled,
unburied, food for savage beasts as well as footless worms, and their bones to
this day whitening in the sun: -- Horrid scenes! I forbear. -- We cried to God,
and the Lord of hosts heard, and sent us aid -- but chose to honor the
military character; and the British troops, veteran, disciplined troops, bred
to war, when joined with those of the colonies, were the instruments of our
deliverance and safety. -- The British troops crossed the Atlantic with their
heavy artillery, under the command of gentlemen who were not wanting in
military skill, yet unacquainted with the genius of the enemy they had to
oppose, and therefore did not succeed at first to their wishes and our sanguine
hopes, yet put a stop to the progress of the enemy till the cool, but intrepid
AMHERST came, who was a man of war from his youth, and to whom heaven decreed
the principal honor of our salvation.

HE, happy man! entered at once into the genius of the enemy; -- acquainted
himself with the exact situation of those places in which he designed should
center his future capital operations; and from his consumate skill in arms, and
the art military, he so disposed of the main body of his army and their several
detachments, as entirely frustrated the designs of the enemy, and conspired to
general conquest. What a crowd of victories attended in close succession, and
crowned the military operation, which took place under the direction of this
able General! -- Cape-Briton, Niagara, Ticondaroga, Crown-point, Quebec,
Montreal, in short, all Canada and her dependants. BY mentioning Mr. AMHERST as
chief, under whose general direction the above conquests were obtained, I do
not mean to detract from the honor of that indisputable Hero, Major General
WOLF, under whose immediate command, Quebec, the metropolis of Canada was
reduced, in such a manner, in the face of every danger, and in spite of all the
difficulties that nature and art could throw in the way, as did the greatest
honor to that gentleman, whose bravery nothing could exceed, and whose skill
and refinements in the arts of war equalled any of his rank and experience. Nor
do I mean to overlook Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON who had the honor of reducing
Niagara, attended with such circumstances, as in point of prowess and presence
of mind placed this gentleman on a level with European general officers: -- But
after all Sir JEFFERY AMHERST must be allowed to be peculiarly formed for the
service to which he was apppointed in America: History, I dare say, scarcely
affords a more extraordinary co-incidence of Providence, or a more striking
instance of excellent military conduct, a clearer foresight, or sounder
judgment than was demonstrated by the meeting of the three armies before
Montreal, which had, under his direction, taken different routs, through a
dangerous and difficult country, where it was hardly possible to keep up any
communication between each other, till they nearly reached, the main object in
view: -- The general with that part of the army which he saw fit to take with
him, made the long and arduous tour of Lake Ontario and Isle Royale, so fell
down the River St. Lawrence, till he reached Montreal, where he landed in good
order, on the sixth of September, 1760. Brigadier General MURRAY, with a part
of the garrison of Quebec, and a Naval force, came up the river and joined him
the next day. Col. HAVILAND and the corpse which he commanded, who took the way
of Champlain and the Isle du Noix, joined the main body, the day following; so
that if General AMHERST had been favored with the entire government of
Providence, he could not have timed things better, or more to his advantage.


FAIR victory held out her honors to this her favorite son, while she
proclaimed through all America the dignity and importance of the military
character. This character will always be important and useful, till that
religion, which is first pure and then peaceable, gains an universal influence
over the hearts and lives of men, and subjects mankind to her gentle and benign
precepts: Then, and not till then, will wars cease; -- then, and not till then,
will the military character cease to be important and useful.

AND as the present state of things is, and so long as divine providence
preserves its ordinary course, the public tranquillity cannot be long
preserved, peace maintained at home, or our sacred and civil rights and
liberties secured from foreign invasion of ambitious and unreasonable men,
without drawing the sword in their defense. Though the sword is a devourer, yet
"out of the eater comes forth meat," necessary to support and defend public
happiness.

IMPROVEMENT.
I SHALL not so far forget my own character as to point out to you the
particular duties of yours. The gentlemen who have done me the honor to appoint
me chaplain of the day, must be supposed to understand them much better than I.

IT is my department to recommend, and to urge in his name who is a man of war,
the practice of his religion which gives virtue to the military character;
without which its true honor and dignity can never be supported, and its
usefulness and importance must in a great measure be lost; and what is worse,
without religion it will degenerate into an engine of infamy, and prove most
destructive of public happiness.

THAT the knowledge and practice of the religion of the blessed Jesus, is
essential to the honor and usefulness of this character I am pleading for, is
most obvious, from his assuming and acting under it himself.

I WOULD not intimate that every good christian is of consequence a good
soldier, -- an accomplished man of war; but this I will venture to say, there
cannot be a good soldier, an accomplished man of war, destitute of the
principles and practice of christianity. The good soldier, whether officer or
private, whose mind is formed upon the genius of the gospel, and life, upon the
model of the doctrines and precepts of christianity, while at home, in the city
or village, will behave himself as a good citizen, in strict conformity to the
laws of the land, lead a peaceable life in godliness and honesty, in adherence
to that christian precept, " be pitiful, be courteous," and under the auspices
of magistracy, will always be ready, to suppress riot, tumult and sedition,
which endanger the state and disturb the public tranquillity: -- When called to
jeopard his life in the high places of the field, he will play the man for his
God, for the cities of his God, and for his country. He considers that not a
sparrow falls to the ground without the knowledge of his heavenly Father; and
is therefore not afraid, with any amazement of ten thousand of the people, and
though a thousand fall at his right hand, and ten thousand on his left, yet he
knows that so long as life is a blessing, the deadly shot shall not come nigh
him: -- So that in the midst of the horrors of clashing arms, and of garments
rolled in blood, he remains intrepid: the thought of dying for his country in
the cause of truth and duty, and living with his God and Savior in a better
world, animates and imboldens him to encounter the most hazardous enterprises.
By faith he waxes valiant in fight -- escapes the edge of the sword, and puts
to flight the alien army.

YOU see, Gentlemen, the dignity and importance of the character you sustain.
It is truly honorable, -- it is very ancient, -- it is almost as old as the
creation, and as important as life and liberty, as public peace and happiness.
I know, Gentlemen, you mean to support the dignity and continue to answer the
laudable end of your original institution: -- a seminary of the art of war: --
a nursery of heroes for the field. Be then religious, list under your
Captain General, who styles himself a man of war -- the Lord is his name. And
while you act the soldier, act the christian, emulate the example of your
divine leader. Breath his spirit, and form upon his model: -- this will
preserve from that horrid abuse of arms, which has too often detracted from the
true dignity and utility of the military character, and enstamped an infamy
that the brazen pen of time can scarcely erase. * This will render you the
honor of human nature, the guardians of our dearest rights, and the glory of
British-America, "The chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof." -- May all
your military improvements and operations be always under the government of
these generous, manly, noble and virtuous principles. -- And we trust your eye
will be always upon Gentlemen for your officers who will support the dignity,
and perpetuate the importance and utility of the character you invest them
with, by uniting the christian hero with the man of war: In this you will have
the patronage of him, who has the honor, and we the happiness of his being
appointed Captain General and Governor in chief; whose extensive knowledge,
great abilities, unblemished virtue and native love of his country, will lead
him to protect, support and favor a character which looks with such a
promising aspect on public happiness.

BUT to conclude, may what we have heard of the honor and usefulness of the
military character, serve to revive a true martial spirit, and inspire with a
laudable zeal, not only to improve but excel in the art military; that the
native courage which has always distinguished British-America, -- especially
the sons of the Massachusetts, may appear to the best advantage, and produce
future heroes, who may vie not only with Greece and Rome, but even with
Great Britain. And may all my brethren of the field be exhorted to act with
honor and fidelity, as the servants of the most high God, the disciples of his
divine Son, and friends to mankind: Then I have the honor and pleasure to
assure them that they shall not only be esteemed by men as guardians of our
dearest rights, but shall be finally crowned by the supreme Leader as
conquerors, and be seated on triumphal thrones of glory, when they will lay
aside the harness, and drop the military character, and ceasing from the
fatigues of war, -- will rest in everlasting peace, harmony and joy.


