SOME HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF GUINEA, Its Situation, Produce and the general
Disposition of its INHABITANTS.

WITH An inquiry into the Rise and Progress of the SLAVE TRADE, its Nature and
lamentable Effects.

ALSO A Re-publication of the Sentiments of several Authors of Note, on this
interesting Subject; particularly an Extract of a Treatise, by GRANVILLE SHARP.

By ANTHONY BENEZET.

Acts xvii. 24, 26. God that made the World -- has made of one Blood all
Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth, and has determined
the -- Bounds of their Habitation. Eccles. viii. 11. Because Sentence against
an evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men
is fully set in them to do Evil. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 34. Is not this laid up in Store
with me and sealed up among my Treasure. To me belongs Vengeance and
Recompense, their Foot shall slide in due Time, for the Day of their Calamity
is at Hand; and the Things that shall come upon them make haste. PHILADELPHIA:
Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-street, opposite the Workhouse.

M,DCC,LXXI.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. A GENERAL account of Guinea; particularly those parts on the rivers
Senegal and Gambia. 1 CHAP. II. Account of the Ivory-Coast, the Gold-Coast and
the Slave-Coast. 17 CHAP. III. Of the kingdoms of Benin, Kongo and Angola. 35
CHAP. IV. Guinea, first discovered and subdued by the Arabians. The Portuguese
make descents on the coast and carry off the natives. Oppression of the
Indians; De la Casa pleads their cause. 41 CHAP. V. The English' s first trade
to the coast of Guinea: Violently carry off some of the Negroes. 52 CHAP. VI.
Slavery more tolerable under Pagans and Turks than in the colonies. As
christianity prevailed ancient slavery declined. 63 CHAP. VII. Montesquieu's
sentiments of slavery. Morgan Godwyn's advocacy on behalf of Negroes and
Indians, etc. 72 CHAP. VIII. Grievous treatment of the Negroes in the colonies,
etc. 85 CHAP. IX. Desire of gain the true motive of the Slave trade.
Misrepresentation of the state of the Negroes in Guinea. 96 CHAP. X. State of
the Government in Guinea, etc. 105 CHAP. XI. Accounts of the cruel methods used
in carrying on of the Slave trade, etc. 111 CHAP. XII. Extracts of several
voyages to the coast of Guinea, etc. 118 CHAP. XIII. Numbers of Negroes, yearly
brought from Guinea, by the English, etc. 128 CHAP. XIV. Observations on the
situation and disposition of the Negroes in the northern ^olonies, etc. 132
CHAP. XV. Europeans capable of bearing reasonable labor in the West Indies,
etc. 141 Extracts from Granville Sharp's representations, etc. Sentiments of
several authors, viz. George Wallace, Francis Hutcheson, and James Foster.
Extracts of an address to the assembly of Virginia. Extract of the bishop of
Gloucester' s sermon.
ERRATUM.
Page 6 line 19. For four or five thousand miles, road three or four thousand.

INTRODUCTION.
THE slavery of the Negroes having, of late, drawn the attention of many
serious minded people; several tracts have been published setting forth its
inconsistancy with every christian and moral virtue, which its hoped will have
weight with the judicious; especially at a time when the liberties of mankind
are become so much the subject of general attention. For the satisfaction of
the serious enquirer who may not have the opportunity of seeing those tracts,
and such others who are sincerely desirous that the iniquity of this practice
may become effectually apparent, to those in whose power it may be, to put a
stop to any farther progress therein; it is proposed, hereby, to republish the
most material parts of said tracts; and in order to enable the reader to form a
true judgment of this matter, which, though so very important, is generally
disregarded; or so artfully misrepresented by those whose interest leads them
to vindicate it, as to bias the opinions of people otherwise upright; some
account will be here given of the different parts of Africa, from which the
Negroes are brought to America; with an impartial relation from what motives
the Europeans were first induced to undertake, and have since continued this
iniquitous traffic. And here it will not be improper to premise, that though wars
arising from the common depravity of human nature, have happened, as well among
the Negroes as other nations and the weak sometimes been made captives to the
strong; yet nothing appears, in the various relations of the intercourse and
trade, for a long time, carried on by the Europeans, on that coast, which would
induce us to believe, that there is any real foundation for that argument, so
commonly advanced, in vindication of that trade viz. That the slavery of the
Negroes took its rise from a desire, in the purchasers, to save the lives of
such of them as were taken captives in war, who would otherwise have been
sacrificed to the implacable revenge of their conquerors. A plea which when
compared with the history of those times, will appear to be destitute of Truth;
and to have been advanced, and urged, principally by such as were concerned in
reaping the gain of this infamous traffic, as a paliation of that, against
which their own reason and conscience, must have raised fearful objections.

Some Historical Account etc.
CHAP. I.
GUINEA affords an easy Living to its Inhabitants, with but little Toil. The
Climate agrees well with the Natives; but extremely unhealthful to the
Europeans. Produces Provisions in the greatest Plenty. Simplicity of their
Housholdry. The Coast of Guinea described from the River Senegal to the Kingdom
of Angola. The Fruitfulness of that Part lying on and between the two great
Rivers Senagal and Gambia. Account of the different Nations settled there.
Order of Government amongst the Jalofs. Good Account of some of the Fulis. The
Mandigos; their Management, Government, etc. Their Worship. M. Adanson's
Account of those Countries. Surprising Vegetation. Pleasant Appearance of the
Country. He found the Natives very sociable and obliging.

WHEN the Negroes are considered barely in their present abject state of
slavery, broken spirited and dejected; and too easy credit is given to the
accounts we frequently hear or read of their barbarous and savage way of living
in their own country; we shall be naturally induced to look upon them as
incapable of improvement, destitute, miserable, and insensible of the benefits
of life; and that our permitting them to live amongst us, even on the most
oppressive terms, is to them a favor; but on impartial enquiry, the case will
appear to be far otherwise; we shall find that there is scarce a country in the
whole world, that is better calculated for affording the necessary comforts of
life to its inhabitants, with less solicitude and toil, than Guinea. And that
notwithstanding the long converse of many of its inhabitants with (often) the
worst of the Europeans, they still retain a great deal of innocent simplicity;
and when not stirred up to revenge from the frequent abuses they have received
from the Europeans in general; manifest themselves to be a humane, sociable
people, whose faculties are as capable of improvement as those of other people;
and that their economy and government is, in many respects, commendable. Hence
it appears they might have lived happy, if not disturbed by the Europeans; more
especially, if these last had used such endeavors as their christian
profession requires, to communicate to the ignorant Africans that superior
knowledge which providence had favored them with. In order to set this matter
in its true light, and for the information of those well minded people who are
desirous of being fully acquainted with the merits of a cause, which is of the
utmost consequence; as therein the lives and happiness of thousands and
hundreds of thousands of our fellow men have fallen, and are daily falling a
sacrifice to selfish avarice, and usurped power, I will here give some account
of the several divisions of those parts of Africa, from whence the Negroes are
brought, with a summary of their produce; the disposition of their respective
inhabitants; their improvements, etc etc, extracted from authors of credit;
mostly such as have been principal officers in the English, French and Dutch
factories, and who resided many years in those countries. But first it is
necessary to premise, as a remark generally applicable to the whole coast of
Guinea, That the Almighty who has determined and appointed the bounds of the
habitation of men on the face of the earth, in the manner that is most
conducive to the well being of their different natures and dispositions has so
ordered it that although Guinea is extremely unhealthy Gentleman's Magazine,
Supplement, 1763. Extract of a letter wrote from the island of Senegal by Mr.
Boon practitioner of physic there, to Dr. Brocklesby of London.

To form a just idea of the unhealthiness of the climate, it will be necessary
to conceive a country extending three hundred leagues east, and more to the
north and south. Through this country several large rivers empty themselves into
the sea; particularly the Sanaga, Gambia and Sherbro; these during the rainy
months, which begin in July, and continue till October, overflow their banks
and lay the whole flat country under water; and indeed, the very sudden rise of
these rivers is incredible, to persons who have never been within the tropicks
and are unacquainted with the violent rains that fall there. At Galem, nine
hundred miles from the mouth of the Sanaga, I am informed that the waters rise
one hundred and fifty feet perpendicular from the bed of the river. This
information I received from a gentleman, who was surgeon's mate to a party sent
there, and the only survivor of three captains command, each consisting of one
captain, two lieutenants, one ensign, a surgeon's mate, three sergeants, three
corporals and fifty privates.

When the rains are at an end which usually happens in October, the intense
heat of the Sun soon dries up the waters, which lie on the higher parts of the
earth, and the remainder forms lakes of stagnated waters, in which are found
all sorts of dead animals: These waters every day decrease till at last they
are quite exhaled and then the effluvia that arises is almost insupportable. At
this season, the winds blow so very hot from off the land, that I can compare
them to nothing but the heat proceeding from the mouth of an oven. This
occasions the Europeans to be sorely vexed with bilious and putrid lovers. From
this account you will not be surprised, that the total loss of British subjects
in this island only, amounted to above two thousand fivehundred in the space of
three years that I was there, in such a putrid moist air as I have described.


to the Europeans, of whom many thousands have met there with a miserable and
untimely end, yet it is not so with the Negroes who enjoy a good state of
health James Barbot, agent general to the French African company, in his
account of Africa, page 105, says, The natives are seldom troubled with any
distempers, being little affected with the unhealthy air; in tempestuous times
they keep much within doors, and when exposed to the weather their skins being
suppled and pores closed by daily anointing with palm oil, the weather can make
but little impression on them.
and are able to procure to themselves a comfortable subsistence; with much
less care and toil than is necessary in our more northern climate; which last
advantage arises, not only from the warmth of the climate, but also from the
overflowing of the rivers, whereby the land is regularly moistened and rendered
extremely fertile; and being in many places improved by culture, abounds with
grain and fruits, cattle, poultry, etc. The earth yields all the year a fresh
supply of food: Few clothes are requisite and little art necessary in making
them; or in the construction of their houses, which are very simple,
principally calculated to defend them from the tempestuous seasons and wild
beasts; a few dry reeds covered with matts serve for their beds. The other
furniture, except what belongs to cookery, gives the women but little trouble;
the movables of the greatest among them amounting only to a few earthen pots,
some wooden utensils and gourds or calabashes; from these last, which grow
almost naturally over their huts, to which they afford an agreeable shade, they
are abundantly stock't with good clean vessels for most household use, being of
different sizes, from half a pint to several gallons.

That part of Africa from which the Negroes are sold to be carried into
slavery, commonly known by the name of Guinea, extends along the coast (...) or
(...) thousand miles. Beginning at the river Senegal, situate about the 17th
degree of north latitude, being the nearest part of Guinea, as well to Europe,
as to North America; from thence to the river Gambia, and in a southerly course
to cape Sierra Leona, comprehends a coast of about seven hundred Miles; being
the same tract for which Queen Elizabeth granted charters to the the first
traders to that coast: From Sierra Leona, the land of Guinea takes a turn to
the eastward, extending that course about fifteen hundred miles, including
those several divisions known by the name of the Grain Coast; the Ivory Coast;
the Gold Coast and the Slave Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From
thence the land runs southward along the coast about twelve hundred miles,
which contains the kingdoms of Congo and Angola; there the trade for slaves
ends. From which to the southermost cape of Africa, called the cape of Good
Hope, the country is settled by Caffers and Hottentots: Who have never been
concerned in the making or selling slaves.

Of the parts which are above described, the first which presents itself to
view, is that situate on the great river Senegal, which is said to be navigable
more than a thousand miles, and is by travelers, described to be very
agreeable and fruitful. Andrew Brue principal factor for the French African
company, who lived sixteen years in that country, after describing its
fruitfulness and plenty, near the Sea, adds Astley's collect, vol. 2, page 46.
the farther you go from the Sea, the country on the river seems the more
fruitful and well improved; abounding with Indian corn, pulse, fruit etc. Here
are vast meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle, and poultry
numerous: The villages that lie thick on the river, show the country is well
peopled. The same author in the account of a voyage he made up the river
Gambia, the mouth of which lies about three hundred miles south of the Senegal,
and is navigable about six hundred miles up the country, says Astley's
Collection of voyages, vol. 2, page 86.
That he was surprised to see the land so well cultivated; scare a spot lay
unimproved, the low lands, divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice
etc. the higher ground planted with millet, indian corn and pease of different
sorts; their beef excellent; poultry plenty and very cheap as well as all other
necessaries of life. Francis Moor, who was sent from England about the year
1735, in the service of the African company, and resided at James fort on the
river Gambia, or in other factories on that river about five years, confirms
the above account of the fruitfulness of the country* William Smith who was
sent in the year 1726, by the African company, to survey their settlements
throughout the whole coast of Guinea, William Smith's voyage to Guinea, page 31,
34.
says, The country about the Gambia is pleasant and fruitful; provisions of all
kinds being plenty and exceeding cheap. The country on and between the two
abovementioned rivers is large and extensive, inhabited principally by these
three Negro nations known by the name of Jalofs, Fulis and Mandingos. The
Jalofs possess the middle of the country. The Fulis principal settlement is on
both sides of the Senegal; great numbers of these people are also mixed with
the Mandingos; which last are mostly settled on both sides the Gambia. The
Government of the Jalofs is represented as under a better regulation than, can
be expected from the common opinion we entertain of the Negroes. We are told in
the Collection, Astley's Collection, vol. 2, page 358.
That the King has under him several ministers of state who assist him in the
exercise of justice. The grand Jerafo is the chief justice through all the King's
dominions, and goes in circuit from time to time to hear complaints and
determine controversies. The King's treasurer exercises the same employment,
and has under him Alkairs, who are governors of towns or villages. That the
Kondi or vice Roy goes the circuit with the chief justice both to hear causes
and inspect into the behavior of the Alkadi or chief magistrate of every
village in their several districts Idem. 259.
. Vasconcelas an author mentioned in the collection says, The ancientest are
preferred to be the Prince's counselors, who keep always about his person, and
the men of most judgment and experience are the judges. The Fulis are settled
on both sides of the river Senegal: Their country which is very fruitful and
populous, extends near four hundred miles from east to west. They are generally
of a deep tawny complexion, appearing to bear some affinity with the Moor's,
whose country they join on the north: They are good farmers and make great
harvest, of corn, cotton, tobacco etc. and breed great numbers of cattle of all
kinds. Bartholomew Stibbs, (mentioned by Fr: Moor) in his account of that
country says, Moor's travels into distant parts of Africa, page 198.
They were a cleanly, decent, industrious people and very affable. But the most
particular account we have of these people is from Francis Moor himself, who
says Ibid. page 21.
Some of these Fuli blacks who dwell on both sides the river Gambia, are in
subjection to the Mandingos, amongst whom they dwell, having been probably
driven out of their country, by war or famine. They have chiefs of their own,
who rule with much moderation. Few of them will drink brandy or any thing
stronger than water and sugar, being strict mahometans. Their form of
government goes on easy, because the people are of a good quiet disposition and
so well instructed in what is right, that a man who does ill is the abomination
of all, and none will support him against the chief. In these countries the
natives are not coveteous of land, desiring no more than what they use; and as
they do not plough with horses and cattle they can use but very little,
therefore the Kings are willing to give the Fulis leave to live in their
country and cultivate their lands. If any of their people are known to be made
slaves, all the Fulis will join to redeem them; they also support the old, the
blind and lame amongst themselves, and as far as their abilities go, they
supply the necessities of the Mandingos, great numbers of whom they have
maintained in famine. The author from his own observations says, They were
rarely angry, that he never heard them abuse one another.

The Mandingos are said by A. Brue before mentioned, To be the most numerous
nation on the Gambia, besides which numbers of them are dispersed over all
these countries; being the most rigid mahometans amongst the Negroes, they
drink neither wine nor brandy, and are politer than the other Negroes. The
chief of the trade goes through their hands. Many are industrious and laborious,
keeping their ground well cultivated and breeding a good stock of cattle.
Astley's Collect. vol. 2, page 269.
Every town has an Alkali, or Governor, who has great power; for most of them
having two common fields of clear ground, one for corn and the other for rice,
the Alkali appoints the labor of all the people. The men work the corn ground,
and the women and girls the rice ground, and as they all equally labor, so he
equally divides the corn amongst them; and in case any are in want, the others
supply them. This Alkali decides all quarrels, and has the first voice in all
conferences in town affairs. Some of these Mandigos who are settled at Galem,
far up the river Senegal, can read and write arabic tolerably, and are a good
hospitable people, who carry on a trade with the Inland nations. Astley's
Collect. vol. 2, page 73.
They are extremely populous in those parts, their women being fruitful, and
they not suffering any person amongst them, but such are guilty of crimes, to
be made slaves. We are told, from Jobson, Ibid. 296.
That the mohammedan Negroes say their prayers thrice a day. Each village has a
priest who calls them to their duty. It Is surprising (says the author) as well
as commendable, to see the modesty, attention and reverence they observe during
their worship. He asked some of their priests the purport of their prayers and
ceremonies; their answer always was, That they adored God, by prostrating
themselves before him; that by humbling themselves, they acknowledged their own
insignificancy; and farther entreated him to forgive their faults, and to grant
thom all good and necessary things, as well as deliverance from evil. Jobson
takes notice of several good qualites in these Negroe priests; particularly
their great sobriety. They gain their livelihood by keeping school, for the
education of the children. The boys are taught to read and write. They not only
teach school, but rove about the country; teaching and instructing; for which
the whole country is open to them; and they have a free recourse through all
places, though the Kings may be at war with one another.

The three forementioned nations, practice several trades, as smiths, potters,
sadlers, and weavers. Their smiths particularly work neatly in gold and silver,
and make knives, hatchets, reaping hooks, spades and shares to cut iron, etc.
etc. Their potters make neat tobacco pipes, and pots to boil their food. Some
authors say, that weaving is their principal trade; this is done by the women
and girls, who spin and weave very fine cotton cloth, which they die blue or
black. F. Moor, 28.
F. Moor says the Jalofs particularly, make great quantities of the cotton
cloth; their pieces are generally 27 yards long and but about 9 inches broad;
their looms being very narrow; these they sew neatly together, so as to supply
the use of broad cloth.

It was in these parts of Guinea, that M. Adanson, correspondant of the royal
academy of sciences at Paris, mentioned in some former publications, was
employed from the year 1749, to the year 1753, wholly in making natural and
philosophical observations, on the country about the rivers Senegal and Gambia.
Speaking of the great heats on Senegal, he says, M. Adanson's voyoge to Senegal
etc. page 308.
It is to them that they are partly indebted for the fertility of their lands,
which is so great, that with little labor and care, there is no fruit nor
grain but grow in great plenty.

Of the soil on the Gambia, he says, Idem, page 164.
It is rich and deep, and amazingly fertile; it produces spontaneously, and
almost without cultivation, all the necessaries of life; grain, fruit, herbs,
and roots. Every thing matures to perfection, and is excellent in its kind. M.
Adanson, page, 162.
One thing which always surprised him, was the prodigious rapidity, with which
the sap of trees repair any loss they may happen to sustain in that country;
and I was never (says he) more astonished, than when landing four days after
the locusts had devoured all the fruits and leaves, and even the buds of the
trees, to find the trees covered with new leaves; and they did not seem me to
have suffered much. It was then, (says the same author,) Idem page, 171.
the fish season; you might see them in shoals approaching toward land. Some
of those shoals were fifty fathom square, and the fish crowded together in such
a manner as to roll upon one another, without being able to swim. As soon as
the Negroes perceive them coming toward land, they jump into the water, with a
basket in one hand, and swim with the other. They need only to plunge and to
lift up their basket, and they are sure to return loaded with fish. Speaking of
the appearance of the country, and of the disposition of the people, he says,
Ibid page, 54
Which way soever I turned mine eyes on this pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect
image of pure nature; an agreeable solitude, bounded on every side by charming
landscapes; the rural situation of cottages in the midst of trees; the ease and
indolence of the Negroes, reclined under the shade of their spreading foliage;
the simplicity of their dress and manners; the whole revived in my mind the
idea of our first parents, and I seemed to contemplate the world in its
primitive state. They are generaly speaking, very good natured, sociable and
obliging. I was not a little pleased with this my first reception; it convinced
me, that there ought to be a considerable abatement made in the accounts I had
read and heard every where of the savage character of the Africans. I observed
both in Negroes and Moors, great humanity and sociableness; which gave me
strong hopes, that I should be very safe amongst them, and meet with the
success I desired, in my enquiries after the curiosities of the country.
Adanson, page, 252, ibid.
He was agreeably amused with the conversation of the Negroes, their fables,
dialogues, and witty stories with which they entertain each other alternately,
according to their custom. Speaking of the remarks which the natives made to
him, with relation to the stars and planets, he says It is amazing, that such a
rude and illeterate people, should reason so pertinently in regard to those
heavenly bodies; there is no manner of doubt, but that with proper instruments,
and a good will, they would become excellent astronomers.

CHAP. II.
THE Ivory Coast; its soil and produce. The character of the natives
misrepresented by some authors. These misrepresentations occasioned by the
Europeans having treacherously carried off many of their people. John Smith
surveyor to the African company, his observations thereon. John Snock's
remarks. The Gold Coast and Slave Coast, these have the most European
Factories; and furnish the greatest number of slaves to the Europeans.
Exceeding fertile. The country of Axim; and of Ante. Good account of the Inland
people. Great fishery. Extraordinary trade for slaves. The Slave Coast. The
kingdom of Whidah. Fruitful and pleasant. The natives kind and obliging. Very
populous. Keep regular markets and (...) Good order therein* Murder, adultery
and theft severely punished. The Kings revenues. The principal people have an
idea of the true God. Commendable care of the poor. Several small governments
depend on plunder and the slave trade.

THAT part of Guinea, known by the name of the Grain, and Ivory Coast, come,
next in course. This coast extends about 500 miles. The soil appears by account
to be in general fertile, producing abundance of rice and roots; indigo and
cotton thrive without cultivation and tobacco would be excellent if carefully
manufactured; fish in great plenty, their flocks greatly increase and their
trees are loaded with fruit. They make a cotton cloth which sells well on the
Coast. In a word the country is rich and the commerce advantageous and might be
greatly augmented by such as would cultivate the friendship of the natives;
these are represented by some writers as a rude, treacherous people; whilst
several other authors of credit give them a very different character;
representing them as sensible, courteous and the fairest traders on the coast
of Guinea. In the collection they are said Collect. 2. vol. page, 560.
to be averse to drinking to excess, and such at do are severely punished by
the kings order: on inquiry why there is such a disagreement in the character
given of these people, it appears, that though they are naturally inclined to be
kind to strangers, with whom they are fond of trading, yet the frequent
injuries done them by Europeans, has occasioned their being suspicious and shy:
the same cause has been the occasion of the ill treatment they have sometimes
given to innocent strangers, who have attempted to trade with them. As the
Europeans have no settlement on this part of Guinea, the trade is carried on by
signals from the ships; on the appearance of which the natives usually come on
board, in their canoes, bringing their gold-dust, ivory, etc. which has given
opportunity to some villainous Europeans, to carry them off with their effects,
or retain them on board till a ransom is paid. It is noted by some that since
the European voyagers have carried away several of these people, their mistrust
is so great, that it is very difficult to prevail on them to come on board.
William Smith remarks W. Smith, page, 111.
As we past along this coast, we very often lay before a town and fired a gun
for the natives to come off; but no soul came near us; at length we learnt, by
some ships that were trading down the coast that the natives came seldom on
board an English ship, for fear of being detained or carried off; yet at last
some ventured on board; but if these chanced to spy any arms, they would all
immediately take to their canoes and make the best of their way home. They had
then in their possession one Bejamin Cross, the mate of an English vessel, who
was detained by them to make reprisals for some of their men, who had formerly
been carried away by some English vessel. In the Collection we are told,
Astley's collection, vol. 2 page, 475.
This villainous custom, is too often practiced, chiefly by the Bristol and
Liverpool ships; and is a great detriment to the slave trade on the Windward
Coast. John Snock mentioned in Bosman W. Bosman's description of Guinea P. 440.
when on that coast wrote, We cast anchor, but not one Negro coming on board, I
went on shore, and after having staid awhile on the strand, some Negroes came
to me; and being desirous to be informed why they did not come on board, I was
answered, that about two months before the English had been there with two
large vessels, and had ravaged the country, destroyed all their canoes,
plundered their houses and carried off some of their people; upon which the
remainder fled to the inland country, where most of them were at that time; so
that there being not much to be done by us, we were obliged to return on board.
W. Bosman's description of Guinea, page, 439.
When I enquired after their wars with other countries, they told me, they were
not often troubled with them; but if any difference happened, they chose rather
to end the dispute amicably than to come to arms. Ibid. 441.
He found the inhabitants civil and good natured. Speaking of the king of Rio
Sestro, lower down the coast, he says, He was a very agreeable, obliging man,
and that all his subjects are civil, as well as very laborious in agriculture
and the pursuits of trade. Marchais says, Astley's collection 2 vol. page, 565.
That though the country is very populous, yet none of the natives (except
criminals) are sold for slaves. Vaillant never heard of any settlement being
made by the Europeans on this part of Guinea; and Smith remarks, Smith's voyage
to Guinea, 112.
That these coasts, which are divided into several little kingdoms, and have
seldom any wars, is the reason the slave trade is not so good here as on the
Gold and Slave Coast, where the Europeans have several forts and factories. A
plain evidence this, that it is the intercourse with the Europeans and their
settlements on the coast which gives life to the slave trade.

Next adjoining to the Ivory Coast are those called the Gold Coast and the
Slave Coast; authors are not agreed about their bounds; but their extent
together along the coast, may be about five hundred miles. And as the policy,
produce and economy of these two divisions of Guinea are much the same, I
shall describe them together.

Here the Europeans have the greatest number of forts and factories, from
whence, by means of the Negro factors, a trade is carried on above seven
hundred miles back in the Inland country; whereby great numbers of slaves are
procured, as well by means of the wars which arise amongst the Negroes, or are
fomented by the Europeans, as those brought from the back country. Here we find
the natives more reconciled to the European manners and trade; but, at the same
time, much more inured to war, and ready to assist the European traders, in
procuring loadings for the great number of vessels which come yearly on those
coasts for slaves. This part of Guinea is agreed by historians to be, in
general, extraordinary fruitful and agreeable; producing (according to the
difference of the soil) vast quantities of rice and other grain; plenty of
fruit and roots; palm wine and oil, and fish in great abundance; with much tame
and wild cattle. Bosman, principal factor for the Dutch at D'Elmina, speaking
of the country of Axim, which is situate toward the beginning of the Gold
Coast, Bosman's description of the coast of Guinea, p. 5.
says, The Negro inhabitants are generally very rich, driving a great trade
with the Europeans for gold: That they are industriously employed either in
trade, fishing, or agriculture; but chiefly in the culture of rice, which grows
here, in an incredible abundance, and is transported hence all over the Gold
Coast. The inhabitants in lieu returning full fraught with millet, jamms
potatoes and palm oil. The same author speaking of the country of Ante, says,
Idem, p. 14.
This country, as well as the Gold Coast, abounds with hills, enriched with
extraordinary high and beautiful trees; its valleys, betwixt the hills, are
wide and extensive, producing in great abundance very good rice, millet, jamms,
potatoes, and other fruits, all good in their kind, He adds, In short it is a
land that yields its manurers as plentiful a crop as they can wish, with great
quantities of palm wine and oil, besides being well furnished with all sorts of
tame, as well as wild beasts; but that the last fatal wars had reduced it to a
miserable condition, and stripped it of most of its inhabitants. The adjoining
country of Fetu, he says, Bosman, p. 41.
was formerly so powerful and populous, that it struck terror into all the
neighboring nations; but it is at present, so drained by continual wars, that
it is entirely ruined; there does not remain inhabitants sufficient to till the
country; though it is so fruitful and pleasant that it may be compared to the
country of Ante, just before described; frequently, says that author, when
walking through it before the last war, I have seen it abound with fine well
built and populous towns, agreeably enriched with vast quantities of corn,
cattle, palm wine and oil. The inhabitants all applying themselves without any
distinction to agriculture, some sow corn, others press oil and draw wine from
palm trees, with both which it is plentifully stored,

William Smith gives much the same account of the before mentioned parts of the
Gold Coast, and adds, The country about D'Elmina and Cape Coast, is much the
same for beauty and goodness, but more populous; and the nearer we come toward
the Slave-Coast, the more delightful and rich all the countries are, producing
all sorts of trees, fruits, roots and herbs, that grow within the torrid Zone.
J. Barbot also remarks, John Barbot's description of Guinea, p. 154.
with respect to the countries of Ante and Adom, That the soil is very good,
and fruitful in corn and other produce, which it affords in such plenty, that
besides what serves for their own use they always export great quantities for
sale; they have a competent number of cattle, both tame and wild; and the
rivers abundantly stored with fish; so that nothing is wanting for the support
of life, and to make it easy. In the Collection its said, Astley's Collection,
2. vol. p. 535.
That the Inland people, on that part of the coast, employ themselves in
tillage and trade, and supply the market with corn, fruit and palm wine; the
country producing such vast plenty of indian corn, that abundance is daily
exported, as well by Europeans as Blacks resorting thither from other parts.
These Inland people are said to live in great union and friendship, being
generally well tempered, civil and tractable; not apt to shed human blood,
except when much provoked; and ready to assist one another. In the Collection
Collection, vol. 2. page 640.
, it is said, That the fishing business is esteemed on the Gold Coast next to
trading; that those who profess it are more numerous than those of other
employments. That the greatest number of these are at Kommendo, Mina and
Kormantin; from each of which places, there goes out every morning, (Tuesday
excepted, which is the Fetish day, or day of rest,) five, six and sometimes
eight hundred canoes, from 13 to 14 feet long, who spread themselves two
leagues at sea, each fisherman carrying in his canoe a sword, with bread,
water, and a little fire, on a large stone, to roast fish. Thus they labor
till noon, when the sea breeze blowing fresh, they return on the shore;
generally laden with fish; a quantity of which the Inland inhabitants come down
to buy, which they sell again at the country markets.

William Smith William Smith, p. 135.
says The country about Acra, where the English and Dutch have each a strong
fort, is very delightful, and the natives courteous and civil to strangers. He
adds, That this place seldom fails of an extraordinary good trade from the
Inland country; especially for slaves, whereof several are supposed to come
from very remote parts; because it is not uncommon to find a Malayen or two
amongst a parcel of other slaves: The Malaya people are originally natives of
Mallacca, in the East Indies, situate several thousand miles from the Gold
Coast. They differ very much from the Guinea Negroes, being of a tawny
complexion, with long black hair.

Most parts of the Slave Coasts are represented as equally fertile and pleasant
with the Gold Coast: The kingdom of Whidah has been particularly noted by
travelers. Smith, p. 194. Bosman, p. 316.
William Smith and Bosman agree, That it is one of the most delightful
countries in the world. The great number and variety of tall, beautiful and
shady trees, which seem planted in groves; the verdant fields every where
cultivated, and no otherwise divided than by those groves, and in some places a
small foot path; together with a great number of villages, contribute to afford
the most delightful prospect; the whole country being a fine easy and almost
imperceptible ascent, for the space of 40 or 50 miles from the sea. That the
farther you go from the sea, the the more beutiful and populous the country
appears. That the natives were kind and obliging, and so industrious, that no
place which was thought fertile could escape being planted, even within the
hedges, which enclose their villages. And that the next day after they had
reaped they sowed again.

Snelgrave also says, The country appears full of towns and villages, and being
a rich soil and well cultivated, looked like an entire garden. In the
Collection Collection, 2 vol. page, 651.
the husbandry of the Negroes is described to be carried on with great
regularity; the rainy season approaching they go into the fields and woods, to
fix on a proper place for sowing; and as here is no property in ground, the
king's license being obtained, the people go out in troops, and first clear the
ground from bushes and weeds which they burn. The fields thus cleared they dig
it up a foot deep and so let it remain for eight or ten days, till the rest of
their neighbors have disposed their ground in the same manner. They then
consult about sowing, and for that end assemble at the king's court, the next
Fetish day. The king's grain must be sown first. They then go again to the
field, and give the ground a second digging, and sow their seed. Whilst the
king or governor's land is sowing, he sends out wine, and flesh ready dressed,
enough to serve the laborers. Afterward they in like manner sow the ground
allotted for their neighbors, as diligently as that of the king; by whom they
are also feasted; and so continue to work in a body for the public benefit,
till every man's ground is tilled and sowed. None but the king and a few great
men are exempted from this labor. Their grain soon sprouts out of the ground.
When it is about man's height and begins to ear, they raise a wooden house in
the center of the field, covered with straw, in which they set their children
to watch their corn and fright away the birds.

Bosman Bosman p. 317.
speaks in commendation of the civility, kindness and great industry of the
natives of Whydah; this is confirmed by Smith Smith p. 195.
who says, The natives here seem to be the most gentleman like Negroes in
Guinea, abounding with good manners and ceremony to each other. The inferior
pay the utmost deference and respect to the superior; as do wives to their
husbands, and children to their parents. All here are naturally industrious and
find constant employment: the men in agriculture, and the women in spinning and
weaving cotton. The men, whose chief talent lies in husbandry, are unacquainted
with arms; otherwise being a numerous people, they could have made a better
defense against the king of Dahome, who subdued them without much trouble.
Collect. 2. vol. p. 657
Throughout the Gold Coast there are regular markets in all villages, furnished
with provisions and merchandise, held every day in the week, except Tuesday;
whence they supply not only the inhabitants, but the European Ships. The Negro
women are very expert in buying and selling, and extremely industrious; for
they will repair daily to market, from a considerable distance, loaded like
pack horses, with a child, perhaps, at their back, and a heavy burden on their
heads. After selling their wares, they buy fish and other necessaries and
return home loaded as they came.

Collect. 3. vol. p. a1.
There is a market held at Sabi, every fourth day; also a weekly one in the
province of Aplogua, which is so resorted to, that there are usually five or
six thousand merchants. Their markets are so well regulated and governed, that
seldom any disorder happens; each species of merchandise and merchants have a
separate place allotted them by themselves. The buyers may haggle as much as
they will, but it must be without noise or fraud. To keep order the king
appoints a-judge, who with four officers well armed, inspects the Markets, hear
all complaints, and in a summary way decides all differences; he has power to
seize and sell as slaves all who are catched in stealing, or disturbing the
peace. In these markets are to be sold men, women, children, oxen, sheep, goats
and fowls of all kinds: European cloths, linen and woollen; printed callicos,
silk, grocery ware, china, gold dust, iron in bars, etc. in a word most sorts
of European goods: as well as the produce of Africa and Asia. -- They have
other markets resembling our fairs, once or twice a year, to which all the
country repair, for they take care to order the day so in different governments
as not to interfere with each other.

With respect to government, William Smith says, Smith p. 193.
That the Gold Coast and Slave Coasts are divided into different districts,
some of which are governed by their chiefs or kings; the others being more of
the nature of a commonwealth, are governed by some of the principal men, called
Caboceros, who Bosman says, are properly denominated civil fathers; whose
province is to take care of the welfare of the city or village and to appease
tumults. But this order of government has been much broken since the coming of
the Europeans. Both Bosman and Barbot mention murder and adultery to be
severely punished on the Coast, frequently by death; and robbery by a fine
proportionable to the goods stolen.

The income of some of the king's is large. Bosman says, That the king of
Whydah's revenues and duties on things bought and sold are considerable; he
having the tithe of all things sold in the market, or imported in the country.
Bosman 337. Barbot, p. 335.
Both the abovementioned authors say, the tax on slaves shipped off in this
king's dominions, in some years amounts to near twenty thousand pounds.

Bosman tells us, The Whydah Negroes have a faint idea of a true God, ascribing
to him the attributes of almighty power and omnipresence; but God, they say, is
too high to condescend to think of mankind, wherefore he commits the government
of the world to those inferior dieties which they worship. Some authors say the
wisest of these Negroes are sensible of their mistake in this opinion, but dare
not forsake their old religion, for fear of the populace rising and killing
them; this is confirmed by William Smith who says, That all the natives of this
coast believe there is one true God, the author of them and all things; and
that they have some apprehension of a future state; and that almost every
village has a grove, or public place of worship, to which the principal
inhabitants, on a set day, resort to make their offerings.

In the Collection Astley's Collect. 2 vol. page 619.
it is remarked as an excellency in the Guinea government, That however poor
they may be in general, yet there are no beggars to be found amongst them;
which is owing to the care of their chief men, whose province it is to take
care of the welfare of the city or village; it being part of their office to
see that such people may earn their bread by their labor; some are set to blow
the smith's bellow's, others to press palm oil, or grind colors for their
matts and sell provision in the markets. The young men are listed to serve as
soldiers, so that they suffer no common beggar. Bosman ascribes a further
reason for this good order, viz. That when a Negroe finds he cannot subsist, he
binds himself for a certain sum of money, and the master to whom he is bound,
is obliged to find him necessaries: that the master sets him a sort of task,
which is not in the least slavish, being chiefly to defend his master on
occasions; or in sowing time to work as much as he himself pleases. Bosman, p.
119.


Adjoining to the kingdom of Whydah, are several small governments, as Coto,
great and small Popo, Ardrah, etc. all situate on the Slave Coast, where the
chief trade for slaves is carried on. These are governed by their respective
kings, and follow much the same customs with those of Whydah; except that their
principal living is on plunder, and the slave trade.

CHAP. III.
THE kingdom of Benin. Its extent. Esteemed the most potent in Guniea.
Fruitfulness of the soil. Good disposition of the people. Order of government.
Punishment of crimes. Large extent of the town of Great Benin. Order
maintained. The natives honest and charitable. Their religion. The kingdoms of
Kongo and Angola. Many of the natives profess christianity. The country
fruitful. Disposition of the people. The administration of justice. The town of
Leango. Slave trade carried on by the Portuguese. Here the slave trade ends.

NEXT adjoining to the Slave Coast, is the kingdom of Benin, which though it
extends but about 170 miles on the Sea, yet spreads so far inland as to be
esteemed the most potent kingdom in Guinea. By Accounts the soil and produce
appears to be, in a great measure, like those before described; and the natives
represented as a reasonable good natured people: Artus says Collect. 3, vol.
page 228.
They are a sincere, inoffensive people, and do no injustice either to one
another or to strangers. William Smith Smith, p. 228.
confirms this account, and says, That the inhabitants are generally very good
natured and exceeding courteous and civil. When the Europeans make them
presents, which in their coming thither to trade they always do, they endeavor
to return them doubly.

Bosman tells us, W. Bosman, p. 405.
That his countrymen the Dutch, who were often obliged to to trust them till
they return the next year, were sure to be honestly paid their whole debts.

There is in Benin a considerable order in government. Theft, murder and
adultery being severely punished. Barbot says, Barbot, p. 237.
If a man and a woman of any quality be surprised in adultery, they are both
put to death, and their bodies are thrown on a dunghill, and left there a prey
to wild beasts. He adds, The severity of the law in Benin against adultery By
this account of the punishment inflicted on adulterers in this and other parts
of Guinea, it appears the Negroes are not insensible of the sinfulness of such
practices. How strange must it then appear to the serious minded amongst these
people, (nay how inconsistent is it with every divine and moral law, amongst
ourselves,) that those christian laws which prohibit fornication and adultery,
are in none of the English governments extended to them: but that they are
allowed to cohabit and separate at pleasure? And that even their masters think
so lightly of their marriage engagements, that when it suits with their
interest, they will separate man from wife, and children from both, to be sold,
in different, and even distant parts; without regard to their sometimes
grievous lamentations; whence it has happened, that such of those people who
are truly united in their marriage covenant, and in affection to one another,
have been driven to such desperation as either violently to destroy themselves,
or gradually to pine away, and die with mere grief. It is amazing, that whilst
the clergy of the established church, are publicly expressing a concern, that
these oppressed people should be made acquainted with the christian religion;
they should be thus suffered, and even forced so flagrantly to infringe one of
the principle injunctions of our holy religion!
amongst all orders of people, deters them from venturing; so that it is but
very seldom any persons are punished for that crime. Smith says, Their towns
are governed by officers appointed by the king, who have power to decide in
civil cases, and to raise the public taxes; but in criminal cases they must
send to the king's court, which is held at the town of Oedo or Great Benin.
This town which covers a large extent of ground, is about sixty miles from the
Sea. J. Barbot, page 358. 359.
Barbot tells us, That it contains thirty streets, twenty fathom wide, and
almost two miles long, commonly extending in a straight line from one gate to
another; that the gates are guarded by soldiers; that in these streets markets
are held every day of cattle, ivory, cotton and many sorts of European goods.
This large town is divided into several wards or districts, each governed by
its respective king of a street, as they call them; to administer justice, and
to keep good order. The inhabitants are very civil and good natured,
condescending to what the Europeans require of them, in a civil way. The same
author confirms what has been said by others of their justice in the payment of
their debts; and adds, That they above all other Guineans are very honest and
just in their dealings, and they have such an aversion for theft, that by the
law of the country it is punished with death. We are told by the same author,
Barbot, p. 369.
That the king of Benin is able upon occasion to maintain an army of a hundred
thousand men; but that for the most part, he does not keep thirty thousand.
William Smith says, The natives are all free men; none but foreigners can be
bought and sold there. W. Smith, p. 369.
They are very charitable, the king as well as his subjects. Bosman confirms
this, (...)* p. 409.
and says, The king and great lords subsist several poor at their place of
residence on charity, employing those who are fit for any work, and the rest
they keep for God's sake, so that here are no beggars.

As to religion these people believe there is a God the efficient cause of all
things, but like the rest of the Guineans they are superstitiously and
idolatrously inclined.

The last division of Guinea from which slaves are imported; are the kingdoms
of Kongo and Angola, these lie to the south of Benin, extending with the
intermediate land about twelve hundred miles on the Coast. Great numbers of
the natives of both these kingdoms profess the christian religion, which was
long since introduced by the Portuguese, who made early settlements in that
country.

In the Collection it is said, that both in Kongo and Angola the soil is in
general fruitful, producing great plenty of grain, indian corn and such
quantities of rice that it hardly bears any price, with fruits, roots and palm
oil in plenty.

The natives are generally a quiet people, who discover a good understanding,
and behave in a friendly manner to strangers, being of a mild conversation,
affable and easily overcome with reason.

In the government of Kongo, the king appoints a judge in every particular
division, to hear and determine disputes and civil causes; the judges imprison
and release, or impose fines according to the rule of custom; but in weighty
matters every one may appeal to the king, before whom all criminal causes are
brought, in which he gives sentence; but seldom condemns to death.

The town of Leango stands in the midst of four lordships, which abound in
corn, fruit etc. Here they make great quantities of cloth of diverse kinds very
fine and curious; the inhabitants are seldom idle: they even make needle work
caps as they walk in the streets.

The slave trade is here principally managed by the Portuguese; who carry the
trade far up into the inland countries. They are said to send off from these
parts fifteen thousand slaves each year.

At Angola, about the 10th degree of south latitude ends the trade for slaves.

CHAP. IV.
THE ancientest accounts of the Negroes, is from the Nubian Geography, and the
writings of Leo the African. Some account of those authors. The Arabians pass
into Guinea. The innocence and simplicity of the natives. They are subdued by
the Moors. Heli Ischia shakes off the Moorish yoke. The Portuguese make the
first descent in Guinea; from whence they carry off some of the natives: More
incursions of the like kind. The Portuguese erect the first fort at D'Elmina:
They begin the slave trade. Cada Mosto's testimony. Anderson's account to the
same purport. Dela Caza's concern for the relief of the oppressed Indians. Goes
over into Spain to plead their cause. His speech before Charles the fifth.

THE most ancient account we have of the country of the Negroes, particularly
that part situate on and between the two great rivers of Senegal and Gambia, is
from the writings of two ancient authors, one an Arabian and the other a Moor.
The first See travels into different parts of Africa by Fr. Moor. with a letter
to the publisher.
wrote in Arabic about the twelfth century. His works printed in that language
at Rome, were afterward translated into Latin and printed at Paris, under the
patronage of the famous Thuanus, chancellor of France, with the title of
Geographica Nubiensis, containing an account of all the nations lying on the
Senegal and Gambia. The other wrote by John Leo, Ibid.
a Moor born at Granada, in Spain, before the Moors were totally expelled from
that kingdom. He resided in Africa; but being on a voyage from Tripoli to
Tunis, was taken by some Italian Corsairs, who finding him possessed of several
Arabian books, besides his own manuscripts, apprehended him to be a man of
learning, and as such presented him to Pope Leo the 10th. This Pope encouraging
him, he embraced the Romish religion; and his description of Africa was
published in Italian. From these writings we gather, that after the mohammedan
religion had extended to the kingdom of Morocco, some of the promoters of it,
crossing the sandy deserts of Numedia, which separates that country from
Guinea, found it inhabited by men, who though under no regular government and
destitute of that knowledge the Arabians were favored with, lived in content
and peace. The first author particularly remarks, That they never made war or
traveled abroad; but employed themselves in tending their herds, or laboring
in the ground. J: Leo says p. 65. That they lived in common, having no property
in land, no tyrant nor superior lord, but supported themselves in an equal
state, upon the natural produce of the country, which afforded plenty of roots,
game and honey. That ambition or avarice never drove them into foreign
countries to subdue or cheat their neighbors. Thus they lived without toil or
superfluities. The ancient inhabitants of Morrocco who wore coats of mail, and
used swords and spears headed with iron, coming amongst these harmless and
naked people, soon brought them under subjection, and divided that part of
Guinea which lies on the rivers Senegal and Gambia into fifteen parts; those
were the fifteen kingdoms of the Negroes, over which the Moors presided and the
common people were Negroes. These Moors taught the Negroes the mohammedan
religion and arts of life; particularly the use of iron, before unknown to
them: About the 14th, century, a native Negro called Heli Ischia, expelled the
Moorish conquerors; but though the Negroes threw off the yoke of a foreign
nation, they only changed a Libyan for a Negroe master. Heli Ischia himself
becoming king, led the Negroes on to foreign wars and established himself in
power over a very large extent of country. Since Leo's time, the Europeans have
had very little knowledge of those parts of Africa; nor do they know what
became of his great empire. It is highly probable that it broke into pieces,
and that the natives again resumed many of their ancient customs; for in the
account published by William Moor, in his travels on the river Gambia, we find
a mixture of the Moorish and mohammedan customs, joined with the original
simplicity of the Negroes. It appears by accounts of ancient voyages, collected
by Hackluit, Purchase and others, that it was about fifty years before the
discovery of America, that the Portuguese attempted to sail round cape Bojador
which lays between their country and Guinea; this after diverse repulses,
occasioned by the violent currents, they effected; when landing on the western
coasts of Africa they soon began to make incursions into the country and to
seize and carry off the native inhabitants. As early as the year 1434, Alonzo
Gonzales, the first who is recorded to have met with the natives, being on that
coast, pursued and attacked a number of them, when some were wounded, as was
also one of the Portuguese, which the author records, as the first blood spilt
by christians in those parts. Six years after, the same Gonzales again attacked
the natives, and took twelve prisoners; with whom he returned to his vessels;
he afterward put a woman on shore, in order to induce the natives to redeem
the prisoners; but the next day 150 of the inhabitants appeared on horses and
camels, provoking the Portuguese to land, which they not daring to venture, the
natives discharged a volley of stones at them, and went off. After this the
Portuguese still continued to send vessels on the coast of Africa, particularly
we read of their falling on a village, whence the inhabitants fled and being
pursued, 25 were taken. He that ran best, says the author, taking the most: in
their way home they killed some of the natives, and took fifty-five more
prisoners. Collection, vol. 1, page 13.
Afterward Dinisanes Dagrama, with two other vessels landed on the island
Arguin, where they took 54 Moors; then running along the coast 80 leagues
farther they at several times took 50 slaves; but here seven of the Portuguese
were killed. Then being joined by several other vessels, Dinisanes proposed to
destroy the island, to revenge the loss of the seven Portuguese, of which the
Moor's being apprized fled; so that no more than 12 were found whereof only
four could be taken; the rest being killed, as also one of the Portuguese. Many
more captures of this kind, on the coast of Barbary and Guinea, are recorded to
have been made in those early times by the Portuguese; who in the year 1481,
erected their first fortat D'Elmina on that coast, from whence they soon opened
a trade for slaves with the Inland parts of Guinea.

From the foregoing accounts it is undoubted that the practice of making slaves
of the Negroes, owes it origin to the early incursions of the Portuguese on the
coast of Africa, solely from an inordinate desire of gain; this is clearly
evidenced from their own historians, particularly Cada Mosto about the year
1455, who writes, Collection, vol. 1. page, 576.
That before the trade was settled for purchasing slaves from the Moors at
Arguin, sometimes four, and sometimes more Portuguese vessels, were used to
come to that gulf, well armed, and landing by night would surprise some
fishermen's villages; that they even entered into the country and carried off
Arabs of both sexes, whom they sold in Portugal. And also That the Portuguese
and Spaniards settled on four of the Canary islands, would go to the other
island, by night, and seize some of the natives of both sexes, whom they sent
to be sold in Spain.

After the settlement of America those devastations and the captivating the
miserable Africans greatly increased.

Anderson in his history of trade and commerce, at page 336, speaking of what
passed in the year 1508, writes That the Spaniards had by this time found that
the miserable Indian natives, whom they had made to work in their mines and
fields, were not so robust and proper for those purposes, as Negroes, brought
from Africa; wherefore they, about that time, began to import Negroes for that
end into Hispaniola, from the Portuguese settlements, on the Guinea coasts; and
also afterward for their sugar works; This oppression of the Indians, had,
even before this time, rouzed the zeal, as well as it did the compassion of
some of the truly pious of that day; particularly that of Bartholomew Delas
Casas, bishop of Chapia; whom a desire of being instrumental toward the
conversion of the Indians, had invited into America. It is generally agreed, by
the writers of that age, that he was a man of perfect disinterestedness, and
ardent charity; being affected with this sad spectacle, he returned to the
court of Spain, and there made a true report of the matter; but not without
being strongly opposed by those mercenary wretches, who had enslaved the
Indians; yet being strong and indefatigable, he went to and fro, between Europe
and America, firmly determined not to give over his pursuit, but with his life.
After long solicitation and innumerable repulses, he obtained leave to lay the
matter before the Emperor Charles the fifth, then King of Spain. As the
contents of the speech he made before the King in council, are very applicable
to the case of the enslaved Africans, and a lively evidence that the spirit of
true piety speaks the same language in the hearts of faithful men, in all ages,
for the relief of their fellow creatures, from oppression of every kind, I
think it may not be improper, here to transcribe the most interesting parts of
it. I was, says this pious bishop, one of the first who went to America;
neither curiosity, nor interest prompted me to undertake so long and dangerous
a voyage, the saving the souls of the heathen was my sole object. Why was I not
permitted, even at the expense of my blood, to ransom so many thousand souls,
who fell unhappy victims to avarice or lust? I have been an eye witness to such
cruel treatment of the Indians, as is too horrid to be mentioned at this time.
-- It is said that barbarous executions were necessary to punish or check the
rebellion of the Americans; -- but to whom was this owing? did not those people
receive the Spaniards who first came amongst them with gentleness and humanity?
Did they not show more joy, in proportion, in lavishing treasure upon them,
than the Spaniards did greediness in receiving it? -- but our avarice was not
yet satisfied; -- though they gave up to us their land and their riches, we would
tear from them their wives, their children and their liberties. -- To blacken
these unhappy people, their enemies assert, that they are scarce human
creatures; -- but it is we that ought to blush, for having been less men, and
more barbarous than they. -- What right have we to enslave a people who are
born free and whom we disturbed, though they never offended us? -- They are
represented as a stupid people, addicted to vice; -- but have they not
contracted most of their vices from the example of the christians? And as to
those vices peculiar to themselves, have not the christians quickly exceeded
them therein? Nevertheless it must be granted, that the Indians still remain
untainted with many vices usual amongst the Europeans; such as ambition,
blasphemy, treachery, and many like monsters, which have not yet took place
with them; they have scarce an idea of them; so that in effect, all the
advantage we can claim, is to have more elevated notions of things, and our
natural faculties more unfolded and more cultivated than theirs. -- Don't let
us flatter our corruptions, nor voluntarily blind ourselves; all nations are
equally free; one nation has no right to infringe upon the freedom of any
other; let us do toward these people as we would have them to have done
toward us, if they had landed upon our shore, with the same superiority of
strength. And indeed, why should not things be equal on both sides? How long
has the right of the strongest been allowed to be the balance of justice? What
part of the gospel gives a sanction to such a doctrine? In what part of the
whole earth did the apostles and the first promulgators of the gospel ever
claim a right over the lives, the freedom, or the substance of the Gentiles?
What a strange method this of propagating the gospel, that holy law of grace,
which from being slaves to Satan, initiates us into the freedom of the children
of God! -- Will it be possible for us to inspire them with a love to its
dictates, while they are so exasperated at being dispossessed of that
invaluable blessing, Liberty? The apostles submitted to chains themselves, but
loaded no man with them. Christ came to free not to enslave us. -- Submission
to the faith he left us, ought to be a voluntary act, and should be propagated
by persuasion, gentleness and reason.

At my first arrival in Hispaniola, added the bishop, it contained a million of
inhabitants, and now (viz. in the space of about twenty years) there remains
scarce the hundredth part of them; -- thousands have perished through want,
fatigue, merciless punishment, cruelty and barbarity. If the blood of one man
unjustly shed, calls loudly for vengeance, how strong must be the cry of that
of so many unhappy creatures which is shedding daily? -- The good bishop
concluded his speech, with imploring the king's clemency for subjects so
unjustly oppressed; and bravely declared, that heaven would one day call him to
an account, for the numberless acts of cruelty which he might have prevented.
The king applauded the bishop's zeal; promised to second it; but so many of the
great ones had an interest in continuing the oppression, that nothing was done;
so that all the Indians in Hispaniola, except a few who had hid themselves in
the most inaccessible mountains, were destroyed.

CHAP. V.
First account of the English trading to Guinea. Thomas Windham and several
others go to that coast. Some of the Negroes carried of by the English. Queen
Elizabeth's charge to captain Hawkins respecting the natives: Nevertheless he
goes on the coast and carries off some of the Negroes. Patents are granted. The
king of France objects to the Negroes being kept in slavery: As do the college
of Cardinals at Rome. The natives, an inoffensive people; corrupted by the
Europeans. The sentiments of the natives concerning the slave trade, from
William Smith: Confirmed by Andrew Brue and James Barbot.

IT was about the year 1551, toward the latter end of the reign of king Edward
the sixth, when some London merchants sent out the first English ship, on a
trading voyage to the coast of Guinea; this was soon ollowed by several others
to the same parts; but the English not having then any plantations in the West
Indies, and consequently no occasion for Negroes, such ships traded only for
gold, Elephants teeth and Guinea pepper. This trade was carried on at the
hazard of losing their ships and cargoes, if they had fallen into the hands of
the Portuguese, who claimed an exclusive right of trade, on account of the
several settlements they had made there. Astley's Collection, vol. 1 page, 139.
In the year 1553, we find captain Thomas Windham trading along the coast with
140 men, in three ships, and sailing as far as Benin, which lies about 3000
miles down the coast, to take in a load of pepper. Collection vol. 1. p. 148.
Next year John Lock traded along the coast of Guinea, as far as D'Elmina, when
he brought away considerable quantities of gold and ivory. He speaks well of
the natives, and says, Ibid. 157.
That whoever will deal with them must behave civilly, for they will not
traffic if ill used.. In 1555, William Towerson traded in a peaceable manner
with the natives, who made complaint to him of the Portuguese, who were then
settled in their castle at D'Elmina, saying, They were bad men, who made them
slaves if they could take them, putting irons on their legs.

This bad example of the Portuguese, was soon followed by some evil disposed
Englishmen, for the same captain Towerson relates, Collection, vol. 1. p. 148.
That in the course of his voyage, he perceived the natives, near D'Elmina,
unwilling to come to him, and that he was at last attacked by them; which he
understood was done in revenge for the wrong done them, the year before, by one
captain Gainsh, who had taken away the Negro captain's son, and three others,
with their gold etc. this caused them to join the Portuguese, notwithstanding
their hatred of them, against the English. The next year captain Towerson
brought these men back again; whereupon the Negroes showed him much kindness.
Ibid. 157.
Quickly after this another instance of the same kind occurred, in the case of
captain George Fenner, who, being on the coast with three vessels, was also
attacked by the Negroes, who wounded several of his people, and violently
carried three of his men to their town. The captain sent a messenger, offering
any thing they desired for the ransom of his men; but they refused to deliver
them, letting him know, That three weeks before, an English ship which came in
the road, had carried off three of their people, and that till they were
brought again they would not restore his men, even though they should give their
three ships to release them. It was probably the evil conduct of these and some
other Englishmen, which was the occasion of what is mentioned in Hill's naval
history, viz. That when captain Hawkins returned from his first voyage to
Africa, Queen Elizabeth sent for him, when she expressed her concern, least any
of the African Negroes should be carried off without their free consent; which
she declared would be detestable, and would call down the vengeance of heaven
upon the undertakers. Hawkins made great promises, which nevertheless he did
not perform, for his next voyage to the coast appears to have been principally
calculated to procure Negro slaves; in order to sell them to the Spaniards in
the West Indies; which occasioned the same author to use these remarkable
words. Here began the horrid practice of forcing the Africans into slavery, an
injustice and barbarity, which, so sure as there is vengeance in heaven for the
worst of crimes will sometime be the destruction of all who act or who
encourage it. This captain Hawkins, afterward sir John Hawkins, seems to have
been the first Englishman who gave public countenance to this wicked traffic:
For Anderson before mentioned, at page 401, says, That in the year 1562,
captain Hawkins, assisted by subscription of sundry gentlemen, now fitted out
three ships, and having learnt that Negroes were a very good commodity in
Hispaniola, he sailed to the coast of Guinea, took in Negroes, and sailed with
them for Hispaniola, where he sold them, and his English commodities, and
loaded his three vessels with hides, sugar and ginger, etc. with which he
returned home, anno. 1563, making a prosperous voyage. As it proved a lucrative
business, the trade was continued both by Hawkins and others, as appears from
the naval chronicle, page 55, where it is said, That on the 18th of October,
1564, captain John Hawkins with, two ships of 700 and 140 tuns sailed for
Africa, that on the 8th December they anchored to the south of Cape Verd, where
the captain manned the boat, and sent eighty men in armor, in the country; to
see if they could take some Negroes, but the natives flying from them, they
returned to their ships, and proceeded farther down the coast; here they staid
certain days, sending their men ashore, in order, as the author says, to burn
and spoil their towns and take the inhabitants. The land they observed to be
well cultivated, there being plenty of grain and fruit of several sorts, and
the towns prettily laid out. On the 25th, being informed by the Portuguese, of
a town of Negroes called Bymba, where there was not only a quantity of gold,
but 140 inhabitants, they resolved to attack it, having the Portuguese for
their guide; but by mismanagement they took but ten Negroes, having seven of
their own men killed and 27 wounded. They then went farther down the coast,
when having procured a number of Negroes, they proceeded to the West Indies,
where they sold them to the Spaniards. And in the same naval chronicle, at page
76, it is said, That in the year 1567, Francis Drake, before performing his
voyage round the world, went with sir John Hawkins, in his expedition to the
coast of Guinea, where taking in a cargoe of slaves, they determined to steer
for the Carribee Islands. How queen Elizabeth suffered so grievous an
infringement of the rights of mankind to be perpetrated by her subjects; and
how she was persuaded about the 30th year of her reign, to grant patents for
carrying on a trade from the north part of the river Senegal, to an hundred
leagues beyond Siera Leona, which gave rise to the present African company, is
hard to account for, any otherwise than to have arisen from the
misrepresentation made to her of the situation of the Negroes, and of the
advantages, it was pretended, they would reap from being made acquainted with
the christian religion. This was the case of Lewis the 13th, king of France,
who Labat, in his account of the isles of America, tells us, Was extremely
uneasy at a law by which the Negroes of his colonies were to be made slaves;
but it being strongly urged to him, as the readiest means for their conversion
to christianity, he acquiesed therewith. Nevertheless, some of the christian
powers did not so easily give way in this matter, for we find, Collection, vol.
3. page 164.
That cardinal Cibo, one of the Pope's principal ministers of state, wrote a
letter on behalf of the college of cardinals or great council at Rome, to the
missionaries in Congo, complaining that the pernicious and abominable abuse of
selling slaves was yet continued; requiring them to remedy the same if
possible, but this the missionaries saw little hopes of accomplishing, by
reason that the trade of the country lay wholly in slaves and ivory.

From the foregoing accounts, as well as other authentic publications of this
kind, it appears that, it was the lust of unwarrantable gain, which first
stimulated the Portuguese, and afterward other Europeans, to engage in this
horrid traffic. By the most authentic relations of those early times the
natives were an inoffensive people, who when civilly used, traded amicably with
the Europeans. Its recorded of those of Benin, the largest kingdom in Guinea,
Collection, vol. 1. page 202.
That they were a gentle loving people, and Reynold says, Idem. 245.
They found more sincere proofs of love and good will from the natives, than
they could find from the Spaniards and Portuguese, even though they had relieved
them from the greatest misery. And from the same relations there is no reason
to think otherwise but that they generally lived in peace amongst themselves;
for I don't find, in the numerous publications I have perused on this subject,
relating to these early times, of there being wars on that coast, nor of any
sale of captives taken in battle, who would have been otherwise sacrificed by
the victors Note, this plea falls of itself, for if the Negroes apprehended
they should be cruelly put to death, if they were not sent away, why do they
manifest such reluctance and dread, as they generally do at being brought from
their native country? William Smith at page 28, says, The Gambians abhor
slavery; and will attempt any thing, though never so desperate, to avoid it, and
Thomas Philips in his account of a voyage he performed to the coast of Guinea,
writes, They, the Negroes are so loath to leave their own country, that they
have often leaped out of the canoe, boat or ship into the sea, and kept under
water till they were drowned to avoid being taken up.
: Notwithstanding some modern authors, in their publications, relating to the
West Indies, desirous of throwing a vail over the iniquity of the slave trade,
have been hardy enough, upon mere supposition or report, to assert the contrary.

It was long after the Portuguese had made a practice of violently forcing the
natives of Africa into slavery, that we read of the different Negroe nations
making war upon each other, and selling their captives. And probably this was
not the case, till those bordering on the coast, who had been used to supply
the vessels with necessaries, had become corrupted, by their intercourse with
the Europeans, and were excited by drunkenness and avarice to join them in
carrying on those wicked schemes; by which those unnatural wars were
perpetrated; the inhabitants kept in continual alarms; the country laid waste;
and as William Moor expresses it, Infinite numbers sold into slavery; but that
the Europeans are the principal cause of these devastations, is particularly
evidenced by one, whose connection with the trade would rather induce him to
represent it in the fairest colors, to wit, William Smith, the person sent in
the year 1726, by the African company to survey their settlements; who, from
the information he received of one of the factors, who had resided ten years in
that country, says, William Smith, page 266.
That the discerning natives account it their greatest unhappiness that they
were ever visited by the Europeans. -- That we christians introduced the
traffic of slaves, and that before our coming they lived in peace.

In the accounts relating to the African trade, we find this melancholy truth
farther asserted, by some of the principal directors in the different
factories, particularly A. Brue says, Collection 2 vol. p. 98.
That the Europeans were far from desiring to act as peacemakers amongst the
Negroes, which would be acting contrary to their interest, since the greater
the wars the more slaves were procured. And William Bosman also remarks, Bosman
p. 31.
That one of the former commanders gave large sums of money to the Negroes of
one nation to induce them to attack some of the neighboring nations, which
occasioned a battle which was more bloody than the wars of the Negroes usually
are. This is confirmed by J. Barbot, who says, That the country of D'Elmina,
which was formerly very powerful and populous, was in his time so much drained
of its inhabitants, by the intestine wars, fomented amongst the Negroes by the
Dutch, that there did not remain enough inhabitants to till the country.

CHAP. VI.
The conduct of the Europeans and Africans compared. Slavery more tolerable
amongst the ancients than in our colonies. As christianity prevailed amongst
the barbarous nations, the inconsistency of Slavery became more apparent. The
charters of manumission, granted in the early times of christianity, founded on
an apprehension of duty to God. The ancient Britons and other European nations,
in their original state, no less barbarous than the Negroes. Slaves in Guinea
used with much greater lenity than the Negroes are in the colonies. -- Note.
How the slaves are treated in Algiers; as also in Turkey.

SUCH is the woeful corruption of human nature, that every practice which
flatters our pride and covetousness, will find its advocates; this is
manifestly the case in the matter before us: the savageness of the Negroes, in
some of their customs, and particularly their deviating so far from the
feelings of humanity, as to join in captivating and selling each other, gives
their interested oppressors a pretense for representing them as unworthy of
liberty, and the natural rights of mankind; but those sophisters turn the
argument full upon themselves, when they instigate the poor creatures to such
shocking impiety, by every means that satanick subtilty can suggest; thereby
showing in their own conduct a more glaring proof of the same depravity, and,
if there was any reason in the argument, a greater unfitness for the same
precious enjoyment; for though some of the ignorant Africans may be thus
corrupted by their intercourse with the baser of the European natives, and the
use of strong liquors, this is no excuse for high professing christians, (bred
in a civilized country, with so many advantages unknown to the Africans; and
pretending to a superior degree of gospel light.) Nor can it justify them in
raising up fortunes to themselves, from the misery of others, and calmly
projecting voyages for the seizure of men, naturally as free as themselves; and
who, they know, are no otherwise to be procured, than by such barbarous means,
as none but those hardened wretches who are lost to every sense of christian
compassion, can make use of. Let us diligently compare and impartially weigh
the situation of those ignorant Negroes, and these enlightened christians; then
lift up the scale and say, which of the two are the greater savages.

Slavery has been of a long time in practice in many parts of Asia; it was also
in usage among the Romans when that empire flourished; but, except in some
particular instances, it was rather a reasonable servitude, no ways comparable
to the unreasonable and unnatural service extorted from the Negroes in our
colonies. A late learned author See Robertson's history of Charles the 5th.
speaking of those times which succeeded the dissolution of that empire
accquaints us, that as christianity prevailed, it very much removed those wrong
prejudices and practices, which had taken root in darker times: after the
irruption of the northern nations, and the introduction of the feudal or
military government; whereby the most extensive power was lodged in a few
members of society, to the depression of the rest; the common people were
little better than slaves, and many were indeed such: but as christianity
gained ground, the gentle spirit of that religion, together with the doctrines
it teaches, concerning the original equality of mankind; as well as the
impartial eye with which the almighty regards men of every condition, and
admits them to a participation of his benefits; so far manifested the
inconsistency of slavery with christianity, that to set their fellow christians
at liberty was deemed an act of piety, highly meritorious and acceptable to
God. In the years 1315 and 1318 Louis X and his brother Philip, kings of
France, issued ordonances, declaring, That as all men were by nature freeborn,
and as their kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks, they determined that it
should be so in reality, as well as in name; therefore they appointed that
enfranchisements should be granted throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and
reasonable conditions. These edicts were carried into immediate execution
within the royal domain. -- In England as the spirit of liberty gained ground,
the very name and idea of personal servitude, without any formal interposition
of the legislature to prohibit it was totally banished.

The effects of such a remarkable change in the condition of so great a part of
the people, could not fail of being considerable and extensive. The husbandman,
master of his own industry, and secure of reaping for himself the fruits of his
labor, became farmer of the same field where he had formerly been compelled to
toil for the benefit of another. The odious name of master and of slave, the
most mortifying and depressing of all distinctions to human nature, were
abolished. New prospects opened, and new incitements to ingenuity and
enterprise presented themselves, to those who were emancipated. The expectation
of bettering their fortune, as well as that of raising themselves to a more
honorable condition, concurred in calling forth their activity and genius; and
a numerous class of men, who formerly had no political existence, and were
employed merely as instruments of labor, became useful citizens, and
contributed toward augmenting the force or riches of the society which adopted
them as members. William Robertson's History of Charles the 5th, 1 vol. p. 35.


Accordingly a great part of the charters granted for the manumission or
freedom of slaves about that time, are granted pro amore Dei, for the love of
God, pro mercede animae, to obtain mercy to the soul. Manumission was
frequently granted on death bed, or by latter wills. As the minds of men are at
that time awakened to sentiments of humanity and piety, these deeds proceeded
from religious motives. The same author remarks, That there are several forms
of those manumissions still extent, all of them founded on religious
considerations; and in order to procure the favor of God. Since that time the
practice of keeping men in slavery gradually ceased amongst christians, till it
was renewed in the case before us. And as the prevalency of the spirit of
christianity caused men to emerge from the darkness they then lay under, in
this respect; so it is much to be feared, that so great a deviation therefrom,
by the encouragement given to the slavery of the Negroes in our colonies, if
continued, will by degrees reduce those countries which support and encourage
it; but more immediately those parts of America which are in the practice of
it, to the ignorance and barbarity of the darkest ages.

If instead of making slaves of the Negroes, the nations who assume the name
and character of christians, would use their endeavors to make the nations of
Africa acquainted with the nature of the christian religion, to give them a
better sense of the true use of the blessings of life, the more beneficial arts
and customs would, by degrees, be introduced amongst them; this care probably
would produce the same effect upon them, which it has had on the inhabitants of
Europe, (formerly as savage and barbarous as the natives of Africa.) Those
cruel wars amongst the blacks would be likely to cease, and a fair and
honorable commerce, in time, take place throughout that vast country. It was by
these means that the inhabitants of Europe, though formerly a barbarous people,
became civilized. Indeed the account Julius Caesar gives of the ancient
Britains in their state of ignorance is not such as should make us proud of
ourselves, or lead us to despise the unpolished nations of the earth, for he
informs us, That they lived in many respects like our Indians, being clad with
skins, painting their bodies, etc. He also adds, That they brother with
brother, and parents with children had wives in common. A greater barbarity
than any heard of amongst the Negroes. Nor does Tacitus give a more honorable
account of the Germans, from whom the Saxons, our immediate ancestors, sprung.
The Danes, who succeeded them, (who may also be numbered among our progenitors)
were full as bad, if not worse.

It is usual for people to advance as a palliation in favor of keeping the
Negroes in bondage, that there are slaves in Guinea, and that those amongst us
might be so in their own country; but let such consider the inconsistency of
our giving any countenance to slavery because the Africans, whom we esteem a
barbarous and savage people, allow of it, and perhaps the more from our
example. Had the professors of christianity acted indeed as such, they might
have been instrumental to convince the Negroes of their error in this respect;
but even this, when inquired into, will be to us an occasion of blushing, if we
are not hardened to every sense of shame, rather than a palliation of our
iniquitous conduct, as it will appear that the slavery endured in Guinea, and
other parts of Africa, and in Asia, In the history of the piratical states of
Barbary, printed in 1750, said to be wrote by a person who resided at Algiers,
in a public character, at page 265 the author says, The world exclaims against
the Algerines for their cruel treatment of their slaves, and their employing
even tortures to convert them to mahometanism: but this is a vulgar error,
artfully propagated for selfish views. So far are their slaves from being ill
used, that they must have committed some very great fault to suffer any
punishment. Neither are they forced to work beyond their strength, but rather
spared lest they should fall sick. Some are so pleased with their situation
that they will not purchase their ransom, though they are able. It Is the same
generally through the mohammedan countries, except in some particular instances,
as that of Muley Ishmael late emperor of Morocco, who being naturally
barbarous, frequently used both his subjects and slaves with cruelty. Yet even
under him the usage the slaves met with was, in general, much more tolerable
than that of the Negroe slaves, in the West Indies. Captain Braithwaite, an
author of credit, who accompanied consul general Russel, in a congratulatory
ambassy to Muley Ishmael's successor, upon his accession to the throne, says,
The the situation of the christian slaves in Morocco was not near so bad as
represented. -- That it was true they were kept at labor by the late emperor,
but not harder than our daily laborers go through. -- Masters of ships were
never obliged to work, nor such at had but a small matter of money to give the
Alcaide. -- When sick they had a religious house appointed for them to go to,
where they were well attended: and whatever money, in charity was sent them by
their friends in Europe, was their own. Braithwaite's revolutions of Morocco.

Lady Montague, wife of the English ambassador, at Constantinople, in her
letters vol. 3. page 20 writes, I know you expect I should say something
particular of the slaves; and you will imagine me half a Turk, when I don't
speak of it with the same horror other Christians have done before me; but I
cannot forbear applauding the humanity of the Turks to these creatures, they
are not ill used, and their slavery, in my opinion, is no worse than servitude
all over the world. It Is true they have no wages, but they give them yearly
clothes to a higher value than our salaries to our ordinary servants.


is by no means so grievous as that in our colonies. William Moor speaking of
the natives living on the river Gambia, W. Moor, p. 30.
says, That some of the Negroes have many house slaves, which is their greatest
glory; that those slaves live so well and easy, that it is sometimes a hard
matter to know the slaves from their masters or mistresses. And that though in
some parts of Africa, they fell their slaves born in the family, yet on the
river Gambia they think it a very wicked thing. The author adds, He never heard
of but one, that ever sold a family slave, except for such crimes as they would
have been sold for, if they had been free. And in Astley's collection speaking
of the customs of the Negroes in that large extent of country further down the
Coast particularly denominated the Coast of Guinea, It is said, Collection 2
vol. p. 647.
They have not many slaves on the Coast, none but the king or nobles are
permitted to buy or sell any, so that they are allowed only what are necessary
for their families, or tilling the ground, the same author adds, That they
generally use their slaves well, and seldom correct them.

CHAP. VII.
Montesquieu's sentiments on slavery. Moderation enjoined by the Mosaic law in
the punishment of offenders. Morgan Godwyn's account of the contempt and
grievous rigor exercised upon the Negroes in his time. Account from Jamaica
relating to the inhuman treatment of them there. Bad effects attendant on slave
keeping; as well to the masters as the slaves. Extracts from several laws
relating to Negroes. Richard Baxter's sentiments on slave keeping.

THAT celebrated civillian Montesquieu, in his treatise on the spirit of laws,
on the article of slavery says, It is neither useful to the master nor slave;
to the slave, because he can do nothing through principle (or virtue,) to the
master because he contracts with his slave all sorts of bad habits, insensibly
accustoms himself to want all moral virtues, becomes, haughty, hasty, hard
hearted, passionate, voluptuous and cruel. The lamentable truth of this
assertion was quickly verified in the English plantations. When the practice of
slave keeping was introduced, it soon produced its natural effects; it
reconciled men of otherwise good dispositions to the most hard and cruel
measures. It quickly proved what under the law of Moses was apprehended would
be the consequence of unmerciful chastisements. Deuteronomy. xxv. 2. And it shall be
if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie
down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain
number; forty stripes he may give him and not exceed. And the reason rendered
is out of respect to human nature, viz. Lest if he should exceed and beat him
above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee. As
this effect soon followed the cause, the cruelest measures were adopted, in
order to make the most of the poor wretches labor; and in the minds of the
masters such an idea was excited of inferiority in the nature of these their
unhappy fellow creatures, that they soon esteemed and treated them as beasts of
burden: pretending to doubt, and some of them, even presuming to deny, the
efficacy of the death of Christ extended to them. Which is particularly noted
in a book entitled the Negroes and Indian's advocate, dedicated to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury: wrote so long since as in the year 1680, by Morgan
Godwyn, thought to be a clergyman of the church of England. There is a
principle which is pure placed in the human mind, which in different places and
ages has had different names; it is however, pure, and proceeds from God. --
It is deep and inward, confined to no forms of religion, nor excluded from any,
where the heart stands in perfect sincerity. In whomsoever, this takes root and
grows, of what nation soever they become brethren in the best sense of the
expression. Using ourselves to take ways which appear most easy to us, when
inconsistent with that purity which is without beginning, we thereby set up a
government of our own, and deny obedience to him whose service is true liberty.
He that has a servant, made so wrongfully, and knows it to be so, when he
treats him otherwise than a free man, when he reaps the benefit of his labor,
without paying him such wages as are reasonably due to free men for the like
service; these things, though done in calmness, without any show of disorder,
do yet deprave the mind, in like manner and with as great certainty, as
prevailing cold congeals water. These steps taken by masters, and their conduct
striking the minds of their children, whilst young, leave less room for that
which is good to work upon them. The customs of their parents, their neighbors
and the people with whom they converse, working upon their minds; and they from
thence conceiving wrong ideas of things, and modes of conduct, the entrance
into their hearts become in a great measure shut up against the gentle movings
of uncreated purity.

From one age to another the gloom grows thicker and darker, till error gets
established by general opinino; that whoever attends to perfect goodness and
remains under the melting influence of it, finds a path unknown to many, and
sees the necessity to lean upon the arm of divine strength, and dwell alone, or
with a few, in the right, committing their cause to him, who is a refuge to his
people. Negroes are our fellow creatures, and their present condition among us
requires our serious consideration. We know not the time when those scales, in
which mountains are weighed may turn. The parent of mankind is gracious; his
care is over his smallest creatures; and a multitude of men escape not his
notice; and though many of them are trodden down and despised, yet he remembers
them. He sees their affliction, and looks upon the spreading increasing
exaltation of the oppressor. He turns the channel of power, humbles the most
haughty people, and gives deliverance to the oppressed, at such periods as are
consistent with his infinite justice and goodness. And wherever gain is
preferred to equity, and wrong things publicly encouraged, to that degree that
wickedness takes root, and spreads, wide amongst the inhabitants of a country,
there is a real cause for sorrow to all such, whose love to mankind stands on a
true principle, and wisely consider the end and event of things." Consideration
on keeping Negroes, by John Woolman, part 2 p. 50.


The same spirit of sympathy and zeal which stirred up the good Bishop of
Chapia to plead with so much energy the kindred cause of the Indians of
America, an hundred and fifty years before, was equally operating about a
century past on the minds of some of the well disposed of that day, amongst
others this worthy clergyman, having been an eye witness of the oppression and
cruelty exercised upon the Negro and Indian slaves, endeavored to raise the
attention of those in whose power it might be to procure them relief; amongst
other matters in his address to the Archbishop, he remarks in substance, That
the people of the of island Barbados were not content with exercising the
greatest hardness and barbarity upon the Negroes, in making the most of their
labor, without any regard to the calls of humanity; but that they had suffered
such a slight and undervalument to prevail in their minds, toward these their
oppressed fellow creatures, as to discourage any step being taken whereby they
might be made acquainted with the christian religion. That their conduct
toward their slaves was such as gave him reason to believe, that either they
had suffered a spirit of infidelity, a spirit quite contrary to the nature of
the gospel, to prevail in them, or that it must be their established opinion,
that the Negroes had no more souls than beasts; that hence they concluded them
to be neither susceptible of religious impressions, nor fit objects for the
redeeming grace of God to operate upon. That under this persuasion and from a
disposition of cruelty, they treated them with far less humanity than they did
their cattle: for says he, they do not starve their horses, which they expect
should both carry and credit them on the road; nor pinch the cow, by whose milk
they are sustained, which yet to their eternal shame, is too frequently the lot
and condition of those poor people, from whose labor their wealth and
livelihood does wholly arise; not only in their diet, but in their clothing
and overworking some of them even to death; which is particularly the calamity
of the most innocent and laborious; but also in tormenting and whipping them
almost and sometimes quite to death, upon even small miscarriages. He
apprehends it was from this prejudice against the Negroes that arose those
supercilious checks and frowns he frequently met with, when using innocent
arguments and persuasions in the way of his duty as a minister of the gospel,
to labor for the convincement and conversion of the Negroes; being repeatedly
told, with spiteful scoffings, (even by some esteemed religious,) that the
Negroes were no more susceptible of receiving benefit, by becoming members of
the church, than their dogs and bitches; the usual answer he received when
exhorting their masters to do their duty in that respect, being, What these
black dogs be made christians: what they be made like us, with abundance more
of the same? Nevertheless, he remarks that the Negroes were capable, not only
of being taught to read and write, etc. but diverse of them eminent in the
management of business. He declares them to have an equal right with us to the
merits of Christ; of which, if through neglect or avarice they are deprived,
that judgment which was denounced against wicked Ahab, must befall us: Our life
shall go for theirs. The loss of their souls will be required at our hands, to
whom God has given so blessed an opportunity of being instrumental to their
salvation.

He complains, That they were suffered to live with their women in no better
way than direct fornication; no care being taken to oblige them to continue
together when married; but that they were suffered at their will, to leave
their wives and take to other women. I shall conclude this sympathizing
clergyman's observations with an instance he gives, to show that not only
discouragements and scoffs, at that time prevailed in Barbados, to establish
an opinion that the Negroes were not capable of religious impressions; but that
even violence and great abuses were used to prevent any thing of that kind
taking place. It was in the case of a poor Negro, who having at his own
request, prevailed on a clergyman to administer baptism to him, on his return
home, the brutish overseer took him to task, giving him to understand that,
that was no sundays work for those of his complexion, that he had other
business for him, the neglect whereof should cost him an afternoon's baptism in
blood, as he in the morning had received a baptism with water, (these says the
parson were his own words,) which he accordingly made good, of which the Negroe
complained to him, and he to the governor: nevertheless, the poor miserable
creature was ever after so unmercifully treated by that inhuman wretch, the
overseer, that to avoid his cruelty, betaking himself to the woods, he there
perished. This instance is applicable to none but the cruel perpetrator, and
yet it is an instance of what, in a greater or less degree, may frequently
happen when those poor wretches are left to the will of such brutish
inconsiderate creatures as those overseers often are. This is confirmed in a
History of Jamaica wrote in thirteen letters, about the year 1740, by a person
then residing in that island who writes, as follows," I shall not now enter
upon the question whether the slavery of the Negroes be agreeable to the laws
of nature or not, though it seems extremely hard they should be reduced to
serve and toil for the benefit of others, without the least advantage to
themselves. Happy Britannia where slavery is never known; where liberty and
freedom chears every misfortune. here ( says the author,) we can boast of no
such blessing; we have at least ten slaves to one freeman. I incline to touch
the hardships which these poor creatures suffer, in the tenderest manner, from
a particular regard which I have to many of their masters; but I cannot conceal
their sad circumstances entirely: the most trivial error is punished with
terrible whipping. I have seen some of them treated in that cruel manner, for
no other reason but to satisfy the brutish pleasure of an overseer, who has
their punishment mostly at his discretion. I have seen their bodies all in a
gore of blood, the skin torn off their backs with the cruel whip; beaten pepper
and salt rubbed in the wounds, and a large stick of sealing wax dropped
leisurely upon them. It is no wonder, if the horrid pain of such inhuman
tortures incline them to rebel. Most of these slaves are brought from the coast
of Guinea: When they first arrive, it is observed they are simple and very
innocent creatures; but soon turn to be roguish enough: And when they come to
be whipped, urge the example of the whites for an excuse of their faults.

These accounts of the deep depravity of mind attendant on the practice of
slavery, verify the truth of Montesquieu's remarks of its pernicious effects.
And although the same degree of opposition to instructing the Negroes may not now
appear in the islands as formerly; especially since the society appointed for
propagating the Gospel have possessed a number of Negroes in one of them;
nevertheless the situation of these oppressed people is yet dreadful, as well
to themselves, as in its consequences to their hard taskmasters, and their
offspring, as must be evident to every impartial person who is acquainted with
the treatment they generally receive, or with the laws which from time to time
have been made in the colonies, with respect to the Negroes; some of them being
absolutely inconsistant with reason, and shocking to humanity. By the 329th act
of the assembly of Barbados, page 125, it is enacted That if any Negroe or
other slave under punishment, by his master or his order, for running away, or
any other crime or misdemeanors, toward his said master, unfortunately shall
suffer in life or member, (which seldom happens,) no person whatsoever shall be
liable to any fine therefore. But if any man shall, of wantonness, or only of
bloody mindedness or cruel intention, wilfully kill a Negro or other slave of
his own, he shall pay into the public treasury, fifteen pounds sterling. Now
that the life of a man should be so lightly valued, as that fifteen pounds
should be judged a sufficient indemnification of the murder of a man, even when
it is avowedly done wilfully, wantonly, cruelly or of bloody mindedness, is a
tyranny hardly to be parrellel'd; nevertheless human laws cannot make void the
righteous law of God, or prevent the inquisition of that awful judgment day,
when, at the hand of every man's brother the life of man shall be required. By
the law of South Carolina, the person that kills a Negro is only subject to a
fine or twelve months imprisonment: It is the same in most, if not all the
West Indies. And by an act of the assembly of Virginia, (4 Ann. Chapter 49. sect.
27. p. 227.) After proclamation is is issued against slaves. That run away and
lie out, it is lawful for any person whatsoever to kill and destroy such
slaves, by such ways and means, as he, she or they shall think fit, without
accusation or impeachment of any crime for the same. -- And lest private
interest should incline the planter to mercy, it is provided, That every slave
so killed in pursuance of this act, shall be paid for by the public.

It was doubtless, a like sense of sympathy with that expressed by Morgan
Godwyn, before mentioned, for the oppressed Negroes, and like zeal for the
cause of religion, so manifestly trampled upon in the case of the Negroes,
which induced Richard Baxter, an eminent preacher amongst the dissenters in the
last century, in his christian directory, to express himself as follows, viz.
Do you mark how God has followed you with plagues, and may not conscience tell
you, that it is for your inhumanity to the souls and bodies of men. -- To go as
pirates and catch up poor Negroes, or people of another land, that never
forfeited life or liberty, and to make them slaves, and sell them, is one of
the worst kinds of thievery in the world; and such persons, are to be taken for
the common enemies of mankind, and they that buy them and use them as beasts
for their mere commodity, and betray, or destroy, or neglect their souls, are
fitter to be called devils incarnate than christians: It is an henious sin to
buy them, unless it be in charity to deliver them. Undoubtedly they are
presently bound to deliver them, because by right the man is his own, therefore
no man else can have a just title to him.

CHAP. VIII.
Griffith Hughes's account of the number of Negroes in Barbados. Cannot keep
up their usual number without a yearly recruit. Excessive hardships wears the
Negroes down in a surprising manner. A servitude without a condition,
inconsistant with reason and natural justice. The general usage the Negroes
meet with in the West Indies. Inhuman calculations of the strength and lives of
the Negroes. Dreadful consequences which may be expected from the cruelty
exercised upon this oppressed part of mankind.

WE are told by Griffith Hughes, rector of St. Lucy in Barbados, in his
natural history of that island, printed in the year 1750, That there was
between sixty five and seventy thousand Negroes, at that time, in the island,
though formerly they had a greater number: That in order to keep up a necessary
number, they were obliged to have a yearly supply from Africa: That the hard
labor, and often want of necessaries, which these unhappy creatures are
obliged to undergo, destroy a greater number than are bred there. He adds, That
the capacities of their minds in common affairs of life are but little
inferior, if at all, to those of the Europeans. If they fail in some arts, he
says, it may be owing more to their want of education and the depression of
their spirits by slavery, than to any want of natural abilities. This
destruction of the human species, through unnatural hardships, and want of
necessary supplies, in the case of the Negroes is farther confirmed in an
account of the European settlements in America, printed London, 1757, where it
is said, par. 6. chap. 11th. The Negroes in our colonies endure a slavery more
complete, and attended with far worse circumstances, than what any people in
their condition suffer in any other part of the world or have suffered in any
other period of time: Proofs of this are not wanting. The prodigious waste
which we experience in this unhappy part of our species, is a full and
melancholy evidence of this truth. The island of Barbados (the Negroes upon
which do not amount to eighty thousand) notwithstanding all the means which
they use to increase them, by propagation, and that the climate is in every
respect (expect that of being more wholesome) exactly resembling the climate
from whence they come; notwithstanding all this, Barbados lies under a
necessity of an annual recruit of five thousand slaves, to keep up the stock at
the number I have mentioned. This prodigious failure, which is at least in the
same proportion in all our islands, shows demonstratively that some uncommon
and unsupportable hardship lies upon the Negroes, which wears them down in such
a surprising manner.

In an account of part of North America, published by Thomas Jeffery 1761, the
author speaking of the usage the Negroes receive in the West India islands,
says, It is impossible for a human heart to reflect upon the servitude of these
dregs of mankind, without in some measure feeling for their misery, which ends
but with their lives. -- Nothing can be more wretched than the condition of
this people. One would imagine, they were framed to be the disgrace of the
human species, banished from their country, and deprived of that blessing
liberty, on which all other nations set the greatest value; they are in a
measure reduced to the condition of beasts of burden. In general a few roots,
potatoes especially, are their food, and two rags, which neither screen them
from the heat of the day, nor the extraordinary coolness of the night, all
their covering; their sleep very short; their labor almost continual: they
receive no wages, but have twenty lashes for the smallest fault. A thoughtful
person, who had an opportunity of observing the miserable condition of the
Negroes, in one of our West India islands, writes thus, I met with daily
exercise to see the treatment which those miserable wretches met with, from
their masters; with but few exceptions. They whip them most unmercifully on
small occasions: you will see their bodies all whaled and scarred; in short,
they seem to set no other value on their lives, than as they cost them so much
money, and are restrained from killing them, when angry, by no worthier
consideration, than that they lose so much. They act as though they did not
look upon them as a race of human creatures, who have reason, and remembrance
of misfortunes; but as beasts, like oxen, who are stubborn, hardy and
senseless; fit for burdens and designed to bear them: they wont allow them to
have any claim to human privileges, or scarce indeed, to be regarded as the
work of God. Though it was consistent with the justice of our maker to
pronounce the sentence on our common parent, and through him on all succeeding
generations, That he and they should eat their bread by the sweat of their
brows: yet does it not stand recorded by the same eternal truth, That the
labourer is worthy of his hire? It cannot be allowed, in natural justice, that
there should be a servitude without condition, a cruel, endless, servitude. It
cannot be reconcilable to natural justice, that whole nations, nay whole
continents of men, should be devoted to do the drudgery of life for others, be
dragged away from their attachments of relations and societies, and be made to
serve the appetite and pleasure of a race of men, whose superiority has been
obtained by illegal force.

Sir Hans Sloan in the introduction to his natural history of Jamaica in the
account he gives of the treatment the Negroes met with there, speaking of the
punishments inflicted on them, says, page 56 For rebellion the punishment is
burning them by nailing them down on the ground, with crooked sticks on every
limb, and then applying the fire by degrees from the feet and hands, burning
them gradually up to the head, whereby their pains are extravagant. For crimes
of a less nature, gelding or chopping off half the foot with an axe. -- For
negligence, they are usually whipped by the overseers with lance-wood switches.
-- After they are whipped till they are raw, some put on their skins pepper and
salt to make them smart; at other times their masters will drop melted wax on
their skins, and use several very exquisite torments. In that island the owners
of the Negroe slaves, set aside to each a parcel of ground, and allow them half
a day at the latter end of the week, which with the day appointed, by the
divine injunction, to be a day of rest and service to God, and which ought to
be kept as such, is the only time allowed them to manure their ground. This
with a few herrings, or other salt fish, is what is given for their support.
Their allowance for clothing in the island is seldom more than six yards of
oznabrigs each year. And in the more northern colonies, where the piercing
westerly winds are long and sensibly felt, these poor Africans suffer much for
want of sufficient clothing, indeed some have none till they are able to pay
for it by their labor. The time that the Negroes work in the West Indies, is
from day break till noon; then again from two o'clock till dark, (during which
time they are attended by overseers who severely scourge those who appear to
them dilatory,) and before they are suffered to go to their quarters, they have
still something to do, as collecting herbage for the horses, gathering fuel
for the boilers, etc. so that it is often past twelve before they can get home;
when they have scarce time to grind and boil their Indian corn: whereby if
their food was not prepared the evening before, it sometimes happens, that they
are called again to labor before they can satisfy their hunger. And here no
delay or excuse will avail, for if they are not in the field immediately upon
the usual notice, they must expect to feel the overseers lash. In crop time
(which lasts many months,) they are obliged (by turns,) to work most of the
night, in the boiling house. Thus their owners from a desire of making the
greatest gain by the labor of their slaves, lay heavy burdens on them, and yet
feed and cloth them very sparingly, and some scarce feed or cloth them at
all; so that the poor creatures are obliged to shift for their living in the
best manner they can; which occasions their being often killed in the
neighboring lands, stealing potatoes or other food, to satisfy their hunger.
And if they take any thing from the plantation they belong to, though under
such pressing want, their owners will correct them severely, for taking a
little of what they have so hardly labored for; whilst many of themselves riot
in the greatest luxury and excess. It is a matter of astonishment how a people
who, as a nation, are looked upon as generous and humane, and so much value
themselves for their uncommon sense of the benefit of liberty, can live in the
practice of such extreme oppression and inhumanity, without seeing the
inconsistency of such conduct, and feeling great remorse. Nor is it less
amazing to hear these men calmly making caculations about the strength and
lives of their fellow men; in Jamaica if six in ten, of the new imported
Negroes survive the seasoning, it is looked upon as a gaining purchase. And in
most of the other plantations, if the negroes live eight or nine years, their
labor is reckoned a sufficient compensation for their cost. If calculations of
this sort were made upon the strength and labor of beasts of burden it would
not appear so strange, but even then a merciful man would certainly use his
beast with more mercy than is usually shown to the poor Negroes. Will not the
groans, the dying groans, of this deeply afflicted and oppressed people reach
heaven, and when the cup of iniquity is full, must not the inevitable
consequence, be the pouring forth of the judgments of God upon their
oppressors? But alas! is it not too manifest that this oppression has already
long been the object of the divine displeasure? For what heavier judgment, what
greater calamity can befall any people, than to become subject to that hardness
of heart, that forgetfulness of God, and insensibility to every religious
impression; as well as that general depravation of manners, which so much
prevails in these colonies, in proportion as they have more or less enriched
themselves at the expense of the blood and bondage of the Negroes.

It is a dreadful consideration, as a late author remarks, that out of the
stock of eighty thousand Negroes in Barbados, there die every year five
thousand more than are born in that island; which failure is probably in the
same proportion in the other islands. In effect this people is under a
necessity of being entirely renewed every sixteen years. And what must we think
of the management of a people, who far from increasing greatly, as those who
have no loss by war ought to do, must in so short a time as sixteen years,
without foreign recruits, be entirely consumed to a man. Is it not a christian
doctrine, that the labourer is worthy of his hire? and has not the Lord by the
mouth of his prophet pronounced woe unto that man who builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, who uses his neighbors service
without wages, and gives him naught for his work? And yet the poor Negroe
slaves are constrained, like the beasts, by beating to work hard without hire
or recompense, and receive nothing from the hand or their unmerciful masters,
but such a wretched provision as will scarce support them under their fatigues.
The intolerable hardships many of the slaves undergo is sufficiently proved by
the shortness of their lives. -- And who are these miserable creatures that
receive such barbarous treatment from the planters? Can we restrain our just
indignation when we consider that they are undoubtedly his brethren! his
neighbors! the children of the same father; and some of those for whom Christ
died, as truly as for the planter himself. Let the opulent planter or merchant
prove that his Negroe slave is not his brother; or that he is not his
neighbor, in the scripture sense of these appellations; and if he is not able
to do so, how will he justify the buying and selling of his brethren, as if
they were of no more consideration than his cattle? The wearing them out with
continual labor, before they have lived out half their days? The severe
whipping and torturing them even to death, if they resist his insupportable
tyranny. Let the hardiest slave-holder look forward to that tremendous day,
when he must give an account to God of his stewardship, and let him seriously
consider, whether at such a time, he thinks, he shall be able to satisfy
himself, that any act of buying and selling, or the fate of war, or the birth
of children, in his house, plantation, or territories, or any other
circumstance whatever, can give him such an absolute property in the persons of
men, as will justify his retaining them as slaves, and treating them as beasts.
Let him diligently consider whether there will not always remain to the slave a
superior property or right to the fruit of his own labor; and more especially
to his own person, that being which was given him by God, and which none but
the giver can justly claim.

CHAP. IX.
THE advantage which would have accrued to the natives of Guinea, if the
Europeans had acted toward them agreeable to the dictates of humanity and
christanity. An inordinate desire of gain in the Europeans, the true occasion
of the slave trade. Notice of the misreprensations of the Negroes, by most
authors, in order to palliate the iniquity of the slave trade. Those
misrepresentations refuted, particularly with respect to the Hottentot Negroes.

FROM the foregoing accounts of the natural disposition of the Negroes, and the
fruitfulness of most parts of Guinea, which are confirmed by authors of
candor, who have wrote from their own knowledge, it may well be concluded,
that the Negroes accquaintance with the Europeans might have been a happiness
to them, if these last had not only bore the name, but had also acted the part
of Christians, and used their endeavors by example as well as precept, to make
them acquainted with the glad tidings of the gospel; which breathes peace and
good will to man, and with that change of heart, that redemption from sin,
which christianity proposes; innocence and love might then have prevailed,
nothing would have been wanting to complete the happiness of the simple
Africans: but the reverse has happened; the Europeans forgetful of their duty,
as men, and christians, have conducted in so iniquitous a manner, as must
necessarily raise in the minds of the thoughtful and well disposed Negroes, the
utmost scorn and detestation of the very name of christians. All other
considerations have given way to an insatiable desire of gain, which has been
the principal and moving cause of the most iniquitous and dreadful scene that
was, perhaps, ever acted upon the face of the earth; instead of making use of
that superior knowledge, with which the Almighty, the common parent of mankind,
had favored them, to strengthen the principle of peace and good will in the
breasts of the incautious Negroes; the Europeans have, by their bad example,
led them into excess of drunkenness, debauchery and avarice; whereby every
passion of corrupt nature being inflamed, they have been easily prevailed upon
to make war, and captivate one another; as well to furnish means for the
excsses they had been habituated to, as to satify the greedy desire of gain in
their profligate employers; who to this intent have furnished them with
prodigious quantities of arms and ammunition. Thus they have been hurried into
confusion, distress and all the extremities of temporal misery; every thing,
even the power of their kings, has been made subservient to this wicked
purpose, for instead of being protectors of their subjects, some of those
rulers corrupted by the excessive love of spirituous liquors, and the tempting
baits laid before them by the factors, have invaded the liberties of their
unhappy subjects, and are become their oppressors.

Here it may be necessary to observe, that the accounts we have of the
inhabitants of Guinea, are chiefly given by persons engaged in the trade, who,
from self interested views, have described them in such colors as were least
likely to excite compassion and respect, and endeavored to reconcile so
manifest a violation of the rights of mankind to the minds of the purchasers;
yet they cannot but allow the Negroes to be posessed of some good qualities,
though they contrive as much as possible to cast a shade over them. A
particular instance of this appears in Astley's collection 2 vol. p. 73, where
the author speaking of the Mandingo's settled at Galem, which is situated 900
miles up the Senegal, after saying that they carry on a commerce to all the
neighboring kingdoms, and amass riches, adds, That excepting the vices
peculiar to the blacks, they are a good sort of people, honest, hospitable,
just to their word, laborious, industrious and very ready to learn arts and
sciences. Here it is difficult to imagine what vices can be peculiarly
attendant on a people so well disposed as the author describes these to be.
With respect to the charge some authors have brought against them as being void
of all natural affection, it is frequently contradicted by others: in the 2
vol. of the collec. p. 275, and 629, the Negroes of North Guinea, and the Gold
Coast, are said, to be fond of their Children, whom they love with tenderness.
And Bosman says p. 340, Not a few in his country ( viz. Holland) fondly
imagine, that parents here fell their children; men their wives, and one
brother the other; but those who think so deceive themselves; for this never
happens on any other account but that of necessity, or some great crime. The
same is repeated by J. Barbot, page 326, and also confirmed by Sir Hans Sloan,
in the introduction to his natural history of Jamaica; where speaking of the
Negroes, he says, They are usually thought to be haters of their own children,
and therefore it is believed that they sell and dispose of them to strangers for
money: but this is not true, for the Negroes of Guinea being divided into
several captainships, as well as the Indians of America, have wars, and besides
those slain in battle, many prisoners are taken, who are sold as slaves and
brought thither; but the parents here although their children are slaves for
ever, yet have so great love for them, that no master dares sell, or give away
one of their little ones, unless they care not whether their parents hang
themselves or no. J. Barbot speaking of the occasion of the natives of Guinea
being represented as a treacherous people, ascribes it to the Hollanders (and
doubtless other Europeans,) usurping authority, and fomenting divisions between
the Negroes. At page 110 he says, It is well known that many of the European
nations trading amongst these people, have very unjustly and inhumanly, without
any provocation, stolen away, from time to time, abundance of the people, not
only on this coast, but almost every where in Guinea who have come on board
their ships in a harmless and confiding manner, these they have in great
numbers carried away, and sold in the plantations with other slaves, which they
had purchased. And although some of the Negroes may be justly charged with
indolence and suppiness, yet many others are frequently mentioned by authors as
a careful, industrious and even laborious people. But nothing shows more
clearly how unsafe it is to form a judgment of distant people from the accounts
given of them by travelers, who have taken but a transient view of things,
than the case of the Hottentots, viz. those several nations of Negroes who
inhabit the most southern part of Africa; these people are represented, by
several authors, who appear to have very much copied their relations one from
the other, as so savage and barbarous as to have little of human, but the
shape; but these accounts are strongly contradicted by others, particularly
Peter Kolben has given a circumstantial relation of the disposition and manners
of those people. See Kolben's account of the Cape of Good Hope.
He was a man of learning, sent from the court of Prussia, solely to make
astronomical and natural observations there; and having no interest in the
slavery of the Negroes, had not the same inducement as most other relators had,
to misrepresent the natives of Africa. He resided eight years at and about the
Cape Good Hope, during which time he examined with great care into the customs,
manners and opinions of the Hottentots; whence he sets these people in a quite
different light, from what they appeared in former authors, whom he corrects,
and blames for the falsehoods they have wantonly told of them, at p. 61. he
says, The detail we have in several authors, are for the most part made up of
inventions and hearsays, which generally prove false. -- Nevertheless, he
allows they are justly to be blamed for their sloth. -- The love of liberty and
indolence is their all: compulsion is death to them. While necessity obliges
them to work, they are very tractable, obedient and faithful; but when they
have got enough to satisfy the present want, they are deaf to all further
entreaty. He also faults them for their nastiness, the effects of sloth, and
for their love of drink; and the practice of some unnatural customs, which long
use has established amongst them; which nevertheless, from the general good
disposition of these people, there is great reason to believe they might be
persuaded to refrain from; if a truly christian care had been extended toward
them; he says, They are eminently distinguished by many virtues, as their
mutual benevolence, friendship and hospitality; they breathe kindness and good
will, to one another; and seek all opportunities of obliging. Is a Hottentots
assistance required by one of his countrymen, he runs to give it; Is his advice
asked he gives it with sincerity. Is his countryman in want, he relieves him to
the utmost of his power. Their hospitallity extends even to European strangers:
in traveling through the Cape countries, you meet with a cheerful and open
reception, in whatsoever village you come to. In short he says, p. 339, The
integrity of the Hottentots; their strictness and celerity in the execution of
justice, and their charity are equalled by few nations. In alliances their word
is sacred; there being hardly any thing, they look upon as a fouller crime than
breach of engagements. Theft and adultery they punish with death. They firmly
believe there is a God, the author of all things, whom they call the God of
gods: but it does not appear that they have an institution of worship directly
regarding this supreme Deity. When pressed on this article, they excuse
themselves by a tradition, That their first parents so grievously offended this
great God, that he cursed them and their posterity with hardness of heart; so
that they know little about him, and have less inclination to serve him. (As
has been already remarked,) These Hottentots are the only Negroe nations
bordering on the sea, we read of, who are not concerned in making or keeping
slaves. Those slaves made use of by the Hollanders at the Cape, are brought
from other parts of Guinea. Numbers of these people told the author, That the
vice they saw prevail amongst christians; their avarice, their envy and hatred
of one another; their restless discontented tempers, their lasciviousness and
injustice, were the things that principally kept the Hottentots from hearkening
to christianity.

Father Tachard a French jesuit famous for his travels in the East Indies, in
his account of these people, says, The Hottentots have more honesty, love and
liberality for one another, than are almost any where seen amongst christians.

CHAP. X.
Man-stealing esteemed highly criminal and punishable by the laws of Guinea: No
Negroes allowed to be sold for Slaves there but those deemed prisoners of war,
or in punishment for crimes. Some of the Negroe rulers, corrupted by the
Europeans, violently infringe the laws of Guinea. The king of Barsailay noted
in that respect.

BY an enquiry into the laws and customs formerly in use and still in force
amongst the Negroes, particularly on the Gold Coast, it will be found, that
provision was made for the general peace, and for the safety of individuals;
even in W. Bosman's time, long after the Europeans had established the slave
trade, the natives were not publicly enslaved, any otherwise than in punishment
for crimes; when prisoners of war; or by a violent exertion of the power of
their corrupted kings. Where any of the natives were stolen, in order to be
sold to the Europeans, it was done secretly, or at least only connived at by
those in power; this appears from Barbot and Bosman's account of the matter,
both agreeing that Man-stealing was not allowed on the Gold Coast. The first,
Barbot, page 303.
says, Kidnapping or stealing of human creatures is punished there, and even
sometimes with death. And W. Bosman, whose long residence on the coast, enabled
him to speak with certainty, says Bosman, page 1^3.
That the laws were severe against murder, thievery and adultery; and adds,
That man-stealing was punished on the Gold Coast with rigid severity, and
sometimes with death itself. Hence it may be concluded, that the sale of the
greatest part of the Negroes to the Europeans is supported by violence, in
defiance of the laws, through the knavery of their principal men Note. Barbot,
page 270 says, the trade of slaves is in a more peculiar manner the business of
kings, rich men and prime merchants, exclusive of the inferior sort of blacks.
, who, (as is too often the case with those in European countries) under
pretense of encouraging trade, and increasing the public revenue, disregard the
dictates of justice, and trample upon those liberties which they are appointed
to preserve.

Fr. Moor also mentions, Man-stealing as being discountenanced by the Negroe
Governments on the river Gambia, and speaks of the inslaving the peaceable
inhabitants, as a violence, which only happens under a corrupt administration
of justice; he says, Moor, page 61.
The kings of that country generally advise with their head men, scarcely doing
any thing of consequence, without consulting them first, except the king of
Barsailay, who being subject to hard drinking is very absolute. It is to this
king's insatiable thirst for brandy, that his subjects freedoms and families
are in so precarious a situation; Idem, page 46.
Whenever this king wants goods or brandy, he sends a messenger to the English
Governor at James Fort, to desire he would send a sloop there with a cargo;
this news, being not at all unwelcome, the Governor sends accordingly; against
the arrival of the sloop, the King goes and ransacks some of his enemies towns,
seizing the people, and selling them for such commodities as he is in want of,
which commonly is brandy, guns, powder, balls, pistols and cutlasses for his
attendants and soldiers; and coral and silver for his wives and concubines; in
case he is not at war with any neighboring king, he then falls upon one of his
own towns, which are numerous, and uses them in the same manner; He often goes
with some of his troops by a town in the day time, and returning in the night,
sets fire to three parts or it, and putting guards at the fourth, there seizes
the people as they run out from the fire, he ties their arms behind them, and
marches them either to Joar or Cohone, where he sells them to the Europeans.

A. Brue, the French director gives much the same account, and says, Collect.
Vol. II. page 29.
That having received goods he wrote to the King, that if he had a sufficient
number of slaves, he was ready to trade with him. This prince, as well as the
other Negroe monarchs, has always a sure way of supplying his deficiences, by
selling his own subjects, for which they seldom want a pretense. The King had
recourse to this method by seizing three hundred of his own people, and sent
word to the director that he had the slaves ready to deliver for the goods. It
seems, the King wanted double the quantity of goods, which the factor would
give him for these three hundred slaves; but the factor refusing to trust him,
as he was already in the company's debt, and perceiving that this refusal had
put the king much out of temper, he proposed that he should give him a license
for taking so many more of his people, as the goods he still wanted were worth;
but this the King refused, saying, It might occasion a disturbance amongst his
subjects. Note. This Negroe king, thus refusing to comply with the Factor's
wicked proposal, shows, he was sensible his own conduct was not justifiable;
and it likewise appears the Factor's only concern was to procure the greatest
number of slaves, without any regard to the injustice of the method, by which
they were procured. This Andrew Brue, was, for a long time, principal director
of the French African factory in those parts; in the management of which, he is
in the collection said to have had extraordinary success. The part he ought to
have acted as a Christian toward the ignorant Africans seems quite out of the
question: the profit of his employers appears to have been his sole concern; at
page 62, speaking of the country on the Senegal river, he says, It was very
populous, the soil rich, and if the people were industrious, they might, of
their own produce, carry on a very advantageous trade with strangers; there
being bui few things in which they could be excelled; but (he adds) it is to be
hoped the Europeans will never let them into the secret. A remark unbecoming
humanity, much more christianity!
Except in the above instance, and some others, where the power of the Negroe
Kings are unlawfully exerted over their subjects; the slave trade is carried on
in Guinea with some regard to the laws of the country, which allow of none to
be sold but prisoners taken in their national wars, or people adjudged to
slavery in punishments for crimes; but the largeness of the country, the number
of kingdoms or commonwealths, and the great encouragement given by the
Europeans, afford frequent pretenses and opportunities to the bold designing
profligates of one kingdom to surprise and seize, not only upon those of a
neighboring government, but also the weak and helpless of their own; This
inhuman practice is particularly described by Brue, in Collect. Vol. II. page
98, where he says, That some of the natives, are, on all occasions,
endeavoring to surprise and carry off their country people. They land (says
he) without noise, and if they find a lone cottage without defense, they
surround it, and carry off all the people and effects to their boat, and
immediately reimbark. This seems to be mostly practiced by some Negroes who
dwell on the sea coast.
and the unhappy people taken on those occasions, are, with impunity, sold to
the Europeans. These practices are doubtless disapproved of by the most
considerate amongst the Negroes, for Bosman acquaints us, that even their
national wars are not agreeable to such. He says Bosman, p. 155.
If the person who occasioned the beginning of the war be taken, they will not
easily admit him to ransom, though his weight in gold should be offered, for
fear he should, in future, form some new design against their repose.

CHAP. XI.
An account of the shocking inhumanity used in the carrying on of the slave
trade, as described by factors of different nations, viz. By Francis Moor on
the river Gambia, and by John Barbot, A. Brue and William Bosman through the
coast of Guinea. Note. Of the large revenues arising to the kings of Guinea
from the slave trade.

FIRST Francis Moor, factor for the English African company on the river
Gambia, Moor. page 28.
writes, That there is a number of Negro traders called joncoes or merchants,
who follow the slave trade, as a business, their place of residence is so high
up in the country, as to be six weeks travel from James Fort, which is situate
at the mouth of that river. These merchants bring down elephants teeth, and in
some years two thousand slaves, most of which they say, are prisoners taken in
war. They buy them from the different princes, who take them; many of them are
Bumbrongs and Petcharies; nations, who each of them have different languages,
and are brought from a vast way inland. Their way of bringing them is tying
them by the neck, with leathern thongs, at about a yard distance from each
other, thirty or forty in a string, having generally a bundle of corn or
elephants teeth upon each of their heads. In their way from the mountains, they
travel through very great woods, where they cannot for some days get water; so
they carry in skin bags enough to support them for a time. I cannot, (adds
Moor) be certain of the number of merchants who follow this trade, but there
may, perhaps, be about an hundred, who go up into the inland country, with the
goods which they buy from the white men, and with them purchase, in various
countries, gold, slaves, and elephants teeth. Besides the slaves which the
merchants bring down, there are many bought along the river: These are either
taken in war, as the former are, or men condemned for crimes; or else people
stolen, which is very frequent. -- Since the slave trade has been used all
punishments are changed into slavery; there being an advantage on such
condemnation, they strain for crimes very hard, in order to get the benefit of
selling the criminal.

John Barbot, the French factor, in his account of the manner by which the
slaves are procured, says, John Barbot, page 47.
The slaves sold by the Negroes, are for the most part prisoners of war, or
taken in the incursions they make in their enemies territories; others are
stolen away by their neighbors, when found abroad, on the road, or in the
woods; or else in the corn fields, at the time of the year when their parents
keep them there all the day to scare away the devouring small birds. Speaking
of the transactions on that part of Guinea, called the Slave Coast, where the
Europeans have the most factories, and from whence they bring away much the
greatest number of slaves, the same author and also Bosman Bosman, page 310.
says, The inhabitants of Coto do much mischief in stealing those slaves they
sell to the Europeans from the upland country. -- That the inhabitants of Popo,
excel the former, being endowed with a much larger share of courage, they rob
more successfully, by which means they increase their riches and trade: The
author particularly remarks, That they are encouraged in this practice by the
Europeans; sometimes it happens according to the success of their inland
excursions, that they are able to furnish two hundred slaves or more in a few
days. And he says, Barbot, page 326.
The blacks of Fida, or Whydah are so expeditious in trading for slaves, that
they can deliver a thousand every month. -- If there happens to be no stock of
slaves there, the factor must trust the blacks with his goods to the value of
one hundred and fifty, or two hundred pounds, which goods they carry up into
the inland country to buy slaves at all markets When the great income which
arises to the Negroe kings on the Slave-Coast, from the slaves brought through
their several governments to be shipped on board the European vessels, is
considered, we have no cause to wonder that they give so great a countenance to
that trade, William Bosman says, page 337. That each ship which comes to Whydah
to trade, reckoning one with another either by toll, trade or custom, pays
about four hundred pounds and sometimes fifty ships come hither in a year.
Barbot confirms the same and adds, page 350. That in the neighboring kingdom
of Ardah the duty to the king is the value of seventy or eighty. slaves for
each trading ship. Which is near half as much more as at Whydah, nor can the
Europeans concerned in the trade with any degree of propriety blame the African
Kings for countenancing it, while they continue to send vessels on purpose, to
take in the slaves which are thus stolen, and that they are permitted under the
sanction of national laws to sell them to the colonies,
, for above six hundred miles up the country, were they are kept like cattle in
Europe; the slaves sold there being generally prisoners of war, taken from
their enemies like other booty, and perhaps some few sold by their own country
men, in extreme want or upon a famine, as also some as a punishment of henious
crimes. So far Barbot's account, that given by William Bosman is as follows,
Bosman, page 340.
When the slaves which are brought from the inland countries, come to Whydah,
they are put in prison together, when we treat concerning buying them, they are
all brought out together in a large plain, where, by our surgeons, they are
thoroughly examined, and that naked, both men and women, without the least
distinction or modesty. Note from the above account of the indecent and
shocking manner in which the unhappy Negroes are treated, it is reasonable for
persons unacquainted with these people to conclude them to be void of that
natural modesty, so becoming a reasonable creature; but those who have had
intercourse with the blacks in these northern colonies know that this would be
a wrong conclusion; for they are indeed as susceptible of modesty and shame as
other people. It is the unparalled brutality to which the Europeans have by
long custom been inured, which urges them, without blushing, to act so
shameful a part. Such usage is certainly grievous to the poor Negroes,
particularly the women; but they are slaves, and must submit to this, or any
other abuse that is offered them, by their cruel taskmasters, or expect to be
inhumanly tormented into acquiescence. That the blacks are unaccustomed to such
brutality, appears from an instance mentioned in Astley's Collection, vol. 2.
page 201. viz. Atan audience which Casseneuve had of the king of Congo, where
he was used with a great deal of civility by the blacks, some slaves were
delivered to him. The king observing Casseneuve (according to the custom of the
Europeans) to handle the limbs of the slaves, burst out a laughing, as did the
great men about him; the factor asking the interpreter the occasion of their
mirth, was told it proceeded from his so nicely examining the slaves.
Nevertheless the King was so ashamed of it that he desired him for decency's
sake to do it in a more private manner.
Those which are approved as good are set on one side; in the mean while a
burning iron, with the arms or name of the company, lies in the fire, with
which ours are marked on the breast. When we have agreed with the owners of the
slaves, they are returned to their prisons, where from that time forward they
are kept at our charge, cost us two pence a day, each slave, which serves to
subsist them like criminals on bread and water; so that to save charges, we
send them on board our ships the very first opportunity, before which their
masters strip them of all they have on their backs, so that they come on board
stark naked, as well women as men. In which condition they are obliged to
continue, if the master of the ship is not so charitable (which he commonly is)
as to bestow something on them to cover their nakedness. Six or seven hundred
are sometimes put on board a vessel, where they lie as close together as its
possible for them to be crowded.

CHAP. XII.
Extracts of several Journals of Voyages to the coast of Guinea for Slaves,
whereby the extreme inhumanity of that traffic is described. Melancholy
account of a ship blown up on that coast with a great number of Negroes on
board. Instances of shocking barbarity perpetrated by masters of vessels
toward their slaves. Inquiry why these scandalous infringements both of divine
and human laws are overlooked by the government.

THE misery and bloodshed attendant on the slave trade, is set forth by the
following extracts of two voyages to the coast of Guinea, for slaves. The first
in a vessel from Liverpool, taken verbatim from the original manuscript of the
Surgeon's Journal, viz.

Sestro, December the 29th, 1724, No trade to day, though many traders come on
board; they informed us, that the people are gone to war within land, and will
bring prisoners enough in two or three days, in hopes of which we stay.

The 30th. No trade yet, but our traders came on board to day, and informed us
the people had burnt four towns of their enemies, so that tomorrow we expect
slaves off: another large ship is come in. Yesterday came in a large Londoner.

The 31st. Fair weather, but no trade yet; we see each night towns burning, but
we hear the Sestro men are many of them killed by the inland Negroes, so that
we fear this war will be unsuccessful.

The 2d of January. Last night we saw a prodigious fire break out about eleven
o'clock; and this morning see the town of Sestro burnt down to the ground; (it
contained some hundreds of houses) so that we find their enemies are too hard
for them at present, and consequently our trade spoiled here; therefore, about
seven o'clock we weighed anchor, as did likewise the three other vessels, to
proceed lower down.

The second relation, also taken from the original manuscript Journal of a
person of credit, who went surgeon on the same trade, in a vessel from
New York, about twenty years past, is as follows; viz. Being on the coast, the
Commander of the vessel, according to custom, sent a person on shore with a
present to the King, acquainting him with his arrival, and letting him know,
they wanted a cargo of slaves. The King promised to furnish them with slaves;
and, in order to do it, set out to go to war against his enemies; designing to
surprise some town, and take all the people prisoners: Some time after, the
king sent them word, he had not yet met with the desired success; having been
twice repulsed, in attempting to break up two towns; but that he still hoped to
procure a number of slaves for them; and in this design he persisted till he
met his enemies in the field; where a battle was sought, which lasted three
days, during which time the engagement was so bloody, that four thousand five
hundred men were slain on the spot. The person who wrote the account beheld the
bodies as they lay on the field of battle. Think (says he in his Journal) what
a pitiable sight it was to see the widows weeping over their lost husbands,
orphans deploring the loss of their fathers, etc. etc. In the 6th Vol. of
Churchill's collection of Voyages, page 219, we have the relation of a voyage
performed by Captain Philips, in a ship of 450 tuns, along the coast of Guinea,
for elephants teeth, gold, and Negro slaves, intended for Barbados; in which
he says, that they took seven hundred slaves on board, the men being all put in
irons two by two shackled together to prevent their mutinying or swimming
ashore. That the Negroes are so loath to leave their own country, that they
often leap out of the canoe, boat, or ship, into the sea, and keep under water
till they are drowned to avoid being taken up, and saved by the boats which
pursue them. -- They had about twelve Negroes who willingly drowned themselves;
others starved themselves to death. -- Philips was advised to cut off the legs
and arms of some to terrify the rest, (as other Captains had done) but this he
refused to do: From the time of his taking the Negroes an board too his arrival
at Barbados, no less than three hundred and twenty died of various diseases.
The following relation is inserted at the request of the Author,

THAT I may contribute all in my power toward the Good of Mankind, by
inspiring any individuals with a suitable abhorrence of that detestable
practice of trading in our fellow creatures, and in some measure atone for my
neglect of duty as a Christian, in engaging in that wicked traffic, I offer to
their serious consideration some few occurrences of which I was an eyewitness.
That being struck with the wretched and affecting scene they may foster that
humane principle, which is the noble and distinguished characteristic of man,
and improve it to the benefit of their children's children.

About the year 1749, I sailed from Liverpool to the coast of Guinea: Some time
after our arrival I was ordered to go up the country a considerable distance;
upon having notice from one of the Negroe Kings, that he had a parcel of slaves
to dispose of; I received my instructions, and went, carrying with me an
account of such goods we had on board to exchange for the slaves we intended to
purchase. Upon being introduced, I presented him with a small case of English
spirits, a gun, and some trifles, which having accepted, and understood by an
Interpreter what goods we had, the next day was appointed for viewing the
slaves; we found about two hundred confined in one place. But here how shall I
relate the affecting sight I there beheld! How can I sufficiently describe the
silent sorrow which appeared in the countenance of the afflicted father, and
the painful anguish of the tender mother, expecting to be forever separated
from their tender offspring; the distressed maid wringing her hands in presage
of her future wretchedness, and the general cry of the innocent from a fearful
apprehension of the perpetual slavery to which they were doomed! Under a sense
of my offense to GOD, in the person of his creatures; I acknowledge I purchased
eleven, who I conducted tied, two and two to the ship. Being but a small
vessel, (ninety ton) we soon purchased our cargo, consisting of one hundred and
seventy slaves, whom thou may Reader range in thy view, as they were
shackled two and two together, pent up within the narrow confines of the main
deck, with the complicated distress of sickness, chains and contempts; deprived
of every fond and social tie, and in a great measure reduced to a state of
desperation. We had not been a fortnight at sea, before the fatal consequence
of this despair appeared; they formed a design of recovering their natural
right, LIBERTY, by rising and murdering every man on board, but the goodness of
the Almighty rendered their scheme abortive, and his mercy spared us to have
time to repent. The plot was discovered; the Ringleader tied by the two thumbs
over the barricade door, at sunrise received a number of lashes, in this
situation he remained till sunset, exposed to the insults and barbarity of the
brutal crew of sailors, with full leave to exercise their cruelty at pleasure.
The consequence of this was, that next morning the miserable sufferer was found
dead, flead from the shoulders to the waist. The next victim was a youth, who,
from too strong a sense of his misery refused nourishment, and died;
disregarded and unnoticed, till the hogs had fed on part of his flesh. Will not
Christianity blush at this impious sacrilege? May the relation of it serve to
call back the struggling remains of humanity, in the hearts of those who from a
love of wealth, partake in any degree of this oppressive gain, and have such an
effect on the minds of the sincere, as may be productive of peace, the happy
effect of true repentance for past transgressions, and a resolution to renounce
all connection with it for the time to come.




Reader, bring the matter home to thy own heart, and consider whether any
situation can be more completely miserable than that of these distressed
captives. When we reflect that each individual of this number had probably some
tender attachment, which was broken by this cruel separation; some parent or
wife who had not an opportunity of mingling tears in a parting embrace; perhaps
some infants, or aged parents, whom his labor was to feed, and vigilance
protect; themselves under the most dreadful apprehension of an unknown
perpetual slavery; confined within the narrow limits of a vessel, where often
several hundred lie as close as possible: Under these aggravated distresses,
they are often reduced to a state of despair, in which many have been
frequently killed and some deliberately put to death under the greatest
torture, when they have attempted to rise in order to free themselves from
present misery and the slavery designed them. Many accounts of this nature
might be mentioned, indeed from the vast number of vessels employed in the
trade, and the repeated relations in the public prints of Negroes rising on
board the vessels from Guinea, its more than probable that many such instances
occur every year. I shall only mention one example of this kind, by which the
reader may judge of the rest; its in Astley's Collection 2 vol. P. 449, related
by John Atkins, surgeon on board Admiral Ogle's squadron, of one Harding,
master of a vessel in which several of the men slaves and a woman slave had
attempted to rise, in order to recover their liberty; some of whom the master,
of his own authority, sentenced to cruel death, making them first eat the heart
and liver of one of those he had killed. The woman he hoisted by the thumbs,
whipped and slashed with knives before the other slaves till she died. A
memorable instance of some of the dreadful effects of the slave trade, happened
about five years past, on a ship from this port, then at anchor about three
miles from shore, near Acra Fort, on the coast of Guinea. They had purchased
between four and five hundred Negroes, and were ready to sail for the
West Indies. Its customary on board those vessels to keep the men shackled two
by two, each by one leg to a small iron bar; these are every day brought on the
deck, for the benefit of air, and least they should attempt to recover their
freedom, they are made fast to two common chains, which are extended on each
side the main deck: The women and children are loose. This was the situation of
the slaves on board this vessel, when it took fire, by means of a person who
was drawing spirits by the light of a lamp; the cask bursting, the fire spread
with so much violence, that in about ten minutes, the sailors apprehending it
impossible to extinguish it, before it could reach a large quantity of powder
they had on board, concluded it necessary to cast themselves into the sea, as
the only chance of saving their lives; and first, they endeavored to loose the
chains by which the Negroe men were fastened to the deck, but in the confusion
the key being missing, they had but just time to loose one of the chains by
wrenching the staple; when the vehemence of the fire so increased, that they
all, but one man, jumped over board, when immediately the fire having gained
the powder, the vessel blew up with all the slaves who remained fastened to the
one chain, and such others as had not followed the sailors examples. There
happened to be three Portuguese vessels in sight, who, with others from the
shore, putting out their boats, took up about two hundred and fifty of those
poor souls who remained alive; of which number about fifty died on shore, being
mostly of those who were were fettered together by iron shackles, which as they
jumped into the sea, had broke their legs, and these fractures being inflamed,
by so long a struggle in the sea probably mortified, which occasioned the death
of every one that was so wounded. The two hundred remaining alive, were soon
disposed of, for account of the owners to other purchasers.
As detestable and shocking as this may appear, to such whose hearts are not
yet hardened by the practice of that cruelty, which the love of wealth by
degrees introduces into the human mind; it will not be strange to those who
have been concerned or employed in the trade.

Now here arises a necessary query to those who hold the balance of justice,
and who must be accountable to God for the use they have made of it; that as
the principles on which the British constitution is founded, are so favorable
to the common rights of mankind, how it has happened that the laws which
countenance this iniquitous traffic, have obtained the sanction of the
legislature; and that the executive part of the government should so long shut
their ears to continual reports of the barbarities perpetrated against this
unhappy people, and leave the trading subjects at liberty to trample on the
most precious rights of others, even without a rebuke. Why are the masters of
vessels thus suffered to be the sovereign arbiters of the lives of the
miserable Negroes, and allowed with impunity, thus to destroy (may I not
properly say to murder) their fellow creatures, and that by means so cruel, as
cannot be even related but with shame and horror.

CHAP. XIII.
Usage of the Negroes, when they arrive in the West Indies. An hundred thousand
Negroes brought from Guinea every year to the English Colonies. The number of
Negroes who die in the passage and seasoning. These are, properly speaking,
murdered by the prosecution of this infamous traffic: Remarks on its dreadful
effects and tendency.

WHEN the vessels arrive at their destined port in the colonies, the poor
Negroes are to be disposed off to the planters, and here they are again exposed
naked, without any distinction of sexes, to the brutal examination of their
purchasers; and this, it may well be judged, is to many another occasion of
deep distress. Add to this, that near connections must now again be separated
to go with their several purchasers; this must be deeply affecting to all, but
such whose hearts are feared by the love of gain. Mothers are seen hanging over
their daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears, and daughters
clinging to their parents, not knowing what new stage of distress must follow
their separation, or whether they shall ever meet again. And here what
sympathy! What commiseration do they meet with! Why, indeed, if they will not
separate as readily as their owners think proper, the Whipper is called for,
and the lash is exercised upon their naked bodies, till obliged to part. Can
any human heart, which is not become callous by the practice of such cruelties,
be unconcerned, even at the relation of such grievous affliction, to which this
oppressed part of our species are subjected.

In a book printed in Liverpool, called, The Liverpool Memorandum, which
contains amongst other things, an account of the trade of that port, there is
an exact list of the vessels employed in the Guinea trade, and of the number of
slaves imported in each vessel; by which it appears, that in the year 1753, the
number imported to America by one hundred and one vessels belonging to that
port, amounted to upwards of thirty thousand, and from the number of vessels
employed by the African company, in London and Bristol, we may, with some
degree of certainty, conclude, there are one hundred thousand Negroes purchased
and brought on board our ships yearly from the coast of Africa. This is
confirmed in Anderson's history of Trade and Commerce, lately printed; where it
is said, Appendix to Anderson's History, page 68.
that England supplies her American colonies with Negroe slaves, amounting in
number to above one hundred thousand every year. When the vessels are full
freighted with slaves, they sail for our plantations in America, and may be two
or three months in the voyage, during which time, from the filth and stench
that is among them, distempers frequently break out, which carry off commonly a
fifth, a fourth, yea sometimes a third or more of them: so that taking all the
slaves together, that are brought on board our ships yearly, one may reasonably
suppose that at least ten thousand of them die on the voyage. And in a printed
account of the state of the Negroes, in our plantations, it is supposed that a
fourth part more or less die at the different islands, in what is called the
seasoning. Hence it may be presumed, that at a moderate computation of the
slaves who are purchased by our African merchants in a year, near thirty
thousand die upon the voyage and in the seasoning. Add to this, the prodigious
number who are killed in the incursions and intestine wars, by which the
Negroes procure the number of slaves wanted to load the vessels. How dreadful
then is this slave trade, whereby so many thousands of our fellow creatures,
free by nature, endued with the same rational faculties, and called to be heirs
of the same salvation with us, lose their lives, and are truly and properly
speaking murdered every year; for it is not necessary in order to convict a man
of murder, to make it appear, that he had an intention to commit murder.
Whoever does, by unjust force or violence, deprive another of his liberty, and
while he has him in his power, continues so to oppress him, by cruel treatment
as eventually to occasion his death, is actually guilty of murder. It is enough
to make a thoughtful person tremble, to think what a load of guilt lies upon
our nation on this account, and that the blood of thousands of poor innocent
creatures murdered every year in the prosecution of this wicked trade, cries
aloud to Heaven for vengeance. Were we to hear or read of a nation that
destroyed every year, in some other way, as many human creatures as perish in
this trade, we should certainly consider them as a very bloody barbarous
people. If it be alleged, that the legislature has encouraged and still does
encourage this trade. It is answered, that no legislature on earth, can alter
the nature of things, so as to make that to be right which is contrary to the
law of God, the supreme legislator and governor of the the world, and opposes
the promulgation of the gospel of peace on earth, and good will to man.
Injustice may be methodized and established by law, but still it will be
injustice as much as it was before, though its being so established, may render
men more insensible of the guilt, and more bold and secure in the perpetration
of it.

CHAP. XIV.
Observations on the disposition and capacity of the Negroes: Why thought
inferior to that of the Whites. Affecting instances of the slavery of the
Negroes. Reflections thereon.

DOUBTS may arise in the minds of of some, whether the foregoing accounts
relating to the natural capacity and good disposition of the inhabitants of
Guinea, and of the violent manner in which they are said to be torn from their
native land, is to be depended upon on; as those Negroes, who are brought to
us, are not heard to complain, nor do but seldom manifest such a docility and
quickness of parts, as is agreeable thereto. But those who make these
objections, are desired to note the many discouragements the poor Africans
labor under when brought from their native land. Let them consider, that those
afflicted strangers, though in an enlightened Christian country, have yet but
little opportunity or encouragement to exert and improve their natural talents:
They are constantly employed in servile labor, and the abject condition in
which we see them, naturally raises an idea of a superiority in ourselves;
whence we are apt to look upon them as an ignorant and contemptible part of
mankind. Add to this, that they meet with very little encouragement of freely
conversing with such of the Whites, as might impart instruction to them. It is
a fondness for wealth, for authority or honor which prompts most men, in their
endeavors to excel; but these motives can have little influence upon the minds
of the Negroes; few of them having any reasonable prospect of any other than a
state of slavery; so that, though their natural capacities were ever so good,
they have neither inducement or opportunity to exert them to advantage: This
naturally tends to depress their minds, and sink their spirits into habits of
idleness and sloth, which they would, in all likelihood, have been free from,
had they stood upon an equal footing with the white people. They are suffered,
with impunity, to cohabit together, without being married, and to part, when
solemnly engaged to one another as man and wife; notwithstanding the moral and
religious laws of the land, strictly prohibiting such practices. This naturally
tends to beget apprehension in the most thoughtful of those people, that we
look upon them as a lower race, not worthy of the same care, nor liable to the
same rewards and punishments as ourselves. Nevertheless it may with truth be
said, that both amongst those who have obtained their freedom, and those who
remain in servitude, some have manifested a strong sagacity and an exemplary
uprightness of heart. If this has not been generally the case with them, is it
a matter of surprise? Have we not reason to make the same complaint of many
white servants, when discharged from our service, though many of them have had
much greater opportunities of knowledge and improvement than the blacks; who
even, when free, labor under the same difficulties as before, having but
little access to, and intercourse with the most reputable white people; they
remain confined within their former limits of conversation. And if they seldom
complain of the unjust and cruel usage they have received in being forced from
their native country, etc. it is not to be wondered at; it being a considerable
time after their arrival amongst us, before they can speak our language; and,
by the time they are able to express themselves, they have great reason to
believe, that little or no notice would be taken of their complaints, yet let
any person enquire of those who were capable of reflection before they were
brought from their native land, and he will hear such affecting relations,
which, if not lost to the common feelings of humanity, will sensibly affect his
heart. The case of a poor Negroe, not long since brought from Guinea, is a
recent instance of this kind. From his first arrival, he appeared thoughtful
and dejected, frequently dropping tears when taking notice of his master's
children, the cause of which was not known till he was able to speak English,
when the account he gave of himself was, That he had a wife and children in his
own country; that some of these being sick and thirsty, he went, in the night
time, to fetch water at a spring, where he was violently seized and carried
away by persons, who lay in wait to catch men, from whence he was transported
to America. The remembrance of his family, friends and other connections, left
behind, which he never expected to see any more, were the principal cause of
his dejection and grief. Many cases equally affecting might be here mentioned,
but one more instance which fell under the notice of a person of credit will
suffice. One of these wretched creatures, then about 50 years of age, informed
him, That being violently torn from a wife and several children in Guinea, he
was sold in Jamaica, where never expecting to see his native land or family any
more, he joined himself to a Negroe woman, by whom he had two children; after
some years, it suiting the interest of his owner to remove him, he was
separated from this second wife and children, and brought to South Carolina,
where, expecting to spend the remainder of his days, he engaged with a third
wife, by whom he had another child; but here the same consequence of one man
being subject to the will and pleasure of another man occurring, he was
separated from this last wife and child, and brought in this country, where he
remained a slave. Can any, whose mind is not rendered quite obdurate by the
love of wealth, hear these relations, without being deeply touched with
sympathy and sorrow; and doubtless the case of many, very many of these
afflicted people, upon enquiry would be found to be attended with circumstances
equally tragical and aggravating. And, if we enquire of those Negroes who were
brought away from their native country when children, we shall find most of
them to have been stolen away when abroad from their parents, on the roads, in
the woods, or watching their cornfieldsd. Now, you that have studied the book
of conscience, and you that are learned in the law, what will you say to such
deplorable cases. When, and how have these oppressed people forfeited their
liberty? Does not justice loudly call for its being restored to them? Have they
not the same right to demand it as any of us should have, if we had been
violently snatched by Pirates from our native land? Is it not the duty of every
dispenser of justice, who is not forgetful of his own humanity, to remember,
that these are men, and to declare them free? Where instances of such cruelty
frequently occur, and are neither enquired into, nor redressed by those whose
duty it is, to seek judgment, and relieve the oppressed, Isaiah i. 17. What can
be expected but that the groans and cries of these sufferers will reach Heaven,
and what shall we do when God rises up and when he visits, What will ye
answer him? Did not he that made them, make us; and did not one fashion us in
the womb. Job xxxi. 14.

CHAP. XIV.
The Expediency of a general freedom being granted to the Negroes considered.
Reasons why it might be productive of advantage and safety to the Colonies.

IT is scarce to be doubted, but that the foregoing accounts will beget in the
heart of the considerate readers, an earnest desire to see a stop put to this
complicated evil, but the objection with many is, What shall be done with those
Negroes already imported and born in our families? Must they be sent to Africa?
That would be to expose them in a strange land to greater difficulties than
many of them labor under at present. To set them suddenly free here, would be,
perhaps, attended with no less difficulty; for undisciplined as they are in
religion and virtue, they might give a loose to those evil habits, which the
fear of a master would have restrained. These are objections which weigh with
many well disposed people, and it must be granted these are difficulties in the
way; nor can any general change be made or reformation affected without some;
but the difficulties are not so great but that they may be surmounted. If the
government was so considerate of the iniquity and danger attending on this
practice as to be willing to seek a remedy, doubtless, the Almighty would bless
this good intention, and such methods would be thought of, as would not only
put an end to the unjust oppression of the Negroes, but might bring them under
regulations that would enable them to become profitable members of society. For
the furtherance of which, the following proposals are offered to consideration:
That all farther importation of slaves be absolutely prohibited; and as to
those born amongst us, after serving so long as may appear to be equitable, let
them by law be declared free. Let every one thus set free, be enrolled in the
county courts, and be obliged to be a resident during a certain number of years
within the said county, under the care of the overseers of the poor. Thus
being, in some sort, still under the direction of governors and the notice of
those who were formerly acquainted with them, they would be obliged to act the
more circumspectly, and make proper use of their liberty, and their children
would have an opportunity of obtaining such instruction as is necessary to the
common occasions of life, and thus both parents and children might gradually
become useful members of the community. And further, where the nature of the
country would permit, as certainly the uncultivated condition of our southern
and most western colonies easily would: suppose a small tract of land were
assigned to every Negroe family, and they obliged to live upon and improve it,
(when not hired out to work for the white people) this would encourage them to
exert their abilities and become industrious subjects. Hence both planters and
tradesmen would be plentifully supplied with cheerful and willing minded
laborers, much vacant land would be cultivated; the produce of the country be
justly increased; the taxes for the support of government lessened to
individuals by the increase of taxables. And the Negroes, instead of being and
object of Terror The hard usage the Negroes meet with in the plantations, and
the great disproportion between them and the white people, will always be a
just cause of terror. In Jamaica and some parts of South Carolina, it is
supposed that there are fifteen blacks to one white.
, as they certainly must be to the governments where their numbers are great,
would become interested in their safety and welfare.

CHAP. XV.
Answer to a mistaken opinion, that the warmth of the climate in the
West Indies will not permit white people to labor there. No complaint of
disability in the whites in that respect in the settlement of the islands.
Idleness and diseases prevailed as the use of slaves increased. The great
advantage which might accrue to the British nation, if the slave trade was
entirely laid aside, and a fair and friendly commerce established through the
whole coast of Africa.

IT is frequently offered as an argument in vindication of the use of Negroe
slaves. That the warmth of the climate in the West Indies, will not permit
white people to labor in the culture of the land; but upon an acquaintance
with the nature of the climate, and its effects upon such laboring white
people as are prudent and moderate in labor and the use of spirituous liquors,
this will be found to be a mistaken opinion. Those islands were, at first,
wholly cultivated by white men; the encouragement they then met with for a long
course of years was such as occasioned a great increase of people. Richard
Ligon, in his history of Barbados, where he resided from the year 1647 to
1650, about 24 years after its first settlement, writes, that there was then
fifty thousand souls on that island, besides Negroes; and that though the
weather was very hot, yet not so scalding, but that servants, both Christians
and slaves labored ten hours a day. By other accounts we gather, that the
white people have since decreased to less than one half the number which was
there at that time; and by relations of the first settlements of the other
islands, we do not meet with any complaints of unfitness in the white people
for labor there, before slaves were introduced. The island of Hispaniola,
which is one of the largest of those islands, was at first planted by the
Bucaneers, a set of hardy laborious men, who continued so for a long course of
years, till following the example of their neighbors in the purchase and use
of Negroe Slaves, idleness and excess prevailing, debility and disease
naturally succeeded, and have ever since continued. If, under proper
regulations, liberty was proclaimed through the colonies, the Negroes, from a
dangerous grudging half fed slaves, might become able willing minded Laborers.
And if there was not a sufficient number of these to do the necessary work, a
competent number of laboring people might be procured from Europe, which
affords numbers of poor distressed objects, who, if not overlooked, with proper
usage, might, in several respects, better answer every good purpose in
performing the necessary labor in the islands than the slaves now do.

A farther considerable advantage might accrue to the British nation in
general, if the slave trade was laid aside, by the cultivation of a fair,
friendly and humane commerce with the Africans, without which it is not
possible the inland trade of that country should ever be extended to the degree
it is capable of; for while the spirit of butchery and making slaves of each
other is promoted by the Europeans amongst the Negroes, no mutual confidence
can take place; nor will the Europeans be able to travel with safety into the
heart of their country to form and cement such commercial friendships and
alliances as might be necessary to introduce the arts and sciences amongst
them, and engage their attention to instruction in the principles of the
Christian religion, which is the only sure foundation of every social virtue.
Africa has about ten thousand miles of sea coast, and extends in depth near
three thousand miles from east to west, and as much from north to south; stored
with vast treasures of materials necessary for the trade and manufactures of
Great Britain, and from its climate and the fruitfulness of its soil, capable,
under proper management, of producing, in the greatest plenty, most of the
commodities which are imported into Europe from those parts of America subject
to the English Government, See note page, 109.
and as in return they would take our manufactures, the advantages of this
trade would soon become so great, that it is evident this subject merits the
regard and attention of the government,

EXTRACT FROM A REPRESENTATION OF THE INJUSTICE AND DANGEROUS TENDENCY OF
TOLERATING SLAVERY, OR Admitting the least CLAIM of private Property in the
Persons of Men in England.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

LONDON: Printed MDCCLXIX.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-street, opposite the
Workhouse.

MDCCLXXI.

CONTENTS.
The occasion of this Treatise. All Persons during their residence in
Great Britain are subjects; and as such, bound to the laws and under the King's
protection. By the English laws, no man, of what condition soever, to be
imprisoned, or any way deprived of his LIBERTY without a legal process. The
danger of Slavery taking place in England. Prevails in the Northern Colonies,
notwithstanding the people's plea in favor of Liberty. Advertisements in the
New York Journal for the sale of SLAVES. Advertisements to the same purpose in
the public prints in England. The danger of confining any person without a
legal warrant. Instances of that nature. Note. Extract of several American
laws. Reflections thereon.

EXTRACT, etc.
SOME persons respectable in the law, having given it as their opinion, That a
slave, by coming from the West Indies to Great Britain or Ireland, either with
or without his master, does not become free, or that his master's property or
right in him is not thereby determined or varied; -- and that the master may
legally compel him to return again to the plantations. -- This causes our
Author to remark, that these Lawyers, by thus stating the case, merely on one
side of the question, (I mean in favor of the master) have occasioned an
unjust presumption and prejudice, (plainly inconsistent with the laws of the
realm) and against the other side of the question; as they have not signified
that their opinion was only conditional and not absolute, and must be
understood on the part of the master, " that he can produce an authentic
agreement or contract in writing, by which it shall appear, that the said slave
has voluntary bound himself without compulsion or illegal duress."

Page 5. Indeed there are many instances of persons being freed from slavery by
the laws of England, but (God be thanked) there is neither law nor even a
precedent, (at least I have not been able to find one) of a legal determination
to justify a master in claiming or detaining any person whatsoever as a slave
in England, who has not voluntarily bound himself as such by a contract in
writing.

Page 20. An English subject cannot be made a slave without his own free
consent, but -- a foreign slave is made a subject with or without his own
consent; there needs no contract for this purpose as in the other case; nor any
other act or deed whatsoever, but that of his being landed in England; for
according to a statute of 32d Henry, VIII. c. 16. Sect. 9. Every alien or
stranger, born out of the King's obeisance, not being denizen, which now or
hereafter shall come into this realm, or elsewhere within the King's dominions,
shall, after the said first of September next coming, be bounden by and unto
the laws and statutes of this realm, and to all and singular the contents of
the same.

Now it must be observed, that though this law makes no distinstion of bond or
free, neither of colors or complexions, whether of black, brown, or white, for
every alien or stranger (without exception) are bounden by and unto the law,
etc.

This binding or obligation, is properly expressed by the English word
Ligeance, ( a Ligando) which may be either perpetual or temporary. Wood 6. 1.
c. 3. p. 37. but one of these is indispensably due to the Sovereign from all
ranks and conditions of people, their being bounden unto the laws, (upon which
the Sovereign's right is founded) expresses and implies this subjection to the
laws, and therefore to allege, that an alien is not a subject, because he is
in bondage, is not only a plea without foundation, but a contradiction in
terms, for every person who in any respect is in subjection to the laws, must
undoubtedly be a subject.

I come now to the main point -- " that every man, woman, or child, that now
is, or hereafter shall be an inhabitant or resiant of this kingdom of England,
dominion of Wales, or town of Berwick upon Tweed," is, in some respect or
other, the King's subject, and as such, is absolutely secure in his, or her
personal liberty, by virtue of a statute, 31st Car. II. chapter 11, and
particularly by the 12th Sect. of the same (wherein subjects of all conditions
are plainly included.)

This act is expressly intended for the better securing the liberty of the
subject, and for prevention of imprisonment beyond the seas. It contains no
distinction of " natural born, naturalized, denizen, or alien subject, nor of
white or black, freemen or even of bond men," (except in the case already
mentioned of a contract in writing, by which it shall appear, that the said
slave have voluntarily bound himself without compulsion or illegal duress)
allowed by the 13th Sect. and the exception likewise in the 14th Sect.
concerning felons, but they are all included under the general titles of " the
subject, any of the said subjects," every such person, etc. Now the definition
of the word " person" in its relative or civil capacity (according to Wood. b.
1. c. 11. p. 27) is either the King or a subject. These are the only capital
distinctions that can be made; though the latter consists of a variety of
denominations and degrees.

But if I were even to allow, that a Negroe slave is not a subject, (though I
think I have clearly proved that he is) yet it is plain, that such an one ought
not to be denied the benefit of the King's court, unless the slaveholder shall
be able to prove likewise, that he is not a Man, because every man may be free
to sue for and defend his right in our courts, says a stat. 20th Edw. III. Chapter
4. and elsewhere according to law. And no man of what estate or condition that
he be, (here can be no exception whatsoever) shall be put out of land or
tenement, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put to death, without
being brought in answer by due process of the law. 28th Edw. III. Chapter 3. No man
therefore, of what estate or condition that he be, can lawfully be detained in
England as a slave, because we have no law, whereby a man may be condemned to
slavery, without his own consent, (for even convicted felons must, " in open
court pray to be transported,") see Habeas Corpus act, Sect. 14. and therefore
there cannot be any " due process of the law," tending to so base a purpose: It
follows, therefore, that every man who presumes to detain any person whatsoever
as a slave, otherwise than by virtue of a written contract, acts manifestly
without " due process of the law." and consequently is liable to the slaves
action of false imprisonment, because every man may be free to sue, etc. so
that the slave-holder cannot avail himself of his imaginary property, either by
the assistance of the common law, or of a court of equity, ( except it appears
that the said slave has voluntary bound himself without compulsion, or illegal
duress) for in both, his suit will certainly appear both unjust and
indefensible. The former cannot assist him, because the statute law at present
is so far from supposing any man in a state of slavery, that it cannot even
permit such a state, except in the two cases mentioned in the 13th and 14th
Section of the Habeas Corpus act; and the courts of equity likewise must
necessarily decide against him, because his mere mercenary plea, of private
property, cannot, equitably in a case between ( man and man,) stand in
competition with that superior property which every man must necessarily be
allowed to have in his own proper person.

How then is the slave-holder to secure what he esteems his property? Perhaps
he will endeavor clandestinely to seize the supposed slave in order to
transport him, (with or without his consent) to the colonies, where such
property it allowed: But let him take care what he does, the very attempt is
punishable, and even the making over his property to another for that purpose,
renders him equally liable to the severe penalties of the law, for a bill of
sale may certainly be included under the terms expressed in the Habeas Corpus
act, 12th Sect. viz. " Anywarrant or writing for such commitment, detainer,
imprisonment or transportation, etc." It is also dangerous for a counselor or
any other person to advise" (see the act "shall be advising") such proceedings
by saying, " that a master may legally compel him, (the slave) to return again
to the plantations." Likewise an Attorney, Notary-public, or any other person,
who shall presume to draw up, negotiate, or even to witness a bill of sale, or
other instrument, for such committment, etc. offends equally against the law,
because, " All, or any person or persons that shall frame, contrive, write,
seal or countersign any warrant, or writing for such commitment, detainer,
imprisonment or transportation, or shall be advising, aiding or assisting in
the same, or any of them," are liable to all the penalties of the act. " And
the Plaintiff, in every such action, shall have judgment to recover his treble
costs, besides damages; which damages so to be given, shall not be less than
five hundred pounds;" so that the injured may have ample satisfaction for their
sufferings; and even a judge may not direct or instruct a jury contrary to this
statute whatever his private opinion may be concerning property in slaves;
because, no order or command, nor no injunction, is allowed to interfere with
this golden act of liberty.

-- I have before observed, that the general term, " every Alien," includes all
strangers whatsoever, and renders them subject to the King and the laws during
their residence in this kingdom; and this is certainly true, whether the aliens
be Turks, Moors, Arabians, Tartars, or even savages from any part of the world.
-- Men are rendered obnoxious to the laws by their offenses, and not by the
particular denomination of their rank, order, parentage, color or country, and
therefore, though we should suppose, that any particular body of people
whatsoeever were not known, or had in consideration by the legislature at the
different times when the severe penal laws were made, yet no man can reasonably
conceive, that such men are exempted on this account from the penalties of the
said laws, when legally convicted of having offended against them.

Laws calculated for the moral purpose of preventing oppression, are likewise
usually supposed to be everlasting, and to make up a part of our happy
constitution; for which reason, though the kind of oppression to be guarded
against, and the penalties for offenders are minutely described therein, yet
the persons to be protected are comprehended in terms as general as possible;
that " no person who now is, or hereafter shall be an inhabitant or resiant in
this kingdom, (see Habeas Corpus act, Sect. 12th) may seem to be excluded from
protection. The general terms of the several statutes before cited are so full
and clear, that they admit of no exception whatsoever, for all persons,
(Negroes as well as others) must be included in the terms; "the subject; -- no
subject of this realm that now is, or hereafter shall be an inhabitant, etc.
any subject; every such person, see Habeas Cor. act. Also, every man may be
free to sue, etc. 20th Edward III. Cap. 4, and no man, of what estate or
condition than he be, shall be taken nor imprisoned. etc. True justice makes no
respect of persons, and can never deny to any one that blessing to which all
mankind have an undoubted right, their natural liberty: Though the law makes no
mention of Negroe slaves, yet this is no just argument for excluding them from
the general protection of our happy constitution.

Neither can the objection, that Negroe slaves were not "had in consideration
or contemplation" when these laws were made, prove any thing against them; but,
on the contrary, much in their favor; for both these circumstances are strong
presumptive proofs, that the practice of importing slaves into this kingdom,
and retaining them as such, is an innovation entirely foreign to the spirit and
intention of the laws now in force.

-- Page 79. A toleration of slavery, is, in effect, a toleration of
inhumanity; for there are wretches in the world, who make no scruple to gain,
by wearing out their slaves with continual labor, and a scanty allowance,
before they have lived out half their natural days. It Is notorious, that this
is too often the case in the unhappy countries where slavery is tolerated.

See the account of the European settlements in America, Part VI. Chap. 11.
concerning the " misery of the Negroes, great waste of them, etc. which informs
us, not only of a most scandalous profanation of the Lord's day, but also, of
another abomination, which must be infinitely more heinous in the sight of God,
viz. oppression carried to such excess, as to be even destructive of the human
species.

At present the inhumanity of constrained labor in excess, extends no farther
in England, than to our beasts, as post and hackney horses, sand asses, etc.

But thanks to our laws, and not to the general good disposition of masters,
that it is so, for the wretch, who is bad enough to mal-treat a helpless beast,
would not spare his fellow man, if he had him as much in his power.

The maintenance of civil liberty, is therefore, absolutely necessary to
prevent an increase of our national guilt, by the addition of the horrid crime
of tyranny. -- Notwithstanding that the plea of necessity cannot here be urged,
yet this is no reason why an increase of the practice is not to be feared.

Our North America colonies afford us a melancholy instance to the contrary; --
for though the climate in general is so wholesome and temperate, that it will
not authorize this plea of necessity for the employment of slaves, any more
than our own, yet the pernicious practice of slave-holding is become almost
general in those parts. At New York, for instance, the infringement on civil or
domestic liberty is become notorious, notwithstanding the political
controversies of the inhabitants in praise of liberty; but no panegyric on
this subject (howsoever elegant in itself) can be graceful, or edifying from
the mouth, or pen of one of those provincials; because men, who do not scruple
to detain others in slavery, have but a very partial and unjust claim to the
protection of the laws of liberty; and indeed it too plainly appears, that they
have no real regard for liberty, farther than their own private interests are
concerned; and (consequently) that they have so little detestation for
despotism and tyranny, that they do not scruple to exercise them whenever their
caprice excites them, or their private interest seems to require an exertion of
their power over their miserable slaves.

Every petty planter, who avails himself of the service of slaves, is an
arbitrary monarch, or rather a lawless Bashaw in his own territories,
notwithstanding that the imaginary freedom of the province wherein he resides,
may seem to forbid the observation.

The boasted liberty of our American colonies, therefore, has so little right
to that sacred name, that it seems to differ from the arbitrary power of
despotic monarchs, only in one circumstance, viz. that it is a manyheaded
monster of tyranny, which entirely subverts our most excellent constitution,
because liberty and slavery are so opposite to each other, that they cannot
subsist in the same community. Political liberty (in mild or well regulated
governments) makes civil liberty valuable; and whosoever is deprived of the
latter, is deprived also of the former. This observation of the learned
Montesquieu, I hope, sufficiently justifies my censure of the Americans for
their notorious violation of civil liberty. -- The New York Journal, or, The
General Advertiser, for Thursday, 22d October 1767, Gives Notice by
Advertisement of no less than eight different persons who have escaped from
slavery, or are put up to public sale for that horrid purpose.

That I may demonstrate the indecency of such proceedings in a free country, I
shall take the liberty of laying some of these Advertisements before my
readers, by way of example.

To be SOLD for Want of Employment, A likely strong active Negroe Man, of about
24 years of age, this country born, ( N.B. A natural born subject) understands
most of a Baker's trade and a good deal of farming business, and can do all
sorts of house-work: -- Also, A healthy Negroe Wench, of about 21 years old, is
a tolerable Cook, and capable of doing all sorts of house-work, can be well
recommended for her honesty and sobriety: She has a female child of nigh three
years old, which will be sold with the Wench if required, etc. Here is not the
least consideration or scruple of conscience for the inhumanity of parting the
mother and young child. From the style, one would suppose the Advertisement to
be of no more importance than if it related merely to the sale of a cow and her
calf, and that the cow should be sold with or without her calf according as the
purchaser should require. -- But not only Negroes, but even American Indians
are detained in the same abominable slavery in our colonies, though there
cannot be any reasonable pretense whatsoever, for holding one of these as
private property; for even, if a written contract should be produced as a
voucher in such a case, there would still remain great suspicion, that some
undue advantage had been taken of the Indians ignorance concerning the nature
of such a bond. Run away, on Monday the 21 st instant, from J -- n T -- s, Esquire
of West-Chester County, in the province of New York, An Indian slave, named
Abraham, he may have changed his name, about 23 years of age, about five feet
five inches.

Upon the whole, I think, I may, with justice conclude, that those
Advertisements discover a shameless prostitution and infringement on the common
and natural rights of mankind. -- But hold! perhaps the Americans may be able,
with too much justice, to reto^^ this severe reflection, and may refer us to
newspapers published even in the free city of London, which contain
Advertisements, not less dishonorable than their own. See Advertisement in the
Public Ledger of 31st December, 1761.

For SALE, A healthy Negroe GIRL, aged about fifteen years; speaks good
English, works at her needle, washes well, does household work, and has had the
smallpox. By J. W. etc.

Another Advertisement, not long ago, offered a reward for stopping a female
slave who had left her mistress in Hatton-garden. And in the Gazetteer of 18th
April 1769, appeared a very extraordinary Advertisement, with the following
title.

Horses, Tim Wisky, and black Boy, To be Sold, at the Bull and Gate Inn,
Holborn, A very good Tim Wisky, little the worse for wear, etc. afterward a
Chestnut Gelding. -- Then, A very good gray Mare -- and last of all, (as if of
the least consequence) A well made good tempered Black Boy, he has lately had
the smallpox, and will be sold to any gentleman. Enquire as above.

Another Advertisement in the same paper, contains a very particular
description of a Negroe man, called Jeremiah --, and concludes as follows: --
Whoever dedelivers him to Capt. M -- U -- y, on board the Elizabeth at Prince's
stairs, Rotherhithe, on or before the 31st instant, shall receive thirty
Guineas Reward, or ten Guineas for such intelligence as shall enable the
Captain or his Master, effectually to secure him. The utmost secrecy may be
depended on. It is not on account of shame, that men, who are capable of
undertaking the desperate and wicked employment of kidnappers, are supposed to
be tempted to such a business, by a promise, " of the utmost secrecy." But this
must be from a sense of the unlawfulness of the act proposed to them, that they
may have less reason to fear a prosecution. And as such a kind of people are
supposed to undertake any thing for money, the Reward of thirty Guineas was
tendered at the top of the Advertisement in capital letters. No man can be
safe, be he white or black, if temptations to break the laws are so shamefully
published in our newspapers.

A Creole Black Boy, is also offered to sale in the Daily Advertiser of the
same date.

Besides these instances, the Americans may perhaps taunt us with the shameful
treatment of a poor Negroe servant, who not long ago was put up to sale by
public auction, together with the effects of his bankrupt master. -- Also, that
the prisons of this free city have been frequently prostituted of late by the
tyrannical and dangerous practice of confining Negroes, under the pretense of
slavery, though there has been no warrants whatsoever for their commitment.

This circumstance of confining a man without a warrant, has so great a
resemblance to the proceedings of a Popish inquisition, that it is but too
obvious what dangerous practices such scandalous innovations (if permitted to
grow more into use) are liable to introduce. No person can be safe, if wicked
and designing men have it in their power, under the pretense of private
property as a slave, to throw a man clandestinely without a warrant into goal,
and to conceal him there, until they can conveniently dispose of him.

A free man may be thus robbed of his liberty, and carried beyond the seas,
without having the least opportunity of making his case known; which should
teach us how jealous we ought to be of all imprisonments made without the
authority, or previous examination of a civil magistrate.

The distinction of color will, in a short time, be no protection against such
outrages, especially, as not only Negroes, but Mullatoes, and even American
Indians, (which appears by one of the Advertisements before quoted) are
retained in slavery in our American colonies; for there are many honest
weather-beaten Englishmen, who have as little reason to boast of their
complexion as the Indians. And indeed the more northern Indians, have no
difference from us in complexion, but such as is occasioned by the climate or
different way of living. The plea of private property, therefore, cannot by any
means justify a private commitment of any person whatsoever to to prison,
because of the apparent danger and tendency of such an innovation. This
dangerous practice of concealing in prison, was attempted in the case of
Jonathan Strong; for the doorkeeper of the P -- lt -- y C -- pt -- r (or some
person who acted for him) absolutely refused for two days to permit this poor
injured Negro to be seen or spoke with, though a person went on purpose both
those days to demand the same. -- All laws ought to be founded upon the
principle of " doing as one would be done by," and indeed this principle seems
to be the very basis of the English constitution, for what precaution could
possibly be more effectual for that purpose, than the right we enjoy of being
judged by our Peers, creditable persons of the vicinage; especially, as we may
likewise claim the right of excepting against any particular juryman, who might
he suspected of partiality.

This law breathes the pure spirit of liberty, equity and social love; being
calculated to maintain that consideration and mutual regard, which one person
ought to have for another howsoever unequal in rank or station.

But when any part of the community, under the pretense of private property, is
deprived of this common privilege, it is a violation of civil liberty, which is
entirely inconsistent with the social principles of a free state.

True liberty protects the labourer, as well as his Lord; preserves the dignity
of human nature, and seldom fails to render a province rich and populous;
whereas, on the other hand, a toleration of slavery is the highest breach of
social virtue, and not only tends to depopulation, but too often renders the
minds of both masters and slaves utterly depraved and inhuman, by the hateful
extremes of exaltation and depression.

If such a toleration should ever be generally admitted in England, (which God
forbid) we shall no longer deserve to be esteemed a civilized people; because,
when the customs of uncivilized nations, and the uncivilized customs which
disgrace our own colonies, are become so familiar, as to be permitted amongst
us with impunity, we ourselves must insensibly degenerate to the same degree of
baseness with those from whom such bad customs were derived, and may too soon
have the mortification to see the hateful extremes of tyranny and slavery
fostered under every roof."

Then must the happy medium of a well regulated liberty be necessarily
compelled to find shelter in some more civilized country, where social virtue,
and that divine precept, " Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself," are
better understood.

An attempt to prove the dangerous tendency, injustice and disgrace of
tolerating slavery amongst Englishmen, would in any former age have been
esteemed as superfluous and ridiculous, as if a man should undertake in a
formal manner to prove, that darkness is not light.

Sorry am I, that the depravity of the present age has made a demonstration of
this kind necessary.

Now that I may sum up the amount of what has been said in a single sentence, I
shall beg leave to conclude in the words of the great sir Edward Coke, which
though spoken on a different occasion, are yet applicable to this, see
Rushworth's Hist. Col. An. 1628. 4. Caroli. fol. 540.

It would be no honor to a king or kingdom, to be a king of bondmen or slaves,
the end of this would be both dedecus Disgrace.
and damnum Loss.
both to king and kingdom, that in former times have been so renowned.

Note, at page 63. According to the laws of Jamaica printed at London in 1756.
If any slave having been one whole year in this island, (says an act, No 64,
clause 5. p. 114) shall run away, and continue absent from his owners service
for the space of thirty days, upon complaint and proof etc. before any two
justices of the peace, and three freeholders, etc. it shall and may be lawful
for such justices and freeholders to order such slave to be punished by cutting
off one of the feet of such slave, or inflict such other corporal punishment as
they shall think fit. Now that I may inform my readers what corporal
punishments are sometimes thought fit to be inflicted, I will refer to the
testimony of sir Hans Sloan, (see voyage to the islands of Madeira, Barbados,
etc. and Jamaica, with the natural history of the last of these islands, etc.
London 1707. Introduction, p. 56, and 57.) The punishment for crimes of slaves
(says he) are usually for rebellions burning them, by nailing them down on the
ground with crooked sticks, on every limb, and then applying the fire by
degrees from the feet and hands, burning them gradually up to the head, whereby
their pains are extravagant; for crimes of a lesser nature gelding, or chopping
off half the foot with an axe. These punishments are suffered by them with
great constancy. -- For negligence, they are usually whipped by the overseers
with lance-wood switches, till they be bloody, and several of the switches
broken, being first tied up by their hands in the mill houses. -- After they
are whipped till they are raw, some put on their skins pepper and salt, to make
them smart; at other times their masters will drop melted wax on their skins,
and use several very exquisite torments. Sir Hans adds, These punishments are
sometimes merited by the blacks, who are a very perverse generation of people,
and though they appear very harsh, yet are scarce equal to some of their
crimes, and inferior to what punishments other European nations inflict on
their slaves in the East Indies, as may be seen by Moquet, and other
travelers. Thus sir Hans Sloan endeavors to excuse those shocking cruelties,
but certainly in vain: because no crimes whatsoever can merit such severe
punishments, unless I except the crimes of those who devise and inflict them.
Sir Hans Sloan indeed, mentions rebellion, as the principal crime, and
certainly it is very justly esteemed a most heinous crime, in a land of
liberty, where government is limited by equitable and just laws, if the same
are tolerably well observed; but in countries where arbitrary power is
exercised with such intolerable cruelty, as is before described, if resistance
be a crime, it is certainly the most natural of all others.

But the 19th clause of the 38th act, would indeed on a slight perusal induce
us to conceive, that the punishment for rebellion is not so severe as it is
represented by sir Hans Sloan; because a slave, though deemed rebellious, is
thereby condemned to no greater punishment than transportation. Nevertheless if
the clause be thoroughly considered we shall find no reason to commend the
mercy of the legislature; for it only proves, that the Jamaica lawmakers will
not scruple to charge the slightest and most natural offenses with the most
opprobrious epithets; and that a poor slave who perhaps has no otherwise
incurred his master's displeasure than by endeavoring (upon the just and
warrantable principles of self-preservation) to escape from his master's
tyranny, without any criminal intention whatsoever, is liable to be deemed
rebellious, and to be arraigned as a capital offender. For every slave, and
slaves that shall run away and continue but for the space of twelve months,
except such slave or slaves as shall not have been three years in this island,
shall be deemed rebellious, etc. (see act 38, clause 19. p. 60.) Thus we are
enabled to define what a West Indian tyrant means by the word rebellious. But
unjust as this clause may seem, yet it is abundantly more merciful and
considerate than a subsequent act against the same poor miserable people,
because the former assigns no other punishment for persons so deemed rebellious
than that they, " Shall be transported by order of two justices and three
freeholders," etc. whereas the latter spares not the blood of these poor
injured fugitives: For by the 66th act, a reward of 50 pound is offered to
those who, shall kill or bring in alive any rebellious slaves, that is, any of
these unfortunate people whom the law has " deemed rebellious," as above; and
this premium is not only tendered to commissioned parties (see 2d. clause) but
even to any private " hunter, slave or other person," (see 3d. Thus it is
manifest, that the law treats these poor unhappy men with as little ceremony
and consideration, as if they were merely wild beasts. But the innocent blood
that is shed in consequence of such a detestable law, must certainly call for
vengeance on the murderous abettors and actors of such deliberate wickedness:
And though many of the guilty wretches should even be so hardened and abandoned
as never afterward to be capable of sincere remorse, yet a time will
undoubtedly come, when they will shudder with dreadful apprehensions, on
account of the insufficiency of so wretched an excuse, as that their poor
murdered brethren were by law " deemed rebellious." But bad as these laws are,
yet, in justice to the freeholders of Jamaica, I must acknowledge, that their
laws are not near so cruel and inhuman as the laws of Barbados and Virginia,
and seem at present, to be much more reasonable than they have formerly been,
many very oppressive laws being now expired, and others less severe enacted in
their room.

But it is far otherwise in Barbados; for by the 329th act, p. 125. If any
Negro or other slave, under punishment by his master, or his order, for running
away, or any other crimes, or misdemeanors toward his said master,
unfortunately shall suffer in life, or member, (which seldom happens) (but it
is plain by this law that it does sometimes happen) no person whatever shall be
liable to any fine therefore, but if any man shall, of wantonness, or only of
bloody mindedness, or cruel intention, wilfully kill a Negro or other slave of
his own. -- Now the reader, to be sure, will naturally expect, that some very
severe punishment must in this case be ordained, to deter, the wanton, bloody
minded, and cruel wretch from wilfully killing his fellow creatures; but alas!
the Barbadian lawmakers have been so far from intending to curb such abandoned
wickedness, that they have absolutely made this law on purpose to skreen these
enormous crimes from the just indignation of any righteous person, who might
think himself bound in duty to prosecute a bloody minded villain; they have,
therefore, prefumptuously taken upon them to give a sanction, as it were, by
law, to the horrid crime of wilful murder; and have accordingly ordained, that
he who is guilty of it in Barbados, though the act should be attended with all
the aggravating circumstances beforementioned, " shall pay into the public
treasury (no more than) fifteen pounds sterling;" but if he shall kill another
man's, he shall pay to the owner of the Negro, double the value, and into the
public treasury, twenty five pounds sterling, and he shall further, by the next
justice of the peace, be bound to his good behavior, during the pleasure of
the governor and council, and not be liable to any other punishment or
forfeiture for the same.

The most consummate wickedness, I suppose, that any body of people, under the
specious form of a legislature were ever guilty of: This act contains several
other clauses which are shocking to humanity, though too tedious to mention
here.

According to an act of Virginia (4 Anne chapter 49. sec. 37. P. 227.) after
proclamation is issued against slaves that run away and lie out, it is lawful
for any person whatsoever, to kill and destroy such slaves by such ways and
means as he, she, or they shall think fit, without accusation or impeachment of
any crime for the same, etc. And lest private interest should incline the
planter to mercy, (to which we must suppose such people can have no other
inducement) it is provided and enacted in the succeeding clause, (No 38.) That
for every slave killed, in pursuance of this act, or put to death by law, the
master, or owner of such slave, shall be paid by the public.

Also by an act of Virginia (9 Geo. I. chapter 4. sect. 18. p. 343) it is ordained,
That, where any slave shall hereafter be found notoriously guilty of going
abroad in the night, or running away, and lying out, and cannot be reclaimed
from such disorderly courses by the common method of punishment, it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the court of the county upon complaint and proof
thereof to them made by the owner of such slave, to order and direct every such
slave to be punished by dismembering or any other way, not touching life, as
the said county court shall think fit.

I have already given examples enough of the horrid cruelties which are
sometimes thought fit on such occasions. But if the innocent and most natural
act of running away, from intolerable tyranny deserves such relentless
severity, what kind of punishment have these lawmakers themselves to expect
hereafter, on account of their own enormous offenses; alas! to look for mercy
(without a timely repentance) will only be another instance of their gross
injustice! " Having their consciences seared with a hotiron," they seem to have
lost all apprehensions that their slaves are men, for they scruple not to
number them with beasts. See an act of Barbados, (No 333. p. 128.) entitled,
An act for the better regulating of outcries, in open market, here we read of
Negroes, cattle, coppers, and stills, and other chattels, brought by execution
to open market to be outcried, and these (as if all of equal importance) are
ranged together " in great lots or numbers to be sold."

-- Page 70. In the 329 act of Barbados (p. 122) it is asserted, that, brutish
slaves deserve not, for the baseness of their condition, to be tried by a legal
trial of twelve men of their peers or neighborhood, which neither truly can be
rightly done, as the subjects of England are; (yet slaves also are subjects of
England, whilst they remain within the British dominions, notwithstanding this
insinuation to the contrary) nor is execution to be delayed toward them, in
case of such horrid crimes committed, etc.

A similar doctrine is taught in an act of Virginia, (9 Geo. I. chapter 4. sect. 3.
p. 339.) wherein it is ordained, that every slave committing such offense as by
the laws ought to be punished by death or loss of member, shall be forth with
committed to the common goal of the county, etc. And the sheriff of such
county, upon such commitment, shall forthwith certify the same, with the cause
thereof, to the governor or commander in chief, etc. who is thereupon desired
and empowered to issue a commission of oyer and terminer; To such persons as he
shall think fit; which persons, forthwith after the receipt of such commission,
are empowered and required to cause the offender to be publicly arraigned and
tried, etc. without the solemnity of a jury, etc. Now let us consider the
dangerous tendency of those laws. As Englishmen, we strenuously contend for
this absolute and immutable necessity of trials by juries: but is not the
spirit and equity of this old English doctrine entirely loft, if we partially
confine that justice to ourselves alone, when we have it in our power to extend
it to others? The natural right of all mankind must principally justify our
insisting upon this necessary privilege in favor of ourselves in particular,
and therefore if we do not allow that the judgment of an impartial jury is
indispensably necessary in all cases whatsoever, wherein the life of man is
depending, we certainly undermine the equitable force and reason of those laws,
by which we ourselves are protected, and consequently are unworthy to be
esteemed, either Christians or Englishmen.

Whatever right the members of a provincial assembly may have to enact bye
laws, for particular exigences among themselves, yet in so doing, they are
certainly bound in duty to their sovereign, to observe most strictly, the
fundamental principles of that constitution, which his majesty is sworn to
maintain; for wheresoever the bounds of the British empire are extended, there
the common law of England must of course take place, and cannot be safely set
aside by any private law whatsoever, because the introduction of an unnatural
tyranny must necessarily endanger the king's dominions. The many alarming
insurrections of slaves in the several colonies, are sufficient proofs of this.
The common law of England ought therefore to be so established in every
province, as to include the respective bye laws of each province; instead of
being by them excluded which latter has been too much the case.

Every inhabitant of the British colonies, black as well as white, bond as well
as free, are undoubtedly the king's subjects, during their residence within the
limits of the king's dominions, and as such, are entitled to personal
protection, however bound in service to their respective masters. Therefore,
when any of these are put to death, without the solemnity of a jury, I fear
that there is too much reason to attribute the guilt of murder, to every person
concerned in ordering the same, or in consenting thereto; and all such persons
are certainly responsible to the king and his laws, for the loss of a subject.
The horrid iniquity, injustice, and dangerous tendency of the several
plantation laws, which I have quoted, are so apparent, that it is unnecessary
for me to apologize for the freedom with which I have treated them. If such
laws are not absolutely necessary for the government of slaves, the lawmakers
must unavoidably allow themselves to be the most cruel and abandoned tyrants
upon earth, or perhaps, that ever were on earth. On the other hand, if it be
said, that it is impossible to govern slaves without such inhuman severity and
detestable injustice, the same will certainly be an invincible argument against
the least toleration of slavery amongst christians, because the temporal profit
of the planter or master, however lucrative, cannot compensate the forfeiture
of his everlasting welfare, or (at least I may be allowed to say) the apparent
danger of such a forfeiture.

Oppression is a most grievous crime; and the cries of these much injured
people (though they are only poor ignorant heathens) will certainly reach
heaven! The scriptures ( which are the only true foundation of all laws)
denounce a tremendous judgment against the man who should offend even one
little one; It were better for him (even the merciful Savior of the world has
himself declared) that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he cast into
the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones. Luke, xvii. 2.
Who then shall attempt to vindicate those inhuman establishments of government,
under which, even our own countrymen so grievously offend and oppress, (not
merely one, or a few little ones, but) an immense multitude of men, women,
children, and the children of their children, from generation to generation?
May it not be said with like justice, it were better for the English nation
that these American dominions had never existed, or even that they should have
been sunk into the sea, than that the kingdom of Great Britain should be loaded
with the horrid guilt of tolerating such abominable wickedness! In short, if
the king's prerogative is not speedily exerted for the relief of his majesty's
oppressed and much injured subjects in the British colonies (because to relieve
the subject from the oppression of petty tyrants, is the principal use of the
royal prerogative, as well as the principal and most natural means of
maintaining the same) and for the extension of the British constitution to the
most distant colonies whether in the East or West Indies, it must inevitably be
allowed, that great share of this enormous guilt will certainly rest on this
side the water.

I hope this hint will be taken notice of by those whom it may concern; and
that the freedom of it will be excused, as from a loyal and disinterested
adviser.

Extracts from the writings of several noted Authors, on the Subject of the
Slavery of the Negroes, viz. George Wallace, Francis Hutcheson, James Foster.
GEORGE WALLIS, in his system of the principles of the laws of Scotland,
speaking of the slavery of the Negroes in our colonies, says "We all know that
they (the Negroes) are purchased from their Princes, who pretend to have a
right to dispose of them, and that they are, like other commodities,
transported by the merchants who have bought them, into America, in order to be
exposed to sale. If this trade admits of a moral or a rational justification,
every crime, even the most atrocious, may be justified. Government was
instituted for the good of mankind; kings, princes, governors, are not
proprietors of those who are subject to their authority; they have not a right
to make them miserable. On the contrary, their authority is vested in them,
that they may, by the just exercise of it, promote the happiness of their
people. Of course, they have not a right to dispose of their liberty, and to
sell them for slaves. Besides, no man has a right to acquire or to purchase
them; men and their liberty are not ( in commercio) they are not either
saleable or purchasable. One, therefore, has nobody but himself to blame, in
case he shall find himself deprived of a man, whom he thought he had, by buying
for a price, made his own; for he dealt in a trade which was illicit, and was
prohibited by the most obvious dictates of humanity. For these reasons every
one of those unfortunate men who are pretended to be slaves, has a right to be
declared to be free, for he never lost his liberty; he could not lose it; his
prince had no power to dispose of him. Of course the sale was ipso jure void.
This right he carries about with him, and is entitled every where to get it
declared. As soon, therefore, as he comes into a country in which the judges
are not forgetful of their own humanity, it is their duty to remember that he
is a man, and to declare him to be free. I know it has been said, that
questions concerning the state of persons ought to be determined by the law of
the country to which they belong; and that, therefore, one who would be
declared to be a slave in America, ought, in case he should happen to be
imported ^^to Britain, to be adjudged according to the law of America to be a
slave; a doctrine than which nothing can be more barbarous. Ought the judges of
any country, out of respect to the law of another, to show no respect to their
kind, and to humanity; out of respect to a law, which is in no sort obligatory
upon them, ought they to disregard the law of nature, which is obligatory on
all men at all times, and in all places: Are any laws so binding as the eternal
laws of justice? Is it doubtful, whether a judge ought to pay greater regard to
them, than to those arbitrary and inhuman usages which prevail in a distant
land? Aye, but our colonies would be ruined if slavery was abolished. Be it so;
would it not from thence follow, that the bulk of mankind ought to be abused,
that our pockets may be filled with money, or our mouths with delicacies? The
purses of highwaymen would be empty in case robberies were totally abolished;
but have men a right to acquire money by going out to the highway? Have men a
right to acquire it by rendering their fellow creatures miserable? Is it lawful
to abuse mankind, that the avarice, the vanity, or the passions of a few may be
gratified? No! There is such a thing as justice, to which the most sacred
regard is due. It ought to be inviolably observed. Have not these unhappy men a
better ^ight to their liberty, and to their happiness, than our American
merchants have to the profits which they make by torturing their kind? Let
therefore our colonies be ruined, but let us not render so many men miserable.
Would not any of us, who should -- be snatched by pirates from his native land,
think himself cruelly abused, and at all times entitled to be free. Have not
these unfortunate Africans, who meet with the same cruel fate, the same right?
Are not they men as well as we, and have they not the same sensibility? Let us
not, therefore, defend or support a usage which is contrary to all the laws of
humanity.

But it is false, that either we or our colonies would be ruined by the
abolition of slavery. It might occasion a stagnation of business for a short
time. Every great alteration produces that effect; because mankind cannot, on a
sudden, find ways of disposing of themselves and of their affairs: But it would
produce many happy effects. It is the slavery which is permitted in America
that has hindered it from becoming so soon populous as it would otherwise have
done. Let the Negroes free, and in a few generations, this vast and fertile
continent would be crowded with inhabitants; learning, arts, and every thing
would flourish amongst them; instead of being inhabited by wild beasts, and by
savages, it would be peopled by philosophers, and by men."

Francis Hutcheson professor of philosphy, at the university of Glascow, in his
system of moral philosophy, page 211, says, "He who detains another by force in
slavery, is always bound to prove his title. The slave sold or carried into a
distant country must not be obliged to prove a negative, that he never
forfeited his liberty. The violent possessor must in all cases show his title,
especially where the old proprietor is well known. In this case each man is the
original proprietor of his own liberty. The proof of his losing it must be
incumbent on those who deprive him of it by force. The Jewish laws had great
regard to justice, about the servitude of Hebrews, founding it only on consent
or some crime or damage, allowing them always a proper redress upon any cruel
treatment; and fixing a limited time for it, unless upon trial the servant
inclined to prolong it. The laws about foreign slaves had many merciful
provisions against immoderate severity of the masters. But under christianity,
whatever lenity was due from an Hebrew toward his country man must be due
toward all; since the distinctions of nations are removed, as to the point of
humanity and mercy, as well as natural right, nay some of these rights, granted
over foreign slaves may justly be deemed only such indulgences, as those of
poligamy and divorce, granting only external impunity in such practice, and not
sufficient vindication of them in conscience."

Page 85, It Is pleaded that, "In some barbarous nations unless the captives
were brought for slaves they would all be murdered. They therefore owe their
lives, and all they can do, to their purchasers; and so do their children, who
would not otherwise have come into life: But this whole plea is no more than
that of the negotium utile gestum, to which any civilized nation is bound by
humanity, it is a prudent expensive office done for the service of others
without a gratuitous intention; and this founds no other right than that to
full compensation of all charges and labor employed for the benefit of others.

A set of inaccurate popular phrases, blind us in these matters, captives owe
their lives, and all to the purchasers, say they. Just in the same manner, we,
our nobles, and princes, often owe our lives to midwives, surgeons,
physicians, etc. one who was the means of preserving a man's life is not
therefore entitled to make him a slave, and sell him as a piece of goods.
Strange that in any nation where a sense of liberty prevails, where the
christian religion is professed, custom and high prospects of gain can so
stupify the conscience of men, and all sense of natural justice, that they can
hear such computations made about the value of their fellow-men, and their
liberty, without abhorrence and indignation.

James Foster, D. D. in his discourses on natural religion and social virtue,
also shows his just indignation at this wicked practice, which he declares to
be " a criminal and outrageous violation of the natural right of mankind." At
page 156, 2 vol. he says, "Should we have read concerning the Greeks or Romans
of old, that they traded, with view to make slaves of their own species, whom
they certainly knew that this would involve in schemes of blood and murder, of
destroying, or enslaving each other, that they even fomented wars, and engaged
whole nations and tribes in open hostilities, for their own private advantage;
that they had no detestation of the violence and cruelty; but only feared the
ill success of their inhuman enterprises; that they carried men like
themselves, their brethren, and the offspring of the same common parent, to be
sold like beasts of prey, or beasts of burden, and put them to the same
reproachful trial, of their soundness, strength and capacity for greater bodily
service; that quite forgeting, and renouncing, the original dignity of human
nature, communicated to all, they treated them with more severity and ruder
discipline, than even the ox or the ass, who are void of understanding --
should we not if this had been the case, have naturally been led to despise all
their pretended refinements of morality; and to have concluded, that as they
were not nations destitute of politeness, they must have been entire strangers
to virtue and benevolence.

But, notwithstanding this, we ourselves (who profess to be christians, and
boast of the peculiar advantage we enjoy, by means of an express revelation of
our duty from heaven) are in effect, these very untaught and rude heathen
countries. With all our superior light, we instill into those, whom we call
savage and barbarous, the most despicable opinion of human nature. We, to the
utmost of our power, weaken and dissolve the universal tie, that binds and
unites mankind. We practice what we should exclaim against, as the utmost
excess of cruelty and tyranny, if nations of the world, differing in color,
and form of government from ourselves, were so possessed of empire, as to be
able to reduce us to a state of unmerited and brutish servitude. Of consequence
we sacrifice our reason, our humanity, our christianity to an unnatural sordid
gain. We teach other nations to despise and trample under foot, all the
obligations of social virtue. We take the most effectual method to prevent the
propagation of the gospel, by representing it as a scheme of power and
barbarous oppression, and an enemy to the natural privileges and rights of men.

Perhaps all, that I have now offered, may be of very little weight to restrain
this enormity, this aggravated iniquity. However I still have the satisfaction,
of having entered my private protest against a practice which, in my opinion,
bids that God, who is the God and Father of the Gentiles, unconverted to
christianity, most daring and bold defiance, and spurns at all the principles
both of natural and revealed religion.

EXTRACT From an ADDRESS IN THE VIRGINIA GAZETTE, of MARCH 19, 1767.
Mr. RIND,
PERMIT me, in your paper, to address the members of our assembly, on two
points, in which the public interest is very nearly concerned.

The abolition of slavery and the retrieval of specie in this colony, are the
subjects on which I would bespeak their attention. --

Long and serious reflections upon the nature and consequences of slavery have
convinced me, that it is a violation both of justice and religion; that it is
dangerous to the safety of the community in which it prevails; that it is
destructive to the growth of arts and sciences; and lastly, that it produces a
numerous and very fatal train of vices, both in the slave, and in his master.

To prove these assertions, shall be the purpose of the following essay.

That slavery then is a violation of justice, will plainly appear, when we
consider what justice is. It is truly and simply defined, as by Justinian,
constans et perpetua volun^as, ejus suum cuique tribuendi; a constant endeavor
to give every man his right.

Now, as freedom is unquestionably the birthright of all mankind, Africans as
well as Europeans, to keep the former in a state of slavery, is a constant
violation of that right, and therefore of justice.

The ground on which the civilians who favor slavery, admit it to be just;
namely, consent, force and birth, is totally disputable. For surely a man's own
will and consent, cannot be allowed to introduce so important an innovation
into society as slavery, or to make himself an outlaw, which is really the
state of a slave, since neither consenting to, nor aiding the laws of the
society, in which he lives, he is neither bound to obey them, nor entitled to
their protection.

To found any right in force, is to frustrate all right, and involve every
thing in confusion, violence and rapine. With these two the last must fall,
since if the parent cannot justly be made a slave, neither can the child be
born in slavery. "The law of nations, says baron Montesquieu, has doomed
prisoners to slavery, to prevent their being slain; the Roman civil law,
permitted debtors whom their creditors might treat ill, to sell themselves. And
the law of nature requires that children, whom their parents being slaves
cannot maintain, should be slaves like them. These reasons of the civilians are
not just, it is not true that a captive may be slain, unless in a case of
absolute necessity; but if he has been reduced to slavery, it is plain that no
such necessity existed, since he was not slain. It is not true that a free man
can sell himself, for sale supposes a price, but a slave and his property
becomes immediately that of his master, the slave can therefore receive no
price, nor the master pay, etc. And if a man cannot sell himself, nor a
prisoner of war be reduced to slavery, much less can his child." Such are the
sentiments of this illustrious civilian; his reasonings, which I have been
obliged to contract, the reader interested in this subject, will do well to
consult at large.

Yet even these rights of imposing slavery, questionable, nay refutable as they
are, we have not to authorize the bondage of the Africans. For neither do they
consent to be our slaves, nor do we purchase them of their conquerors. The
British merchants obtain them from Africa by violence, artifice and treachery,
with a few trinkets to prompt those unfortunate****people to enslave one
another by force or stratagem. Purchase them indeed they may, under the
authority of an act of the British parliament. An act entailing upon the
Africans, with whom we are not at war, and over whom a British parliament could
not of right assume even a shadow of authority, the dreadful curse of perpetual
slavery, upon them and their children for ever. There cannot be in nature,
there is not in all history, an instance in which every right of men is more
flagrantly violated. The laws of the ancients never authorized the making
slaves, but of those nations whom they had conquered; yet they were heathens
and we are christians. They were misled by a monstrous religion, divested of
humanity, by a horrible and barbarous worship; we are directed by the unerring
precepts of the revealed religion we possess, enlightened by its wisdom, and
humanized by its benevolence; before them were gods deformed with passions, and
horrible for every cruelty and vice; before us is that incomparable pattern of
meekness, charity, love and justice to mankind, which so transcendently
distinguished the founder of christianity and his ever amiable doctrines.

Reader, remember that the corner stone of your religion is to do unto others
as you would they should do unto you; ask then your own heart whether it would
not abhor any one, as the most outrageous violator of that and every other
principle of right, justice and humanity, who should make a slave of you and
your posterity for ever. Remember that God knows the heart, lay not this
flattering unction to your soul, that it is the custom of the country; that you
found it so: that not your will but your necessity consents. Ah! think how
little such an excuse will avail you in that awful day, when your Savior shall
pronounce judgment on you for breaking a law too plain to be misunderstood, too
sacred to be violated. If we say we are christians, yet act more inhumanly and
unjustly than heathens, with what dreadful justice must this sentence of our
blessed Savior fall upon us: "Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father
which is in heaven." ( Matthew vii. 21.) Think a moment how much your temporal,
your eternal welfare depends upon an abolition of a practice, which deforms the
image of your God, tramples on his revealed will, infringes the most sacred
rights, and violates humanity.

Enough I hope has been asserted to prove that slavery is a violation of
justice and religion. That it is dangerous to the safety of the state in which
it prevails, may be as safely asserted.

What one's own experience has not taught, that of others must decide. From
hence does history derive its utility; for being, when truly written, a
faithful record of the transactions of mankind, and the consequences that
flowed from them, we are thence furnished with the means of judging what will
be the probable effect of transactions similar among ourselves.

We learn then from history, that slavery, wherever encouraged, has sooner or
later been productive of very dangerous commotions. I will not trouble my
reader here with quotations in support of this assertion, but content myself
with referring those who may be dubious of its truth, to the histories of
Athens, Lacedemon, Rome, and Spain. --

How long, how bloody and destructive was the contest between the Moorish
slaves, and the native Spaniards? and after almost deluges of blood had been
shed the Spaniards obtained nothing more, than driving them into the mountains.
-- Less bloody indeed, though not less alarming have been the insurrections in
Jamaica; and to imagine that we shall be for ever exempted from this calamity,
which experience teaches us to be inseparable from slavery, so encouraged, is
an infatuation as astonishing as it will be surely fatal. -- etc. etc.

EXTRACT OF A SERMON, PREACHED BY THE BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER, Before the SOCIETY
for the PROPAGATION of the GOSPEL, at their anniversary meeting, on the 21st of
February, 1766.
FROM the free-savages I now come (the last point I propose to consider) to the
savages in bonds. By these I mean the vast multitudes yearly stolen from the
opposite continent, and sacrificed by the colonists to their great idol, the
GOD OF GAIN. But what then, say these sincere worshippers of Mammon, they are
our own property, which we offer up. Gracious God! to talk (as in herds of
cattle) of property in rational creatures! creatures endowed with all our
faculties, possessing all our qualities but that of color; our brethren both
by nature and grace, shocks all the feelings of humanity, and the dictates of
common sense. But, alas! what is there in the infinite abuses of society which
does not shock them? Yet nothing is more certain in itself, and apparent to
all, than that the infamous traffic for slaves directly infringes both divine
and human law. Nature created man free; and grace invites him to assert his
freedom. In excuse of this violation, it has been pretended, that though
indeed these miserable outcasts of humanity be torn from their homes and native
country by fraud and violence, yet they thereby become the happier, and their
condition the more eligible. But who are YOU, who pretend to judge of another
man's happiness? That state, which each man, under the guidance of his maker,
forms for himself; and not one man for another. To know what constitutes mine
or your happiness, is the sole prerogative of him who created us, and cast us
in so various and different moulds. Did your slaves ever complain to you of
their unhappiness amidst their native woods and deserts? Or, rather, let me
ask, did they ever cease complaining of their condition under you their lordly
masters? where they see, indeed, the accommodations of civil life, but see them
all pass to others, themselves, unbenefited by them. Be so gracious then, ye
petty tyrants over human freedom, to let your slaves judge for themseves, what
it is which makes their own happiness. And then see whether they do not place
it in the return to their own country, rather than in the contemplation of your
grandeur, of which their misery makes so large a part. A return so passionately
longed for, that despairing of happiness here, that is, of escaping the chains
of their cruel task masters, they console themselves with feigning it to be the
gracious reward of heaven in their future state; which I do not find their
haughty masters have as yet concerned themselves to invade. The less hardy
indeed wait for this felicity till overwearied nature sets them free; but the
more resolved have recourse even to self-violence, to force a speedier passage.

But it will be still urged, that though what is called human happiness be of
so fantastic a nature, that each man's imagination creates it for himself, yet
human mi^^ry is more substantial and uniform throughout all the tribes of
mankind. Now, from the worst of human miseries, the savage Africans by these
forced emigrations, are entirely secured, such as the being perpetually hunted
down like beasts of prey or profit, by their more savage and powerful
neighbors -- In truth, a blessed change! -- from being hunted to being caught.
But who are they that have set on foot this general HUNTING? Are they not these
very civilized violators of humanity themselves? who tempt the weak appetites,
and provoke the wild passions of the fiercer savages to prey upon the rest."

THE END.
INDEX.
A
ADANSON (M.) his account of the country on the rivers Senegal and Gambia, 14.
Extraordinary fertility, ibid. Surprising vegetation, 15. Beautiful aspect of
the country, 16. Good disposition of the natives, ibid. Advertisements in the
New York journal, for the sale of slaves, part ii. 14. Also in the news papers
of London, p. ii. 16. Africa, that part from whence the Negroe slaves are
brought; how divided, 6. Capable of a considerable trade, 143. Alien, (every)
or stranger coming within the kings dominion becomes a subject, p. ii, 4.
Ancientest account of the Negroes, 41. Were then a simple innocent people, 43.
Angola, a plentiful country, 39. Character of the natives, 40. Government,
ibid.
B
B ARBADOES, (laws of) respecting Negroe slaves, p. ii, 26. Burbot, (John)
agent general of the French African company, his account of the Gold-Coast, 25.
Of the Slave-Coast, 27. Bosman (William) principal factor for the Dutch, at
D'Elmina, his account of the Gold-Coast, 23. Of the Slave-Coast. 27. Brue
(Andrew) principal factor of the French African company, his account of the
country on the river Senegal, 7. And on the river Gambia, 8. Benin (kingdom of)
good character of the natives, 35. Punishment of crimes, 36. Order of
government, ibid. Largeness and order of the city of Great-Benin, 37. Britains
(ancient) in their original state no less barbarous than the African Negroes,
68. Baxter (Richard) his testimony against slavery, 83.
C
CORRUPTION of some of the kings of Guinea, 107.
D
D E la Casa (bishop of Chapia) his concern for the Indians, 47. His speech to
Charles the fifth emperor of Germany and king of Spain, 48. Prodigious
destruction of the Indians in Hispaniola, 51. Divine principle, in every man,
its effects on those who obey its dictates, 14.
E
E LIZABETH (queen) her caution to captain Hawkins, not to enslave any of the
Negroes, 55. English, their first trade on the coast of Guinea, 52. Europeans
are the principal cause of the wars which subsist amongst the Negroes, 61.
English laws, allows no man, of what condition soever to be deprived of his
liberty, without a legal process, p. ii, 6. The danger of confining any person
without a warrant, p. ii, 18.
F
FISHING, a considerable business on the Guinea coast, 26. How carried on,
ibid. Foster (James) his testimony against slavery, p. ii, 42. Fuli Negroes
good farmers, 10. Those on the Gambia particularly recommended for their
industry and good behavior, ibid. France (king of) objects to the Negroes, in
his dominions, being reduced to a state of slavery, 58.
G
G AMBIA (river) 8, 14. Gloucester bishop of) extract of his sermon, p. ii, 50.
Godwyn (Morgan) his plea in favor of the Negroes and Indians, 75. Complains of
the cruelties exercised upon slaves, 76. A false opinion prevailed in his time,
that the Negroes were not objects of redeeming grace, 77. Gold-Coast, has
several European factories, 22. Great trade for slaves, 22. Carried on far in
the inland country, ibid. Natives more reconciled to the Europeans; and more
diligent in procuring slaves, 22. Extraordinary fruitful and agreeable, 22, 25.
The natives industrious, 24. Great Britain, all persons during their residence
there are the king's subjects, p. ii, 4. Guinea, extraordinary fertile, 2.
Extremely unhealthy to the Europeans, 4. But agrees well with the natives,
ibid. Prodigious raising of waters, ibid. Hot winds, ibid. Surprising
vegetation, 15.
H
H AWKINS (captain) lands on the coast of Guinea and seizes on a number of the
natives, which he sells to the Spaniards, 55. Hottentots misrepresented by
authors, 101. True account given of these people by Kolben, 102. Love of
liberty and sloth their prevailing passions, 102. Distinguished by several
virtues, 103. Firm in alliances, ibid. Offended at the vices pre-dominant
amongst christians, 104. Make nor keep no slaves, ibid. Hughes (Griffith) his
account of the number of Negroes in Barbados, 85. Speaks well of their natural
capacities, 86. Husbandry of the Negroes, carried on in common, 28. Hutcheson
(Francis) his declaration against slavery, p. ii, 40.
I
J ALOF (Negroes) their government, 9. Indians grievously oppressed by the
Spaniards, 47. Their cause pleaded by Bartholemew De la Casa, 48. Inland people
good account of them, 25. Ivory Coast, fertile, etc. 18. Natives falsely
represented to be atreacherous people, ibid. Kind when well used, 19. Have no
European factories amongst them, 21. And but few wars; therefore few slaves to
be had there, 22. Jury, Negroes tried and condemned without the solemnity of a
jury, p. ii. 30. Highly repugnant to the English constitution, p. ii. 32.
Dangerous to those concerned therein, ibid.
L
LAWS, (in Guinea) severe against man-stealing and other crimes, 10^.
M
M ANDIGOE (Negroes) a numerous nation, 11. Great traders, ibid. Laborious, 11.
Their government, 13. Their worship, ibid. Manner of tillage, ibid. At Galem
they suffer none to be made slaves, but criminals, 20. Malayens, (a black
people) sometimes sold amongst Negroes, brought from very distant parts, 27.
Markets regularly kept on the Gold and Slave-Coasts, 30. Montesquieu his
sentiments on slavery, 72. Moor (Francis) factor to the African company, his
account of the slave trade on the river Gambia, 111. Mosaic law merciful in its
chastisements, 73. Has respect to human nature, ibid.
N
NATIONAL wars disapproved by the most considerate amongst the Negroes, 110.
Negroes (in Guinea) generally a humane, sociable people, 2. Simplicity of their
way of living, 5. Agreeable in conversation, 16. Sensible of the damage
accruing to them from the slave trade, 61. Misrepresented by most authors, 98.
Offended at the brutality of the European factors, 116. Shocking cruelties
exercised on them by masters of vessels, 124. How many are yearly brought from
Guinea by the English, 129. The numbers who die on the passage and in the
seasoning, 120. Negroe slaves (in the colonies) allowed to cohabit and separate
at pleasure, 36. Great waste of them, through hard usage in the islands, 86.
Melancholy case of two of them, 236. Proposals for setting them free, 129.
Tried and condemned without the solemnity of a jury, p. ii. 30. Negroes (free)
discouragement they meet with, 133.
P
P ORTUGUESE carry on a great trade for slaves at Angola, 40. Make the first
incursions into Guinea, 44. From whence they carry off some of the natives,
ibid. Beginners of the slave trade, 46. Erect the first fort at D'Elmina.
R
R OME (the college of cardinals at) complain of the abuse offered to the
Negroes in selling them for slaves, 58.
S
S ENEGAL (river) account of, 7, 14. Ship (account of one) blown up on the
coast of Guinea with a number of Negroes on board, 125. Slave trade how carried
on, at the river Gambia, 111. And in other parts of Guinea, 113. At Whidah,
115. Slaves, used with much more lenity in Algiers and in Turkey than in our
colonies, 70. Likewise in Guinea, 71. Slavery more tolerable amongst the
ancient Pagans than in our colonies, 63. Declined as christianity prevailed,
65. Early laws in France, for its abolishment, 66. If put an end to would make
way for a very extensive trade through Africa, 143. The danger of slavery taking
place in England, p. ii. 20. Sloan (sir Hans) his account of the inhuman and
extravagant punishments inflicted on Negroes, 89. Smith (William) surveyor to
the African company, his account of the Ivory-Coast, 20. Of the Gold-Coast, 24.
U
V IRGINIA (laws) respecting Negroe slaves, p. ii. 28. Virginia (address to the
assembly) setting forth the iniquity and danger of slavery, p. ii, 45.
W
W ALLIS (George) his testimony against slavery, p. ii, 36. West Indies, white
people able to perform the necessary work there, 141. Whydah (kingdom of)
agreeable and fruitful, 27. Natives treat one another with respect, 29.

