A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE CORPORATION For the Relief of the WIDOWS and
CHILDREN of CLERGYMEN, in the Communion of the CHURCH of ENGLAND in AMERICA; AT
THEIR ANNIVERSARY MEETING ON October 2d, 1771, at PERTH-AMBOY. TO WHICH IS
ANNEXED A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THEIR PROCEEDINGS.

BY THOMAS B. CHANDLER D. D. Rector of St. John's-Church, Elizabeth-Town,
NEW JERSEY, and Missionary from the Society for the propagation of the Gospel
in foreign parts.

SOLD FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

BURLINGTON, Printed by ISAAC COLLINS.

AT the Anniversary Meeting of the Corporation for the Relief of the Widows and
Children of Clergymen in the Communion of the Church of England in America, at
the City of Perth-Amboy, on the second day of October, 1771.

AGREED that the thanks of the Corporation be given to the Reverend Dr.
Chandler, for his Sermon preached this day before them; and that he be
requested to deliver a copy of the same to the Corporation to be printed.

JONATHAN ODELL Secretary.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM FRANKLIN ESQUIRE. GOVERNOR OF NEW JERSEY: IN TESTIMONY
OF THAT ESTEEM WHICH IS DUE TO DISTINGUISHED MERIT, AND OF THAT GRATITUDE TO
WHICH A GENEROUS PATRON AND BENEFACTOR IS ENTITLED FROM EVERY WELL-WISHER TO
OUR CHARITABLE CORPORATION, THE FOLLOWING SERMON IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.

GAL. vi. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them which are of the Household of Faith.


TO do good, as we have opportunity, and according to our respective abilities,
is a duty clearly pointed out by NATURE, and repeatedly commanded in the more
express language of REVELATION.

EVERY man's own particular frame -- his innumerable wants of assistance from
others -- his situation as a member of society -- and the tendency of this
practice to improve and dignify the Agent; are natural proofs of our obligation
to perform kind and beneficent actions, or, in the words of my text, to do good
unto all men.

SUCH are the nature and frame of man, that what is most worthy of the name of
Happiness is found, by experience, to be utterly inconsistent with an unfeeling
selfishness. He that confines his aims and prospects to his own private
interest, is a stranger to, and does not intermeddle with, the most substantial
and cordial satisfaction, which this life affords. There is a generous, noble
and exquisite pleasure, experienced by the friendly and benevolent, which is
incomparably superior to what a person of his character has ever felt, or can
feel. As therefore the Author of our nature has annexed a much greater degree
of happiness to the exercise of the benevolent, than of the selfish,
Affections; it is evidently his will and intention, which are the foundation of
all moral obligation, that every human creature should, as opportunity offers,
perform acts of kindness and beneficence.

THE innumerable wants of assistance from others, which we constantly
experience, are also a manifest indication of the same intention. No man, for
any considerable time, in the present state of the world, can even support
life, by his own endeavors. Not a single day passes, from his first entrance
upon this stage of existence until he makes his final exit, in which a man
would not be miserable, were it not for the labor and assistance of other
people See this point well illustrated by Mr. WOLLASTON, in his Religion of
Nature delincated. Sect. vii.
. If he is possessed of riches, for which he is always chiefly beholden to
others; he must know that bare riches -- that silver and gold, how much soever
some men may place their hope and confidence in them, will neither feed nor
cloth him. They are in reality no otherwise useful to him, than as they may be
exchanged, for what will immediately answer his necessities and wants. If he
has bread enough and to spare; yet he finds that, in the literal sense of the
expression, man does not live by bread alone; but that other things are as
necessary as his daily food. The same observation might be extended to all the
different circumstances of life. No situation can be assigned, in which a man
does not frequently want assistance, nor any in which he is not, in his turn,
capable of giving assistance to others that want it, in some form or other. But
if he refuses to give assistance, he has no right to demand it; the claim being
mutual and conditional. This farther shows it to be the design of Divine
Providence, in placing him in such a state, that he should be assisting to
others; or, that he should do good to them, as he has opportunity, and as cases
may require.

THIS obligation will appear in a light that is still more striking, if we
consider ourselves as members of society. All the individuals belonging to the
human species, however dispersed or distant from one another, or however
differing in sentiments, manners, or political interests, yet constitute one
society or system, which is united together by many inviolable bonds. This
general society is divided into various distinct bodies or lesser societies;
the members of which are linked together by still closer ties, than those which
connect the distant members of a larger system. Thus the subjects of every
kingdom, or the inhabitants of any country that are united under the same
government, form a distinct civil society; and they have a more intimate
connection with one another, than what arises from their relation as men, or as
belonging to the same species. So again: the professors of the same religion,
the disciples of the same master, constitute a society of a different kind;
compared by St. Paul Cor. xii. 12.
, in one instance at least, to the human body; all the parts or members of
which have their respective uses and functions assigned them, and are mutually
subservient to one another. And it deserves our notice, that in proportion as
society is reduced into a smaller compass by subdivision, the members of it
become of more consequence, and their mutual good offices are more necessary.

If we consider ourselves then as members of society, whether in a larger or
more confined view, whether in a civil or religious sense; it will appear to be
our duty to act as members of society. Now to act as members of society, is to
perform all those offices toward the body in general, and our fellow members
in particular, which the station assigned us, and the relation we are in,
require; that is, according to our power, to contribute, in the first place,
what is necessary to the being, and then to the well-being, both of the body,
and of any of its members; or, in other words, to do all the good that we can.

SUCH conduct appears also to be our duty, as it naturally improves us; for we
are under the same obligations to improve and perfect ourselves, as we are to
preserve ourselves. Every right act has a tendency to produce a right habit and
disposition of mind; and the excellency of any moral agent consists as much, at
least, in a right habit and disposition, as in intellectual capacity or power.
The Supreme Being is infinite perfection; and the more any other being
resembles him, the farther he is advanced toward a state of perfection. And
the more any creature performs acts of goodness and kindness, and has acquired
the habit of performing them, the more he resembles that adorable Being, whose
goodness is perpetually exercised, and extends to all the parts of the
creation; and who delights in constantly beholding millions of his creatures,
of different ranks and orders, from the highest Angel down to the lowest
reptile, enjoying the various degrees of perfection and happiness, which they
have derived from his bounty.

THE same considerations that prove it to be our duty to do good at all, prove
also that we should do it, to all men, as we have opportunity. Why we should be
bound to do good, and not to do all the good in our power, will be impossible
to show. To suppose that a man has ten degrees of ability to do good, and yet
that he is under obligations to exercise no more than five of them, is to
suppose that the other five degrees of this ability were given him for no
purpose. But, in truth, the obligation is always in proportion to the power and
opportunity; since it arises from the circumstances and connections in which
GOD has placed us.

AS we are connected with all men, and are fellow members with them of one
general society, we should be disposed to do good unto all men. But as the most
important relation we bear to others in many respects, is that of
fellow christians; our obligation to do good to those, who are in this relation
to us, is proportionably stronger. We are, according to the just distinction in
my text, as we have opportunity, to do good unto all men; but more especially,
and with peculiar attention, unto them which are of the household of faith.

WHAT the light of nature thus teaches to be our duty, the voice of revelation
universally confirms. Under the Mosaic institution indeed, the precepts
injoining kindness and good offices have commonly a particular reference to
those, who were members of the Jewish tribes; who, for wise reasons, were
separated from all the families of the earth, and distinguished with peculiar
privileges; and whose affections, still wandering after the vanities and
superstitions of the idolatrous nations around them, it was necessary to call
off and restrain, with great strictness and severity. Yet notwithstanding,
instances are not wanting under that dispensation, in which kindness and acts
of beneficence were required toward STRANGERS; i. e, persons who were
unconnected with them by any political or religious ties, being, in the
language of St. Paul, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel.

THUS general benevolence to mankind was recommended to them, and urged, from
the example of GOD himself, as well as from the consideration of their own
former experiences. HE does execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow,
and loves the STRANGER, in giving him food and raiment. Love ye THEREFORE the
STRANGER; for YE were strangers in the land of Egypt. Deuteronomy. x. 18, 19.
Again: when thou cuttest down thine harvest in the field, and have forgot a
shief in the field, thou shall not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the
STRANGER, for the fatherless and for the widow: that the Lord thy God may bless
thee in all the work of thine hands. -- And thou shall remember that THOU wast
a bondsman in the land of Egypt: THEREFORE I command thee to do this thing.
Deuteronomy. xxiv. 19, 22. See also Levit. xix. 33, 34.
And the Jews themselves take notice, that a kind behavior toward Strangers
is required in one and twenty passages of their law.

SUCH precepts, as the foregoing, have a tendency to impress upon the mind the
great natural duty of universal kindness and benevolence; and they were
undoubtedly intended for that purpose. There were cases, it must be confessed,
wherein the Jews were commanded to treat some strangers in a very different
manner; but the exceptions from the general rule were not many, and special
reasons were always assigned for them.

THUS an unrelenting severity toward the Canaanites was directed and
prescribed in these words. When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land
whither thou go to possess it, and has cast out many nations before thee:
-- and when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shall smite
them, and UTTERLY DESTROY them; thou shall make no covenant with them, NOR SHOW
MERCY unto them. Deuteronomy. vii. 1, 2.
The Israelites were also commanded to pursue the Amalekites with the same
exterminating acts of hostility, and not to spare them any more than the seven
nations of the land of Canaan. Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way
(in your passage through the wilderness) when ye were come forth out of Egypt,
how he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were
feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary, and he feared not God.
THEREFORE it shall be, when the Lord thy God has given thee rest from all
thine enemies round about thee -- that thou shall blot out the remembrance of
Amalek from under Heaven, thou shall not forget it. Deuteronomy. xxv, 17.
The great Governor of the world saw fit that these implacable and idolatrous
nations, on account of their innumerable provocations and enormous wickedness,
should be destroyed; and he had an unquestionable right to make use of the
Israelites, as instruments in his hands, to accomplish their destruction: and
all those seemingly revengeful instructions, which we meet with in the law of
Moses, were necessary in order to a due execution of the righteous purposes of
Divine Providence.

IF from the Law, we turn to the Gospel; we shall find every page of it shining
with precepts, or examples, of the most active and unbounded Charity. The
infinite goodness of GOD, extending to every part of the creation; -- the
amazing kindness, and compassion, and condescension of his blessed SON, of
which the whole human race are the objects; -- are placed before us as the
pattern and standard, by which we are commanded to regulate our affections. The
whole system of the Gospel, and every part of it, have a strong tendency to
inspire and establish, the most refined and exalted sentiments, and the most
vigorous and unlimited exercise, of love and affection to our fellow creatures.

IT is a fundamental law in this benevolent institution, relating to our mutual
intercourse, that we make our own reasonable wishes and desires, in case our
circumstances were exchanged for those of other men, the rule of our conduct
toward them. From this general law no exceptions are admitted. Neither the ill
language, nor the ill treatment, nor the avowed enmity, nor even the
persecution we may have met with (which is one of the worst effects of it) is
allowed to excuse us. All this is literally and expressly commanded, and no
room for evasion is left us: I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have
ye? do not even the Publicans the same? and if ye salute (or treat with common
civility) your brethren only, what do ye more than others? Do not even
Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect. Matt. v. 43 -- 48.


I have recited these verses in connection, because the whole passage, taken
together, not only contains the law of our Blessed Master, but explains the
reason of it, as well as the extent and perfection in which it ought to be
interpreted.

AND indeed, a benevolent disposition, unlimited with regard to its objects, is
represented throughout the New Testament to be of such consequence, that our
eternal happiness depends upon our having it. Were our faith strong enough to
remove mountains -- were our knowledge deep and extensive enough to comprehend
all mysteries -- would our zeal, even in a good cause, support us under the
pains of Martyrdom -- and were the tongues of men and of Angels added to our
other accomplishments; yet St. Paul assures us, that without charity -- by
which he means an universal love and affection to our fellow creatures, as well
as to our Maker -- they would profit us nothing. 1 Cor. xiii.


NOTWITHSTANDING, as has been already observed, and as my text intimates, this
great and essential qualification is not a blind and undistinguishing
affection, leading us equally to love all men, without any regard to the
difference of their characters. The love of GOD extends to all men; but some
are the objects of his peculiar affection, as being in reality more worthy than
others. Among the disciples of our blessed Lord, there was one whom he loved in
an eminent degree; leaving us, even in this respect, an example, that we should
follow his steps. If the righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, he is
more deserving of our esteem than his neighbor; for we should esteem every
thing, and love every one in some degree of proportion to the real excellence,
which that thing or that person possesses.

EVERY man is entitled to some degree of esteem, on this account. The worst of
men possess something that is valuable. They bear, in some respects, the image
of their Maker. They are, at least, the workmanship of GOD; and therefore they
are not to be despised. They are also of the same nature with ourselves, and
originally of the same family, being descended from the same ancestors. And
however they may be situated, and whatever may be their characters, in other
respects; yet still, as they are men, they are entitled to our kindness, and if
we are able to relieve their necessities, both nature and religion oblige us to
relieve them.

BUT if we are thus to do good unto all men, we are under a more particular
obligation to do good to the worthy and deserving Donabit (Sapiens) aut bonis,
aut eis quos facere poterit bonos. Donabit cum summo concilio, dignissimos
eligens. SENECA de vita beata.
, and to those who have a closer connection with us than the mass of mankind.
Under this latter head may be reckoned, our countrymen and kindred -- our
friends and such as have done kind offices to us -- those whom Providence has
made dependent upon us -- those who are united to us by the ties of the same
common religion -- and the members of the same particular church, worshipping
GOD in the use of the same solemn offices; who are, according to reason, and to
revelation, entitled to our peculiar affection and kindness.

OF all religions, that of the Gospel produces the most intimate union among
its professors. They are all governed by the same laws, and entitled to the
same privileges, and included in one general purchase; and not only so, but
they are taught to consider themselves as so many branches of the same vine --
as so many limbs or members belonging to the same body. As the body is one, and
has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one
body; so also is CHRIST: for by one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be (originally) Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and
have all been made to drink into one spirit 1 Cor. xii. 12.
. And, in another passage, the Apostle lays it down, and argues from it, as an
established principle, that Christians are members one of another Ephesians. iv. 25.
.

SUCH are the illustrations, in Scripture, of the inseparable connection of
Christians with CHRIST, and with one another. No society, whether civil or
religious, introduces so close an union between its members as the Church of
CHRIST does: our obligation therefore, as fellow christians, to cultivate
brotherly love, and to do good to one another, is greater than it is, or can
be, in any other religious society.

IN collective bodies of men, as well as in the natural body, all the members
have their respective offices assigned them, more or less honorable -- of
greater or less importance; and they who perform the more important and
honorable Offices, are entitled to proportionably greater kindness and respect,
than others who are placed in an inferior station. In the household of faith,
they who are appointed, as stewards, to dispense to the various members of it
that provision which is to nourish and support them, are, on account of their
rank, and especially if faithful to their trust, in the estimation of St. Paul,
worthy of double honor 1 Timothy v. 17.
. The honor due to them evidently appears to be, not an useless, unavailing
respect, but an active principle, performing all those good Offices, by which
esteem and affection are properly signified.

THE lowest instance of this nature, is, if possible, to prevent their falling
into distress or necessitous circumstances; and, where this has not been done,
to relieve their distresses, and supply their wants. So much indeed is due to
them on the common foot of humanity; and they would have a right to expect it,
were they strangers or enemies. They are still more entitled to this kindness,
considered as Christians. For if any one that deserves the name of christian --
if one of the least of our brethren, is known to be in such a condition, we are
to give him meat; if he is thirsty, we are to give him drink; if he is a
stranger, or destitute of particular friends to receive him, we are to take him
in; if he is naked, and unable to provide for himself, we are to cloth him; if
he is sick, or in prison, we are to visit him, with a view of relieving him.
All this is commanded, and you know the penalty: Depart from me ye cursed, into
ever lasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels Matt: xxv.
.

BUT surely something more must be due to the CLERGY, than to Christians of the
lowest degree! for, as has been observed, they are the most important members
of the mystical body of CHRIST, without whose functions the body must soon
perish. We are not forward to speak on this subject, nor to say what we esteem
to be our just rights; -- in an age wherein the least intimation of our
claiming any superior respect, or kindness, on account of our stations in the
Church, is so liable to be treated as PRIESTCRAFT. However, we ought sometimes
to remind men, in what manner our office is represented in Scripture; and
briefly to do this, on the present occasion, I doubt not but the candid will
think excusable.

THE clergy then are spoken of, by our Savior himself, as sterwards, whom
their lord has made rulers over his household, to give them their portion of
meat in due season -- as shepherds, set over the flock of Christ -- as the salt
of the earth, the light of the world etc. St. Paul speaks of them as
ambassadors for Christ, employed by him to negociate matters that concern the
salvation of sinners. They are in other places represented as persons appointed
and commissioned by CHRIST, to dispense the mysteries of his Gospel, to apply
the seals to his covenant, and to convey those spiritual mercies which are
infinitely more valuable than all earthly enjoyments. And we know that it is
also a part of their office, to present the homage and adoration of their
fellow christians, before the throne of the Divine Majesty. Such are their
office and employment, according to the language of Scripture; and we can
freely leave it for others to judge, whether persons of this rank and
distinction in the Church of CHRIST, are not entitled to peculiar kindness and
respect from Christians in general.

AMONG the several ways in which this kindness and respect are to be shown, I
shall confine myself to a single one; because I would not lose sight of the
occasion of our present assembling, to which all that has been hitherto said
has a particular reference. The instance then that I shall mention, is that of
providing a comfortable and decent maintenance for them and their families. As
they are commonly situated, this is a natural expression of that respect which
is due to them; and, at the same time, it would contribute greatly to their
usefulness, as it would enable them to devote themselves to their proper
business, without distraction.

EASY circumstances, in some measure, animate and enlarge the mind, and inspire
it with suitable confidence, vigor and resolution: whereas the faculties are
cramped, and cannot be exerted to advantage (as many of us can tell you from
experience), by a perpetual anxiety to procure, what we shall eat, and what we
shall drink, and wherewithal we shall be clothed. To this may be added, (what
some of you perhaps can tell us from experience), that less attention is paid
to the instructions and exhortations of the clergy, when they are known to be
in mean and indigent circumstances, than when their condition is otherwise.

HAD I time, I might easily show, that it was the opinion of the most
celebrated legislators of antiquity, and of those nations which are most
respected for their wisdom and sound policy Egypt is deservedly famed as the
first among the ancient nations, for the wisdom of its laws and government, as
well as its improvement in arts. And Moses informs us, that, among the
Egyptians, the Priests enjoyed many privileges and immunities, and in
particular, that they had a portion of the lands assigned them of Pharaoh, and
that they were exempted from paying the common tribute and taxes Genesis xlvii.
. And Diodorus informs us, that Isis gave the property of the third part of
Egypt to the Priests for their own maintenance, and furnishing the necessary
sacrifices. They held them in the highest honor; they were the first order in
the state, always near the person of their sovereign; they assisted him with
their advice and instruction, and sometimes with their persons. -- In a word,
they filled the highest offices of the state, administered justice, directed in
levying taxes, had the inspection of moneys, weights and measures.

See the excellent work of the learned president GOGUET, on the origin of laws,
arts and sciences. Vol. 1. p. 51.


, that an honorable support ought to be provided for the ministers of religion;
and that it was cheerfully contributed. I might set before you the conduct of
the Jews in this case; which ought to have the more weight, as GOD himself was
pleased to prescribe it. But I will only observe, with regard to the Jews, that
although the tribe of Levi, which was set apart for the performance of the
public offices of religion, was the least of all the tribes; yet to the Levites
was assigned the tenth part of all the produce of the labor, land and stock,
of the other tribes. Besides all this, they had the property of forty-eight
cities in the different parts of that dominion. The Priests had also the first
fruits of the cattle, corn, wine, oil etc, which were annually dedicated to
GOD. To which may be added, that they received a certain price for the
redemption of every firstborn; to say nothing of many voluntary oblations, and
the remainder of all the things, part of which had been offered in sacrifice.
All this must have amounted to a large standing revenue, and has been
calculated at a third part of the whole produce of the country; out of which is
only to be deducted, what was expended in supporting the service of the
tabernacle, and afterward of the temple See Potter on Church Government. CHAP.
v. Sect. 9. -- and compare with it Lowman on the civil government of the
Hebrews. CHAP. vi.
.

THE positive part of this law, we confess, has no obligation upon Christians;
nor do the ministers of the Gospel claim the same maintenance, either as to
kind or degree, with the Jewish Priests. But the moral law obliges us, and the
positive law of CHRIST obliges us; and both these laws require an honorable and
decent support for the Christian clergy; whose office demands much greater
abilities and application in order to execute it properly -- is much more
useful and honorable in itself -- and requires a much greater preparation for
it, than that of the Jewish Priests.

OUR Blessed Savior indeed has not prescribed to his followers, how large a
support, nor after what mode, they should provide for his ministers. But when
he first sent out his Apostles, he directed them to make no provision for
themselves during their mission; assigning this reason, the workman is worthy
of his meat Matt. x. 10.
. And when he sent forth his seventy disciples, he gave them the same
direction, repeating the same reason Luke x. 7.
. From whence it is evident, that he expected and intended, that the preachers
of the Gospel should receive a full maintenance.

ST. Paul strongly asserts, and proves, and insists upon, the right of the
ministers of the Gospel to be supported by it; and, that Christians ought not
to think it any great matter to make due provision for them. Speaking to the
Corinthians on this subject, he says: who goes a warfare at any time at his
own charges? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or,
who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these
things as a man, or says not the law the same also? For it is written in the
law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the
corn. Does GOD take care of oxen, or says he it altogether for OUR sakes? For
our sakes, no doubt, this is written; that he that ploweth, should plow in
hope; and he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we have
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal
things? -- Do ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live of the
things of the temple; and they who wait at the altar, are partakers with the
altar? Even so HAS THE LORD ORDAINED, that THEY WHO PREACH THE GOSPEL, SHOULD
LIVE OF THE GOSPEL 1 Cor. ix.
.

IN this passage, St. Paul proves the right of the clergy to a maintenance,
from the reasonableness of the thing, which requires that a man should be
rewarded according to his services; and this he illustrates by the cases of
soldiers, husbandmen, shepherds etc. He enforces his argument from the Jewish
law; which expressly provided, that those who ministered at the altar should be
supported by it. And he concludes with the most decisive argument of all, the
authority of CHRIST himself; who ordained, says he, that they who preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

THIS ordinance and law of CHRIST he esteemed to be of such great importance in
the Christian church, that a due attention to it is made one of the articles of
his charge to Timothy. Let the elders, says he, that rule well, be accounted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine.
That this double honor principally means a liberal support and maintenance, is
evident from the next words: For the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzle the
ox that treads out the corn: and the laborer is worthy of his hire 1 Timothy v.
17, 18.
. On the same principle he exhorts the Galatians, in my context, to the
practice of the same duty: Let him that is taught in the word, communicate, to
him that teaches, in all good things Verse 6.
.

IT is time now that I show, how the preceding general observations are
applicable to the present occasion. You want not to be informed, that this
annual meeting is in order to promote the charitable design of our CORPORATION,
which is to raise and conduct a fund, FOR THE RELIEF OF THE WIDOWS AND CHILDREN
OF CLERGYMEN IN THE COMMUNION OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN AMERICA. This design
corresponds exactly with St. Paul's exhortation in my text; which is to do good
unto all men in general, but more ESPECIALLY unto them which are of the
household of faith.

BY the household of faith is undoubtedly meant the Christian church; and, in
the exercise of kindness, or in doing good, why a distinction should be made by
Christians in favor of their Fellow Christians, has been particularly shown. It
has also been shown, that the reason for this preference extends farther, and
equally requires, that some Christians should be treated with a higher degree
of respect and kindness than others: and that this may justly be said of the
clergy, whose station in the church is more useful, more important, and
consequently more honorable, than that of Christians in common.

AMONG the proper methods of doing good to them, one has been particularly
noticed; namely, that of securing to them a freedom from the distracting cares
of the world, by providing for them an easy and comfortable maintenance -- so
far as men's circumstances enable them to make this provision. Besides the
reasonableness of doing this, and its being an essential part of that
beneficence which is recommended in my text; more direct proof has been made,
from the declarations of our blessed Savior, and the words of an eminent
Apostle, that this is a necessary and important duty, not to be evaded
consistently with the Christian character.

WHEREVER therefore it has been neglected, the clergy have been debarred from a
just night; and the injury, like all other injuries, ought to be repaired, as
speedily and effectually as possible. And wherever the failure has been owing
to want of ability, (which, if real, and not pretended, is always a sufficient
excuse, in the sight both of GOD and man), care ought to be taken to render the
ill consequences as light as the case will admit of.

THAT the clergy of our church in these colonies, some individuals excepted,
receive, upon the whole, but a scanty support Although the bounty of the
venerable society to the clergy of these three provinces, in many instances,
far exceeds the contributions raised by their congregations. which however
commonly plead that they do as much, in this way, as they can: yet considering
the expenses of living -- expenses which the clergy cannot avoid, it may be
truly said that they have no more than a scanty support. The society's salary
is always punctually paid: and they expect from their missions, even in the
poorest parts of the country, that the people, besides providing a convenient
and comfortable parsonage-house and glebo, will also punctually pay the annual
sum of L 30 sterling to the missionary; and so much, at least, I believe, is
always promised at the time of the application for the society's bounty. But in
what manner it is performed by some congregations; whether it is done wholly,
or with that punctuality which is necessary; it concerns all those, who have
thus stipulated, and have any regard to their just and formal engagements, as
honest men and as Christians seriously to consider.
; a few moments attention to their case will convince men of liberal
sentiments, who perhaps are the only competent judges. When I declare that our
maintenance is generally deficient, I mean, that it is not an adequate
compensation for the expenses we have been at in preparing ourselves for this
service; -- that it does not allow us to devote ourselves entirely to the
business of our functions; -- and that it does not enable us to leave our
families in comfortable circumstances when we are taken away from them.

THE expenses attending our education for the ministry may be easily imagined.
It requires the application of many years, to make a tolerable proficiency in
the learned languages: a long time is commonly spent by us in other academical
improvements: and these ought always to be succeeded, as I trust they commonly
are, by a course of theological studies -- before we presume to offer ourselves
as candidates for holy orders. During the two former of these periods, that is,
during the long time of our classical and academical education, besides food
and apparel suitable to our stations, instruction must be paid for, and many
books must be purchased. When we are ready to offer ourselves for the service
of the church, which must be at an age By the statute of 13 Eliz. and by Canon
xxxiv, none can be admitted to Priest's orders under the age of 24 years. No
dispensation is allowed of.
when men may have been long settled in any other employment, there is still a
heavy load of expense (to whose reproach shall I speak it? for a reproach it
certainly is;) to be sustained, in a voyage to a distant quarter of the globe
for ordination. This last expense, heavy as it is, is a hardship peculiar to
the candidates of our own church in the colonies; and such an one as, I am
persuaded, is not to be paralleled in the annals of history.

THOSE of us who live to return from this voyage (for it has proved fatal to
the lives of many of our candidates) Particularly of messrs. Bradstreet, Brown,
Miner, Dean, Checkley, Colton, Johnston, Usher, Giles and Wilson.
are fixed in parishes or missions, the incomes of which are greatly inferior
to the profits of other callings, which require not more than half the time,
nor so much as half the expense, to prepare for them. With these incomes we are
expected to live, as other people in public and reputable stations live -- to
be not behind them in showing hospitality -- and to be the very foremost in
every work of charity. If we answer not these expectations, many will impute it
to avarice, to churlishness, or to any thing, rather than to its true cause. If
such an opinion of us once gets abroad, perhaps the whole order is reproached
with us; at least, our own ministrations are slighted, and the interest of
religion proportionably suffers.

IT is not within the power of many of us to avoid these evils. We are not
allowed to call in to our aid any secular employ, one only perhaps excepted,
for which but few of us are qualified; nor indeed can we easily find leisure,
from the important business of our sacred profession, to pursue one. Such of us
therefore as have any independent property of our own, find it necessary to
expend from it; and the rest of us are obliged to shift as well as we can. In
the mean while, as to ourselves, the expectation of a reward in a better
country will greatly support our spirits under our hard fortune in this; but
still it must necessarily give us pain to consider, what may become of our poor
widows and children, after our departure.

IMAGINATION can hardly picture to itself scenes of deeper distress, than are
sometimes really to be found in the families of clergymen, when the source that
supplied them is at once dried up. Bereaved of their support -- deprived of
their habitations -- turned abroad to the world, wounded, and half-dead, in a
more pitiable sense than the traveller bound from Jerusalem to Jericho was Luke
x. 30.
; their condition is such, as would move the compassion even of a Samaritan.
How then must it affect every tender, humane and generous heart in this
Christian assembly! Indigence is terrible in all cases; but when it succeeds
fullness of bread -- when it comes suddenly -- when it falls upon persons of
delicate sensibility The causes of pleasure and pain are relative things: and
in order to estimate truly their effect upon any particular subject, they ought
to be drawn into the degrees of perception in that subject. When the cause is
of the same kind, and acts with an equal force, if the perception of one person
be equal to that of another, what they perceive must needs be equal. And so it
will likewise be, when the forces in the producing causes and the degrees of
perception in the sentiments are reciprocal. For (which does not seem to be
considered by the world, and therefore ought the more particularly to be noted)
if the cause of pleasure or pain should act but half as much upon A, as it does
upon B; yet if the sensibility of A be double to that of B, the sum of their
pleasures or pains will be equal. In other cases they will be unequal.
WOLLASTON.
, who from their former way of life are peculiarly unable to help themselves,
it is more than doubly distressing.

NOW, to remedy such distress, or rather to prevent it as far as possible,
which is still a greater act of humanity; a corporation has been erected,
consisting of the clergy in general, and gentlemen of the first rank and
character in these three colonies; whose countenance and assistance, in this
good work, are acknowledged with all gratitude. A fund is now established by
charter; to which the clergy themselves are large annual subscribers, and to
which several generous donations have been already made. That venerable
society, which is famed throughout the Christian world for its charity -- a
charity, to which our church in these colonies, in a great measure, owes its
existence -- contributes a yearly allowance of L 60 sterling. Collections have
been made in several congregations, the largeness of which is not less
honorable to them, than to this institution. But notwithstanding all that has
been done, much remains still to be done, in order to make our fund adequate to
the purpose for which it is intended: and we must depend upon the farther
kindness and compassion of our friends, to assist in making up the deficiency.

AND in order to obtain it, can it be necessary to do more, than to give a
plain and true representation of the design? Can it be needful to make use of
arguments or entreaties, to prevail with our friends, who are of the same
household with ourselves, to assist us in a work, in which, at the same time,
their own reputation is peculiarly concerned, as well as the honor of their
religion?

IT has been shown, in this discourse, that the clergy have an undoubted right
to a comfortable maintenance for themselves and their families; which right
ought to take place, where the state of a country will admit of it: yet, for
want either of inclination or ability in their friends, that their maintenance
is deficient in these colonies. But, at present, we relinquish the claim. We
are not now contending for rights; nor do we demand any thing for ourselves: we
only request your CHARITY, in making some decent provision for the relief of
our wives and children, when they shall come more sensibly to feel the bitter
effects of that ill fortune which has hitherto attended us. We make this
application and request, in full confidence of your humanity and compassion. We
are persuaded that you will not, that you cannot, disregard so pitiable a case,
and pass by on the other side; a case, perhaps as worthy of your notice, of
your friendly interposition, all circumstances attended to, as the providence
of GOD has ever called you to consider.

WE desire you to do no more, on this occasion, than what your abilities will
fairly admit of -- to give no more, than what you can conveniently spare, or
what may easily be retrenched from the superfluities of living; of which every
man is allowed to judge for himself. And you may be assured, that whatever
shall be given in this way will be faithfully applied, if not for the immediate
support of the clergy themselves, yet for the support of those who are as dear
to them as themselves, when they shall need it most. Whatever is given in this
way will therefore lay us under equal obligations, with what is given to
ourselves.

AND, at the last day, when all our accounts, both of justice and charity,
shall be publicly audited, each of us will make the acknowledgment, with
regard to what you shall contribute to this fund, for the relief of our widows
and children: inasmuch as ye have done it unto my little ones, whom I left
behind me in a helpless condition, and to her who was most dear to me on earth,
ye have done it unto me. The like acknowledgment will also be made by one, whom
you are under infinitely greater obligations to regard; even the Son of Man,
when he shall appear, surrounded with his Angels, and seated on the throne of
his glory Matt. xxv.
.

THAT our conduct on this, and all other occasions, may meet with approbation
in that day, may GOD of his infinite mercy grant, through the merits and
mediation of JESUS CHRIST, whose charity and compassion led him to die for us;
to whom therefore, with the Father and Holy Ghost, be glory and dominion,
adoration and praise, now and forever!

(...) A copy of the CHARTER, and an abstract of the PROCEEDINGS, of the
CORPORATION for the relief of the widows and children of Clergymen in the
communion of the church of England in America, with a general account of
BENEFACTIONS, and of the stated contributions to their fund, from the date of
its commencement, October 4th, 1769, to October 4th, 1771.
THE PUBLIC has been already informed, that this charity is conducted by the
clergy in general and a number of very respectable gentlemen of the laity, who
are incorporated for that purpose by three distinct charters of similar tenor,
vesting the same members with all the powers requisite for the discharge and
execution of this benevolent trust, in the three provinces of New York,
New Jersey and Pennsylvania. A public and grateful testimony has been given of
that readiness and cheerfulness, with which the several governors consented to
the grant of these charters in their respective provinces. And the members of
the corporation do, further, thankfully acknowledge themselves indebted to the
officers of government in these provinces, for their kindness and generosity in
refusing to accept the fees, to which, on that occasion, they were by law
entitled. The following is a copy of the charter granted by his Excellency the
governor of New Jersey.

GEORGE the third, by the grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, defender of the faith, and so forth; TO all to whom these presents shall
come GREETING. Whereas it has been represented unto us, that the clergy of the
church of England in our American colonies, and especially the missionaries in
the service of the society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts,
have in general but a small support, and have always found it difficult to make
any tolerable provision for their families, so that their widows and children
are often left in great distress; and whereas, in order to provide a remedy for
these growing difficulties, humble application has been made to us, that we
would erect and constitute a corporation in our province of New Jersey, for
receiving managing and disposing such sums of money as may be subscribed and
paid in from time to time by the clergy and missionaries themselves, and such
benefactions as may be given by charitable and well-disposed persons, as a fund
toward the support and relief of the widows and children of the ministers of
the church of England in our said American colonies;

KNOW YE therefore, that we, favoring the said useful and laudable design, and
being fully convinced of the loyalty and affection of the clergy of the church
of England in America to our person and government, of our especial grace,
certain knowledge and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these
presents, for us and our successors, DO give ordain constitute declare and
grant, that the Honorable Peter Kemble, Charles Read, James Parker, Samuel
Smith and Frederick Smyth Esquires of our province of New Jersey; the Honorable
Sir William Johnson Baronet, Cadwallader Colden, John Watts, Charles Ward
Apthorp and Henry Cruger Esquires of our province of New York; the Honorable
James Hamilton, Lynford Lardner, Benjamin Chew and James Tilghman Esquires of
the province of Pennsylvania; the Reverend William Smith, Samuel Auchmuty, and
Thomas Bradbury Chandler, Doctors in Divinity; Miles Cooper, Doctor of Laws;
Richard Peter's, William Currie, Richard Charlton, Philip Reading, George Craig,
John Ogilvie, Samuel Cook, Samuel Seabury, Thomas Barton, Charles Inglis,
William Thomson, Jacob Duche, Leonard Cutting, Alexander Murray, Ephraim Avery,
John Beardsley, Jonathan Odell, Samuel Magaw, John Andrews, Abraham Beach,
William Airs, and William Frazer, clerks; Cortland Skinner, John Lawrence and
Daniel Coxe Esquires of our province of New Jersey; John Tabor Kempe, John
Livingston, Elias Desbrosses, James De Lancey, James Van Cortlandt, Isaac
Willet, Nicholas Stuyvesant, James Duane, Jacob Le Roy, Benjamin Kissam, Jacob
Walton and William Axtell Esquires of our province of New York; Joseph
Galloway, John Ross, Richard Hockley, Samuel Johnson, Thomas Willing, Samuel
Powell, Francis Hopkinson and William Atlee Esquires and Doctor John Kearsley
of the province of Pennsylvania; and such other persons as shall hereafter be
elected and admitted members of the corporation erected, and to be erected, by
these presents, according to the tenor hereof, and of such bylaws and
constitutions, as shall hereafter be made by the said corporation, be, and for
ever hereafter shall be, by virtue of these presents, ONE BODY CORPORATE AND
POLITIC in deed and in name, by the name of, THE CORPORATION FOR THE RELIEF OF
THE WIDOWS AND CHILDREN OF CLERGYMEN IN THE COMMUNION OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
IN AMERICA, and them by the same name, ONE BODY CORPORATE AND POLITIC in deed
and in name, we do for us, and for our successors, fully create, constitute and
confirm, by these presents; and Do grant that by the same name they, and their
successors, shall and may have perpetual succession, and shall and may, at all
times for ever hereafter, be persons able and capable in the law to purchase,
take, have, hold, receive, enjoy and transmit to their successors lands,
tenements, rents and hereditaments, within our province of New Jersey to the
value of One Thousand Pounds Sterling by the year in the clear, above all
outgoings and reprisals, in fee simple, or for any other estate, term and
interest, whatsoever; and also to take, have, hold, receive, enjoy and transmit
to their successors, goods, chattels, moneys, and effects, but at no one time
to exceed the sum of twenty thousand pounds sterling in the gross, within our
said province of New Jersey; and may and shall, by the name aforesaid, do and
execute all things touching and concerning the same, for the benefit, succor
and relief of the WIDOWS and CHILDREN of such deceased clergymen, who have been
in communion of the church of England, as shall or may be contributors to the
funds of the said corporation, and in such manner, rates, proportions and
annuities, as shall be reasonably settled, adjusted, agreed to, and expressed
in the bylaws and regulations, which shall be made, from time to time, by the
said corporation, and their successors. And also, that they, and their
successors, by the name aforesaid, be, and shall be for ever hereafter, persons
able and capable in the law to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, answer
and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any courts of justice,
and before all or any judges, officers or other persons whatsoever, in all and
singular actions, plaints, pleas, suits, causes, matters and demands, of what
nature, kind or sort soever. And that it shall and may be lawful to and for
them the said corporation, and their successors, for ever hereafter, to have a
common seal for their use, and in their affairs and business, and the same, at
the will and pleasure of them, and their successors, to change, alter, break
and make new, from time to time, as they shall think best: and for the well
governing and ordering the affairs of the said corporation, we do, for us, and
for our successors, further grant, that it may be lawful for them, and their
successors, to meet together on the first Wednesday after the feast of Saint
Michael, in every year, and at such other time and times, and in such places,
upon such public notice given, as may be fixed and agreed upon by certain
fundamental regulations, to be first duly made and enacted, by a majority of
the said corporation, and never afterward to be altered, but by a majority of
the members for the time being: and they the said corporation, being so met, in
such number, and agreeably to such notice, as shall be fixed by the said
fundamental regulations, shall have full power and authority, from time to
time, to make other necessary laws and regulations, and to transact, manage and
settle, all such matters and things, touching and concerning the affairs of the
said corporation, as they shall be empowered and authorized to transact, settle
and manage, by virtue of the fundamental laws and regulations of the said
corporation, once duly made and enacted by a majority of the members as
aforesaid. And all the bylaws and regulations so made, whether concerning the
election of officers and servants, or concerning the government, and management
of the goods, chattels, estate, revenues, business and affairs, of the said
corporation, shall have full effect and force, and be binding upon, and
inviolably observed by, all the members of the said corporation, from time to
time, according to the tenor and effect of the same; PROVIDED that the same be
reasonable in their own nature, and not contrary to the laws of that part of
Great Britain called England, or of our said province of New Jersey. AND
FURTHER, We do hereby constitute and appoint Richard Peter's of Philadelphia,
clerk, to be the first president of this corporation; and Thomas Bradbury
Chandler, doctor in divinity, to be the first treasurer, and Jonathan Odell,
clerk, to be the first secretary; who shall continue in their respective
offices, until the first Wednesday after the feast of Saint Michael, in this
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine, and from
thenceforwards until one president, one or more treasurer or treasurers, and
one scretary be chosen into their rooms, in such manner, and for such term and
period, as shall be settled by the fundamental regulations, to be made for that
purpose by a majority of the said corporation, duly met and convened. AND we do
hereby, for us, and our successors, ordain, order, and appoint, that the
accounts and transactions of the said corporation, legally and properly vouched
and authenticated, shall, from time to time, and as often as demanded, be laid
before the Lords Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the Bishop of London,
for the time being, or before the Governor with any three of his Majesty's
council of New Jersey, for the time being, in order that they, the said
Archbishops of Canterbury and York and the Bishop of London, or the Governor
with any three of his Majesty's council of New Jersey, for the time being, may
ratify and confirm the said accounts, or subject them to such revisal check and
confirmation as may be thought just and reasonable. And our will and pleasure
is, and we do by these presents give and grant for us and our successors
forever, that these our letters patent, or the inrollment thereof in our
secretary's office in our said province of New Jersey, shall be good and
sufficient in the law to all intents and purposes whatever against us our heirs
and successors, without any other license grant or confirmation from us our
heirs or successors hereafter to be had or obtained, notwithstanding the
misreciting or not naming or misnaming of the officers, franchises, privileges,
or other immunities aforesaid, or any of them, and notwithstanding a writ of ad
quod damnum has not issued to enquire of the premises, or any of them, before
the ensealing thereof, To HAVE TO HOLD AND ENJOY all and singular the
privileges, advantages, liberties and immunities, and all and singular the
premises hereby given and granted, or meant mentioned or intended to be hereby
given and granted, unto them the said corporation for the relief of the widows
and children of clergymen in the communion of the church of England in America,
and their successors forever. IN TESTIMONY whereof we have caused these our
letters to be made patent, and the great seal of our said province of
New Jersey to be hereunto affixed; WITNESS our trusty and well-beloved WILLIAM
FRANKLIN, Esquire, Captain General, Governor and Commander in Chief, in and
over our said province of New Jersey and Territories thereon depending in
America, Chancellor and Vice Admiral in the same, etc. at our city of
Burlington the twenty-ninth day of March in the ninth year of our reign, anno
domini one thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine.

REED.
THE first meeting of the corporation was held, agreeably to the tenor of the
foregoing charter, on the first Wednesday after the feast of Saint Michael, the
fourth day of October 1769, at Burlington; from which place they were
adjourned, to meet again on the Tuesday following at Philadelphia; where, a
majority of the members being met, the FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and REGULATIONS of the
corporation, as directed by charter, were duly made and enacted; a copy of
which is here inserted.



FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and REGULATIONS, of the corporation for the relief of the
widows and children of clergymen in the communion of the church of ENGLAND in
America.
LAWS relative to ANNUITIES, etc.
I. THE yearly contributions of the clergy, whose widows and children shall be
hereby entitled to annuities, shall not be less than eight Spanish milled
dollars, of the present current weight, namely, seventeen penny-weight and six
grains, nor more than twenty-four such dollars, or the value thereof in current
money of the province where each contributor lives.

II. NO annuities shall be paid but to the widows and children of such
clergymen as shall have been contributors to the fund; and the respective
annuities to be paid to the widows and children of such clergymen, shall be
five times the sum of their annual contributions.

III. IN order to have a certainty, both as to the quantum, as well as the
payment of the annual rates, each contributor shall abide by that rate or class
which he first chooses; unless he shall change into another class, on such
terms as to the corporation shall appear to be reasonable: and each contributor
shall pay his annual contribution to the corporation, on or before the first
Wednesday after the feast of Saint Michael in every year, under the penalty of
one penny in the pound for every day's default: and if the said penalty of one
penny in the pound, together with the whole contributions due, shall not have
been paid up during the life of the contributor, then his widow and children
shall receive only an annuity proportionable to the payments made by the
husband or father.

IV. EVERY yearly contributor, who shall marry oftener than once, shall pay one
year's contribution extraordinary on every such marriage, as he makes the
chance in general worse against the fund.

V. IF the husband or father of any person or persons, entitled to an annuity
on this plan, shall not have paid five annual contributions into the fund; then
the widow and children shall only be entitled to ten per cent. per annum for
thirteen years, on the amount of the contributions paid by the deceased.

VI. IF any contributor shall have paid for five years, or any number of years
under fifteen, and exceeding five, the annuitants shall receive only half the
annuity which belongs to the rate or class subscribed to by the deceased, until
such time as the yearly deduction of half the annuity, added to five or more
payments, made by the deceased (without computing interest) shall together make
a sum in the fund, equal to the sum of fifteen annual payments in the rate or
class to which such deceased contributor belonged; which partial annuities,
payable agreeably to this article, shall be proportioned between the widow and
children as hereafter fixed, in respect to full annuities, viz.

VII. IF there be no children, the widow of every contributor, if fewer than
fifteen payments shall have been made by the deceased, shall receive the whole
annual sum due by the last preceding article; and if fifteen such payments
shall have been made complete by the deceased, then the widow shall receive the
whole annuity due on the husband's contribution during her widowhood; and if
she marry again, she shall, from the time of such second marriage, receive only
half such annuity during her natural life.

VIII. IF there be a child, and no widow, such child shall be entitled to the
whole or partial annuity for thirteen years, agreeably to the foregoing
articles; but if there be more than one child, and no widow, the annuity,
whether whole or partial, shall be equally divided among them, to be laid out,
in case they are minors, in their education or apprenticeship, with the advice
and approbation of such executors or guardians as the father may have
nominated; and if none such shall have been nominated by the father, then in
such manner for the benefit of the child or children, as the corporation shall
direct.

IX. IF there be a widow, and one child, the annuity, whether whole or partial,
shall be equally divided between them, under the limitations aforesaid: and if
there be a widow, and two or more children, she shall have one third during her
widowhood, or one sixth during her natural life, if she should marry a second
time; and the remainder for thirteen years, shall be laid out for the use of
the children as aforesaid.

X. THE corporation may, if they think proper, with the consent of the
annuitants, or of their guardians, if they be minors, pay the child or children
of contributors such a sum in hand, as shall be equal to the annuity of such
child or children, according to the number of years for which such annuity
should be paid, deducting legal interest, and taking into the account the
chances against the life of such child or children, for the term such annuity
is to be paid.

XI. THE corporation shall have power to increase the rates of annuities, as
the state of the fund shall admit; and for that end, all benefactions that
shall be made to this fund shall, for the term of ten years to come from this
day, be put out to interest, on good land security, and the said interest,
annually collected, and again put out to interest, shall be appropriated as an
augmentation of the capital stock, for the said term of ten years; and, after
the expiration of the said term, the interest of all benefactions shall be
equally divided among all the children of contributors for the term that their
annuities respectively shall continue payable, according to the foregoing
articles.

LAWS relative to MEETINGS and BUSINESS.
I. AT every annual meeting, agreeble to the charter, there shall be one
president, one or more treasurers, and one secretary chosen for the ensuing
year; and if any of the said officers should be absent from any meeting, the
members met shall choose another to officiate in his stead, during that
meeting. At any annual meeting, the members met as aforesaid, shall have power
to elect; such new members as they shall think fit, and likely to promote the
good purposes of the charity; and all elections whatsoever, shall be by ballot,
and the majority of votes shall be sufficient for the election of the
president, treasurer or treasurers, and secretary; but no new member shall be
admitted, unless four fifths of the whole votes be in his favor.

II. There shall at each annual meeting be chosen a standing committee of six
members, consisting of two out of each of the three provinces, who, together
with the president, teasurer or treasurers, and secretary, shall direct and
carry on the necessary correspondence of the corporation, and from time to time
assist the treasurer or treasurers, in managing the rents and estate of the
corporation, and in putting out at interest the moneys coming into the stock,
either by the annual contributions of the clergy, or the occasional donations
of benevolent persons, for which good land security shall be taken, at least to
double the value of the moneys lent, payable in Spanish milled dollars of the
present current weight, namely, seventeen penny-weight and six grains each, or
the value thereof in current money of the province where the loan is made.

III. THE annual meetings of the corporation, appointed by the charter, shall
be alternately held in the provinces of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania;
and six weeks previous notice of the time and places of all annual meetings,
shall be given by the secretary, in one or more of the public newspapers,
published in New York, and in Philadelphia. And if an occasional meeting of the
corporation should be found at any time necessary, and the standing committee
of business, to be appointed agreeably to the rules of the society, should
apply in writing to the president of the corporation, to call such meeting at
any particular place within the said three provinces, the president shall call
such occasional meeting at the place requested by the committee, giving such
public notice thereof, by the secretary, as is directed above. And at all such
meetings, whether occasional or stated, any number of members met, not being
less than fifteen, shall have power to make bylaws, and in general, shall have
all the powers granted by charter to this corporation, other than the making,
altering or repealing fundamental laws and regulations; provided always, that
when any part of the stock of the corporation is to be disposed of, or any
augmentation of annuities to be made, the same shall be expressed in the
previous public notices hereby directed to be given of such meetings.

IV. THE treasurer or treasurers, shall give such security to the corporation
every year, as often as thereto required, in such sum or sums as the
corporation at any annual meeting may judge sufficient, for the faithful
discharge of the trust reposed, and to be reposed, in him or them; and farther,
he or they shall, at each annual meeting, exhibit his or their accounts to the
corporation, for their inspection and approbation.

ALTHOUGH the foregoing laws and regulations were enacted upon as full and
mature deliberation as the time would admit, yet, upon reconsidering them
carefully the next day, when the number of members present was not sufficient
to authorize any alteration or amendment, some things, relative to the payments
to be made by those of the clergy whose widows and children were to be entitled
to annuities, seeming to have been tacitly implied, which ought rather to have
been fully expressed, in order to prevent any future misapprehension of the
sense of those articles; it was therefore thought expedient, that an
explanatory article should be added, to be agreed to and subscribed by all the
clergy present, and, in future, by every clergyman who should become a
contributor, in order to entitle his widow and children to an annuity from this
fund; until such time as a majority of the members of the corporation should
again be met, to give this explanatory article, such further sanction as might
be thought necessary. In this explanatory article the clergy declare their
sense of the (...) laws and regulations to be, that every clergyman, who shall
become a contributor, in order that his widow and children may be entitled to
an annuity at his decease, is to continue the payment of his yearly
contribution during his life, and not to stop at the end of fifteen years; the
whole calculations being on the principle of payments for life. And they
further declare their sense of the articles to be, that if any clergyman should
die in arrears of his annual payments, all his arrears, with the penalty of one
penny in the pound per day, are to be deducted out of the annuity payable to
the widow and children.

BY the foregoing laws and regulations a plan was settled for the management
and disposition of a fund, that was, partly, to arise from the stated
contributions of those whose families were to be entitled to relief and
assistance from it. These contributions of the clergy are considered as the
annual savings of a strict and severe economy, laid out in the purchase of
small annuities, to be kept in reserve for their wives and children, in case
they should come to be widows and orphans. To such a fund, where the parties to
be benefited by it were themselves to exert their utmost ability toward its
establishment, it could not be doubted that large additions would be made by
the generosity and charity of the benevolent and tenderhearted; especially as
the wants and distresses of those, who by this institution are to be relieved
and assisted, could not fail to have been peculiarly interesting and affecting
to persons of humanity and sensibility. Two years, only, and a few months, have
passed since the corporation was erected; and the members of it have the
pleasure to acknowledge, that they are already indebted to the worthy and
humane, for as much assistance as could have been expected in so short a time;
and they are encouraged to promise themselves a continuance of the public favor
to the excellent charity, which they have undertaken to manage and conduct.

IT was intended, that a full account of the benefactions, received during the
former year, should have been annexed to the sermon, preached before the
corporation at New York, and published, at their request, by the Revd. Dr.
Auchmuty; to whom such an account was accordingly transmitted by the secretary:
but, by some accident, it was lost. This occasioned the omission of several
articles, which, otherwise, would have been then acknowledged. A general
account is, therefore, here inserted, of the encouragement and assistance
hitherto received by the corporation; who now return their sincere thanks for
the following benefactions, which, as nearly as it could be ascertained, are
mentioned according to the order of time in which they were received.

The current money in these provinces being of unequal value, the several
articles of this account, in order to avoid perplexity, are expressed according
to their value in Spanish dollars, at seven shillings and sixpence a piece;
which is the value of a dollar in lawful money of New Jersey, and in the money
of Pennsylvania; in New York a dollar is valued at eight shillings of the
current money of that province.
Lawful Money of New Jersey. To the congregation of Christ-Church,
Philadelphia, for their contribution, made at the first annual meeting of the
Corporation, October 10, 1769, L. 40 -- 6 To the Rev. Dr. Peter's, president of
the Corporation, 200 -- 0 To a Gentleman, by the Rev. Mr. Cook, 10 15 4 To a
Gentleman, by the Rev. Dr. Smith, 6 -- 0 To a Lady, by the same hand, 1 -- 0 To
a Gentleman, by the Rev. Dr. Chandler, 6 -- 0 To a Gentleman, by the same hand,
3 -- 0 To a Person unknown, by the Rev. Dr. Peter's, -- 15 0 To several Ladies,
by the Rev. Mr. Duche, 14 8 0 To Mrs. Jackson, by the Rev. Mr. Craig, 1 -- 0 To
Mrs. Vanlear, by the same hand, 1 -- 0 To the Lord Bishop of London, by the
Rev. Dr. Peter's, L 20 Sterling, 33 -- 0 To his Excellency Governor Franklin, by
the Rev. Mr. Odell, L. 10 -- 0 To the congregation of St. Mary's Church,
Burlington, by the same hand, 5 8 0 To the congregation of St. Andrew's Church
Mount-holly, by the same hand, 2 5 9 To the Hon. Sir William Johnson, Baronet,
by the Rev. Dr. Auchmuty, 9 7 6 To the congregation of Trinity-Church,
New York, for their contribution made at the annual meeting of the corporation,
October 2, 1770, 140 11 5 To a person unknown, by Dr Auchmuty, 3 -- 0 To
another person, by the same hand, 1 17 6 To a Lady unknown, by the Rev. Dr.
Ogilvie, 3 -- 0 To a military Gentleman, by the same hand, 3 -- 0 To another
military Gentleman, by the same hand, 3 -- 0 To another military Gentleman, by
the same hand, 1 17 6 To a Gentleman unknown, by Dr Auchmuty, 2 16 3 To a Lady,
by Dr. Ogilvie, 3 -- 0 To the Rev. Mr. Provost, by Dr. Auchmuty, 9 7 6 To the
Rev. Mr. Forbes, by the same hand, 1 7 2 To a Lady unknown, by Dr. Ogilvie, 3
-- 0 To a Gentleman unknomn, by Dr. Auchmuty, 8 4 0 To a Lady unknown, by the
same hand, 1 10 0 To the Rev. Mr. Preston, by Dr. Chandler, 1 14 8 To the
venerable Society for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts, their
annual contribution, L 60, sterling 97 -- 7 To Mr. William Hilton, by Dr.
Chandler, -- 18 9 To the Right Hon. Lord Dartry of Ireland, by Major Fell. 5 2
0 To Col. John Lawrence, of Charlestown, South Carolina, by Dr. Peter's, 7 10 0
To Mr. J.M. of Philadelphia, by Dr. Smith. 1 -- 0 To Mrs. P. of Philadelphia,
by the same hand, 2 -- 0 To Thomas Smith, Esquire. of Charlestown, South Carolina,
by the same hand, L. 3 -- 0 To Mr. Elliot, of the same place, by the same hand,
3 -- 0 To John Smyth, Esquire. of Perth-Amboy, by the same hand, 3 -- 0 To Robert
Pringle, Esquire. of Charlestown, South Carolina, by the same hand, 6 -- 0 To Col.
Armstrong of New Castle county, by the same hand, 5 -- 0 To John Morton, Esquire.
of Chester, by the Rev. Mr. Craig, 3 -- 0 To Mr. John Crosby, jun. of Chester,
by the same hand. 2 -- 0 To Henry Hale Graham, Esquire. of Chester, by the same
hand, 1 5 9 To the congregation of St. Martin's, Chichester, by the same hand,
1 1 4 To the congregation of St. Peter's Church, Perth-Amboy, for their
contribution, made at the annual meeting of the corporation, October 2, 1771,
30 3 2 To two persons unknown, by Cortland Skinner, Esquire. 1 15 4

BESIDES the benefactions above acknowledged, it remains to mention one, which
(though not yet come to hand) is no less entitled to the public thanks of the
corporation. At the annual meeting in New York, October 2d, 1770, a committee
being named, to devise a proper seal for the corporation, Jocob Le Roy Esquire.
offered to pay the expense of any seal that should be agreed upon, the price
not exceeding ten guineas. This generous offer was politely accepted by the
board; and a seal was accordingly ordered, and is daily expected from England.

AND here also it is, with pleasure, acknowledged, that the sincere thanks of
the corporation are due to the Rev. Mr. Thomas Wharton, rector of St. Michael's
at Bridgetown, in Barbados; who, on the first intelligence he received of this
charitable institution, warmly interested himself in its behalf, soliciting his
brethren and acquaintance, in that Island, to join with him in contributing to
so laudable, so worthy an undertaking. Such are the terms in which he expresses
his approbation of the scheme, and his zeal for its success, in a letter to Dr.
Smith, dated so early as May, 1770; in which he intimates to the corporation
his hope of procuring some considerable contributions to their fund. The
corporation have not yet received any direct account of the success of his
application; but the readiness and zeal with which it has been seconded and
supported by the clergy, and by many of the principal gentlemen of the laity.
in Barbados, appear from the following advertisement, which was lately
inserted, for several weeks together, in the Barbados Mercury.

The benevolent and humane are acquainted, that a subscription has been opened
for the relief of the widows and orphans of the clergy of the established
church in North America, and that the members of the assembly, and several
other principal gentlemen of the Island, have been pleased to encourage the
laudable scheme, by cheerfully contributing to the charitable design. Notice
therefore is hereby given, that the several clergymen of the Island will
receive subscriptions, from such of their parishioners as will be pleased to
offer their bounty; and the sums subscribed will be duly transmitted, by Henry
Duke Esquire. and the Rev. Thomas Wharton.

The following is a general account of the receipts and payments of the
corporation, as they stood at the last annual meeting, on the 2d of October,
1771; (including the annual contributions of the clergy for the year past,
which became due on that day.)

RECEIPTS
By benefactions and charitable contributions, from October 4th, 1769, to
October 2d, 1771, L. 704 3 2 By the stated annual contributions of the clergy,
for the same term, 306 0 0 By one year's interest of L. 300, in the hands of
Mr. Treasurer Hopkinson, of Philadelphia, 18 0 0 By a fine, for delay of
payment of an annual contribution, -- 2 0 Total L. 1028 5 2 PAYMENTS.
For two editions of the sermon, preached before the corporation by Dr. Smith,
at the first annual meeting, in Philadelphia, L. 40 8 3 For engrossing the
charter granted in the province of New York, 3 0 0 For engrossing the charter
granted in New Jersey, -- 15 0 For a book of minutes for the use of the
corporation, -- 12 0 For copying several pieces of church-music, and for other
incidental charges, at the annual meeting of the corporation, in New York, 4 10
3 To two bonds in the hands of Mr. Hopkinson, 300 0 0 To cash in the hands of
Dr. Chandler, for which interest is allowed by the executors of the late Col.
Rickets, 57 16 3 To a mortgage in the hands of Mr. treasurer Le Roy, of
New York, 187 10 0 To balance due to the corporation, in the hands of the
several treasurers, 433 13 5 Total L. 1028 5 2

A LIST of the MEMBERS of the Corporation.
The Rev. Richard Peter's, D. D. President. His Excellency William Franklin,
Esquire. Governor of New Jersey. His Excellency William Tryon, Esquire. Governor of
New York. The Honorable Cadwallader Colden, Esquire. Lieutenant Governor of
New York.
A
The Honorable Charles Ward Apthorp, Esquire. Samuel Auchmuty, D. D. The Honorable
William Axtell, Esquire. Ephraim Avery, M. A. John Andrews, M. A. The Rev. William
Ayers. William Atlee, Esquire.
B
Isaac Brown, M. A. Thomas Barton, M. A. John Beardsley, M. A. Abraham Beach,
M. A. Joshua Bloomer, M. A.
C
The Honorable Henry Cruger, Esquire. Benjamin Chew, Esquire. Thomas Bradbury Chandler,
D. D. Miles Cooper, L. L. D. The Honorable Daniel Coxe, Esquire. Richard Charlton,
M. A. George Craig, M. A. William Currie, M. A. Samuel Cook, M. A. Leonard
Cutting, M. A. James Van Cortlandt, Esquire.
D
Elias Desbrosses, Esquire. James De Lancey, Esquire. James Duane, Esquire. Jacob Duche, M.
A.
F
The Rev. William Frazer.
G
Joseph Galloway, Esquire.
H
The Honorable James Hamilton, Esquire. Richard Hockley, Esquire. Francis Hopkinson,
Esquire.
I
The Honorable Sir William Johnson, Bart. Samuel Johnson, Esquire. Charles Inglis,
M. A.
K
The Honorable Peter Kemble, Esquire. John Tabor Kempe, Esquire. attorney general in
the province of New York. Benjamin Kissam, Esquire. Ebenezer Kneeland. M. A.
L
The Honorable John Lawrence, Esquire. Lynford Lardner, Esquire. John Livingston, Esquire.
Jacob Le Roy, Esquire. John Lion, M. A.
M
The Honorable Roger Morris, Esquire. The Rev. Mr. Muhlenburgh. Alexander Murray,
M. A. Samuel Magaw, M. A.
O
John Ogilvie, D. D. Jonathan Odell, M. A.
P
The Honorable John Penn, Esquire. one of the proprietaries of Pennsylvania. The
Honorable James Parker, Esquire. Samuel Powell, Esquire. Frederick Philips, Esquire. Samuel
Provost, M. A. John Preston, M. A.
R
The Honorable Charles Read, Esquire. John Ross, Esquire. Philip Reading, M. A.
S
The Right Honorable Lord Stirling. The Honorable Samuel Smith, Esquire. The
Honorable Frederick Smyth, Esquire. Cortland Skinner, Esquire. attorney general in the
province of New Jersey. William Smith, D. D. Samuel Seabury, M. A. The Rev.
John Sayre. John Swift, Esquire. Nicholas Stuyvesant, Esquire.
T
James Tilghman, Esquire. William Thomson, M. A.
W
The Honorable John Watts, Esquire. Isaac Willet, Esquire. Jacob Walton, Esquire. Thomas
Willing, Esquire.
A LIST of the OFFICERS of the Corporation, for the present year.
President,
The Reverend Richard Peter's, D. D.
Treasurers,
Jacob Le Roy, Esquire. for New York. Thomas B. Chandler, D. D. for New Jersey.
Francis Hopkinson, Esquire. for Pennsylvania.
Standing Committee,
The Hon. John Watts, Esquire. in N. York. The Rev. Mr. Charles Inglis, in N. York.
The Hon. James Parker, Esquire. in N. Jersey. Cortland Skinner, Esquire. in N. Jersey.
Thomas Willing, Esquire. in Pennsylvania. The Rev. Dr. Smith, in Pennsylvania.
Secretary,
Jonathan Odell.
The FORM of a LEGACY To the Corporation for the Relief of the Widows and
Children of Clergymen in the Communion of the Church of England in America.
ITEM. I GIVE to the "corporation for the relief of the widows and children of
clergymen in the communion of the church of England in America," the sum of
(...) to be raised and paid, by and out of all my ready money, plate, goods,
and personal effects, which by law I can or may charge with the payment of the
same (and not out of any part of my lands, tenements and hereditaments) and to
be applied toward carrying on the charitable purposes, expressed in the
charters granted to the said corporation, in the provinces of New York,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, in America.

N. B. IT will be necessary to observe the above form in any legacy in
Great Britain and Ireland; but in the colonies, where charters are granted to
the corporation, a legacy in lands, or in money payable out of the sale or rent
of lands, will be valid; and then the form may be thus --

ITEM. I give to the "corporation for the relief of the widows and children of
clergymen in the communion of the church of England in America," and to their
successors for ever, (...) acres of land, situated, lying and being in [here
describe the lands] or, if it is money payable out of lands --

ITEM. I give to the corporation [using the charter style as before] the sum of
(...) to be paid, within (...) after my decease, out of all my effects, goods
and estate whatsoever, whether real or personal, and to be applied toward
carrying on the charitable purposes, expressed in the charters granted to the
said corporation, in the provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.

A BENEFACTION to the corporation may be sent to either of the treasurers, or
other officers, mentioned in the list of officers for the present year.

END.

