ESSAYS ON ^. THE Nature, Uses, and Subjects of the Sacraments of the NEW
TESTAMENT. II. ON Regeneration, wherein the Principle of spiritual Life thereby
implanted, is particularly considered. III. ON the Nature and Use of the Means
of GRACE.


By JOHN BLAIR, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH of GOOD WILL, (alias WALLKILL) in
the Province of New York.

MAT. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

1. COR. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death till he come.

EPHESIANS. 2.1. And you has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins.

ROMANS 3.1.2. What Advantage then has the Jews? Or what Profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every Way: Chiefly because that unto them were committed the
Oracles of God.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, at the EXCHANGE M,DCC,LXXI.

The PREFACE To the READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
THE Apologies of Authors for appearing in print, and their craving the
Indulgence of the Candid Reader to the Imperfections of their Performances, are
generally considered as mere Words of Course. Therefore without the Vanity to
imagine I have no Need, I shall however omit troubling him with any such
Application. Nor do I think it necessary to take up his Time with the Reasons
and Motives, which have induced me to this Publication. It is to be supposed in
a Judgment of Charity, that a Writer aims at the Instruction and Good of
Mankind (unless there appear strong Reasons to the Contrary) and hopes his
Performance is, in some Measure, calculated for that Purpose. The Subjects here
touched at are, I have observed, lately become Matters of much Controversy; I
have not been so happy as to be fully satisfied with the Publications I have
seen on either Side: At least as to the Manner of treating these Points, even
by such as take the Side, I apprehend to be substantially the Truth. I
thereupon determined to renew my Examination of Matters so Important, and so
interesting in our Faith and Daily Practice; and in doing so, I resolved simply
to enquire, what appears, from the Word of God, to be the Truth on these
Topics; and as impartially as I could, examine the Weight of occurring
Objections, without intermeddling as a Party in the present disputes. Thus I
have laid none under a Necessity, nor I hope provoked any to commence a
Controversy with me. Angry Debate seldom does the Justice to Truth, that may be
expected from free dispassionate Enquiry; and in Matters of Controversy,
Readers are generally more curious to observe which Combatant manages his Part
with most Ingenuity, or is likely to come off Conqueror, than to discover the
real Truth. Many of my Friends will, probably, be surprised, to find I have
changed my Sentiments with Respect to some Subjects of one of the Sacraments;
for they know it was formerly my Opinion, that the Unregenerate ought not, by
any Means, to adventure to the Lord's Table; though they ought to dedicate their
Children to God in Baptism. But for some Years past, I durst not be peremptory
in that Matter; and upon a more extensive View of the Subject, I could not see,
that the Arguments, upon which I founded my former Opinion, were conclusive,
for Reasons which appear in my Answers to Objections. Whether my Arguments for
the Side I have taken shall appear sufficient, or not, I hope my Friends will
not be stumbled, but will see at least, so much Appearance of Weight in them,
as may satisfy them, that I have changed upon Principle, and from a Conviction
of Truth by what appears to me full Evidence. I hope, my Readers in general
will endeavor to consider impartially the Point of Light, in which I have set
these interesting Subjects, and enter into the true Spirit and Strength of my
Arguments, without Prejudice; and not content themselves with throwing up a
little Dust, in Order to Support strong Prepossessions at any Rate.

That Truth may appear, be received in the Love of it; and the Churches of
Christ may be edified; is the earnest Prayer of,

Courteous Reader, thy Soul's Servant for Christ's Sake. J. BLAIR
GOOD WILL, December 21st. 1770.
AN ESSAY ON THE NATURE, USES, and SUBJECTS of the SACRAMENTS of the
NEW TESTAMENT, etc.
IT is disputed by some, whether God ever entered into Covenant with Man; the
Reason alleged against it is, that the Parties in a Covenant must, at least in
Respect of the Matters contained therein, be upon equal Footing, and free from
previous Obligations. But, I think, this Conclusion is not founded in the
Nature of Things, but too rashly drawn from the State of Matters amongst Men;
which takes Place only in certain Cases, where human Laws have made Provision
to that Purpose, in Order to prevent the Abuse and Encroachments of Power. A
Reason this, which can have no Place with Respect to the blessed God. I see no
Reason in the Nature of Things, why a Superior may not condescend to enter into
Covenant with an Inferior for his Advantage and Benefit. Yea, such Transactions
do take Place among Men in many Instances, as between Parents and Children,
Princes and their Subjects; of this Nature are Charters, which are of Force
only on their being accepted. Now surely the great God, who can do no Wrong,
nor ever abuse his Power, may, if he pleases, thus condescend. And I think, the
Institution of Sacramental Signs and Seals, puts it beyond Dispute, that in
Fact he has. By these he ratifies and confirms a Right to Benefits conferred by
way of Promise, upon the Consent of Persons to certain Terms; which Consent is
expressed, and the Persons brought under solemn Obligations, by partaking of
them. Surely, this contains, not only the Substance, but the Form of a Covenant.

In every Dispensation, the blessed God has confirmed his Covenant with Man in
this Manner. By the Tree of Life, he confirmed the Promise of Life: And by the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, the Threatening of Death, in the Covenant of
Works. -- To this, upon it is Violation, succeeded the Covenant of Grace. This
was confirmed in the patriarchal Age (when God made a public Distinction
between his Church and the World) by the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. Romans 4.11. To which, the Passover was added, upon
Occasion of the Israelites' Deliverance from Egyptian Bondage. The Institution
of a second Seal was reserved until this Time, because this Deliverance was so
eminently typical of the Redemption of Sinners by Jesus Christ. -- Upon the
Resurrection of Christ, when an entire Change of the whole external
Administration of that gracious Covenant took Place, Baptism was substituted in
the Room of Circumcision, and the Lord's Supper in the Room of the Passover, as
Ordinances better suited to this new Frame of Administration. And as this is
the last Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, these are the last sacramental
Institutions, and none other are to be expected.

Seeing these sacred Ordinances, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, have so close
and solemn Connection with the Covenant of Grace, which is the Great Charter of
all our spiritual Privileges and Mercies, it is of vast Importance that they be
rightly understood, in Order to a proper Attendance upon, and Improvement of
them. With a View to assist the common Christian in this, I shall endeavor to
set before him, the Nature, Uses, and Subjects of these Ordinances, as briefly
as I can, in the few following Observations.

I. The Name, Sacrament, it must be acknowledged, is not of divine Authority,
but human Invention. It is derived from the Latin Word, Sacramentum, which,
among the Romans, signified the Oath, whereby their Soldiers swore Fidelity to
their General; and by Divines, applied to these sacred Institutions, because of
the solemn Obligations to the blessed God, infered on those who partake of
them. But the principal Use of Names, is to suggest to the Mind, without
tedious Circumlocutions, the Things to which they are given: And this Name, by
common Consent, answers that End in the present Case. There can, therefore, be
no Danger from the Use of it, while we give a scriptural View of the Things
signified thereby. This is next to be attempted.

II. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance, in which, some sensible Thing, or Things
are, by divine Institution, to be used as a Sign and Seal of the Privileges,
Mercies and Engagements, of the Covenant of Grace between God and his People.
-- A Sign is Something, which, by its Presence or Use, suggests or represents
something else to the Mind. This must therefore, be some sensible visible
Thing. The Sign in a Sacrament is not a natural, but arbitrary Sign, it has no
natural necessary Connection with the Thing signified; but its Connection is by
Institution for that Purpose. -- Written Covenants among Men, are confirmed by
adding a Bit of Wax impressed with the Character of a Seal, which is, by a
particular Action and express Declaration, acknowledged, and is therefore
called a Seal. When this is done, the Covenant cannot be revoked, but by the
Consent and Deed of both Parties; without which, their Engagements to each
other stand good and in full Force. Now if any other Sign or Thing, attended
with significant Actions, be appointed for the same Purpose, it is called by
the same Name. Thus the Elements of Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the
Lord's Supper, are called Seals, because when used according to their
Institution, they have the same Efficacy with Respect to the Covenant of Grace,
that there is in Seals, annexed to written Covenants among Men. -- Thus then
some sensible Sign; it is Separation and Appointment to it is proper Purpose; and
in Consequence thereof, it is Significancy and Efficacy as a Sign and Seal of
the Covenant of Grace, all concur to the Constitution of a Sacrament. This is
the View of the Matter which the Scriptures give us. thus Genesis 17.10.11. This
is my Covenant; -- every Man-Child among you shall be circumcised. -- And it
shall be A TOKEN OF the Covenant betwixt you and me. It shall be a Token or
Sign: It shall suggest to your Minds the Necessity of your being cut off from
the old Stock, and engrafted into Christ Jesus, the living Vine; and that the
Foreskin of your Hearts, their natural Hardness and Stubbornness, must be taken
away, and be turned to the Lord. (see Jer. 4.4. Romans 2.28, 29.) It is also a
Sign or Token of the Existence of the Covenant. The Tenor of the Covenant, was
the Promises made to Abraham in v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. see also Gal. 3.14, -- 16.
Yet Circumcision is called the Covenant v. 10. Which can only mean, that the
Promises of the Covenant are confirmed by it. Hence the Apostle uses the Terms,
Promises, and Covenant, promiscuously; and observes, that the Covenant was
confirmed before, of God in Christ, viz, to Abraham by Circumcision. Gal. 3.17.
And the Apostle calls it A SEAL of the Righteousness of Faith. Romans 4.11.

III. Baptism and the Lord's Supper agree in the general Nature of a Sacrament,
as above described. Yet, they differ not only in the external Elements,
(without which, they, could not be two Sacraments) but in sundry other
considerable Respects. As (...) Baptism is an initial commonstrative A
commonstrative Sign, is that, which denotes the Presence of the Thing signified.
Sign and Seal, which visibly denotes the Existence of God's Covenant between
him and the baptized Party, and their Entrance into the School of Christ as his
Disciples; and by which, their visible Membership in the Church is publicly
ratified. This Ratification of Membership in the Church of Christ as his
visible Disciples, is, in Scripture, attributed to this, and never to the other
Sacrament. Thus Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. Go ye therefore, and teach, ((...)
Discipline) all Nations; and then take Care of and treat them as Disciples,
(...) teaching them to observe all Things, whatsoever I have commanded you;
they are hereby bound and engaged to observe and attend upon all Ordinances and
Duties.

The Lord's Supper is a commemorative Sign, wherein Persons recollect and
recognize their Engagements to be the Lords, previously entered into in the
initiating Sacrament of Baptism; and especially commemorate, and improve the
Sufferings and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Persons Church Membership is
pre-supposed in, and pre-requisite to their Access to this Sacrament. Hence 2d,
the Sacrament of Baptism is only once to be administered to, and received by the
same Subject. For, from what has been observed, it appears, that by one
Administration it obtains its whole Effect. Membership in the Church of Christ
admits not of Degrees; a Person is either a Member or no Member of the Church;
there is no Ground in Scripture or Reason for the Distinction of imperfect or
perfect Members, Members in a passive and active State as different Sorts of
Members, the same Member may have very different Degrees of Capacity for the
Discharge of the Duties and Enjoyment of the Privileges of a Member, but he is
the same Member still. An Infant Member cannot exercise Knowledge, nor perform
Duty, nor in Childhood can he perform Duties, which require Degrees of
Knowledge above his Capacity; but yet still he is truly a Member, training up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. I would ask what is done to persons
in their passive State, viz. Infancy, when they are baptized. Are they not
separated from the World, and dedicated to God as his peculiar Property? Are
they not brought under the Bond of God's Covenant, and under the Ordinances of
the Gospel or means of Grace, as they become capable of Instruction? Are they
not really bound, and that so as, upon its being duly laid before them, their
Consciences must feel the Obligation, to cleave to God in Christ, to perform
all Christian Duties, and, among the rest, to renew their Covenant Engagements
at the Lord's Table. But do they, by approaching the Lord's Table, acquire a
new State of Member-ship? In what Scripture is that declared? I would further
ask, whether an adult Person, when baptized, is a perfect Member, or only
imperfect, a Member in Embrio? If the latter, then, the Matter does not turn
upon the Difference between the passive and active State, and so that
Distinction must be given up; but the Imperfection of his Membership must arise
from an insufficiency in the Sacrament of Baptism to ratify it, that is, it is
not sufficient to ratify what it is expressly appointed to ratify, Mat. xxviii.
19, which is absurd; but if the former, then there is perfect Membership by
Baptism, previous to coming to the Lord's Table. Therefore also, Baptism so
confirms Church Membership to an Infant, as to maintain and make good his
Title, as he arrives to Capacity of Enjoyment; for its Efficacy takes Place
after, as well as at the Time of Administration, even through the whole Course of
Life. Thus, though a baptized Person should not be regenerated and united to
Christ by a saving Faith until old Age; yet, thereupon, his Baptism, which he
received in Infancy, seals his ingrafting into Christ, and personal Interest in
the Special Blessings of the Covenant, otherwise, where is the great Advantage
of Infant Baptism? Hence also, it appears how groundless and unreasonable the
Distinction, which obtains in many Places, between the Church and the
Congregation. By this means, the greater Part of worshipping Societies are
excluded from the Care and Discipline of the Church, and yet are, in some
Respects, treated as Members, in being admitted to dedicate their Children to
God in Baptism; their is great Inconsistency in these Things. but to return.
From the very Nature of a commemorative Sign, it is evident, it is designed to
affect the Heart by frequently bringing to Remembrance the Things signified;
therefore, must be frequently used for that Purpose. Hence, as the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper is such, therefore it must be often celebrated by the same
Persons. They are to eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord often. 1
Cor. xi. 26.

III. These two Sacraments differ with Respect to some of their Subjects.
Actual Exercise, and a competent Knowledge of the Nature of the Ordinance and
Transactions required, for which a proper Degree of natural Capacity is
requisite, are indispensibly necessary to an Attendance on the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. Without this, it could not be to Persons what it is, viz. a
commemorative Sign, its Subserviency to its End, is from the Impression it is
calculated to make on the Heart, in attending upon it; but as Circumcision of
old, so Baptism, which succeeds it now, is to be administered to Infants, born
of professing Parents.

IV. The Sacraments are public Signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, as
transacted between the blessed God and his Church as such. The Covenant of
Grace, is the great and glorious Charter, by which Jehovah has erected and
constituted his Church. She stands related to him, and interested in him by
Covenant, Ezekiel. xvi. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold
thy Time was a Time of Love, and I spread my Skirt over thee, and covered thy
Nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee, and thou becomest mine. Hence it is, that
the Church is so repeatedly considered in Scripture, as married to the Lord. It
is a Marriage Covenant: This, I think, is the primary View of the Covenant of
Grace, as thus represented and confirmed by Sign and Seal; and it comprehends
all the personal Interests of Individuals, as Members of the Body of Christ,
and belonging to that Society; in all God's Covenant-Transactions with Men; of
which we have an Account in Scripture; the Persons, with whom he immediately
transacted, are not to be considered in a strict or abstract personal Capacity,
but as Members of Society, or as including the Church. Thus when the gracious
God opened and established his Covenant with our first Parents after the Fall,
[Gen. iii. 15,] they were then the Church of God, and the Stock from whence it
was to be propagated. In the Covenant-transaction with Abraham, he is
considered as the Father of many Nations. Genesis xvii. 5. The Church is set up in
his House, his Family, yea, the whole, both Jewish and Christian Church are
included. Romans iv. 10, 11, 12, 13. Gal. iii. 14 -- 16. None of the Promises of
the Covenant are directed to any, who are out of the Church. All who are Aliens
to the Commonwealth of Israel, are Stangers to the Covenants of Promise. Ephesians.
ii. 12. The Promises do, indeed, describe particular Characters, and point out
particular Conditions and Circumstances of God's People, to which they are
accommodated. Hence, each Persons of those Characters, and in such Condition or
Circumstances, may claim a personal Interest in such Promises. Yet, this is not
by Virtue of any personal Direction of the Promise; but he pleads it as
comprehended in the Church, and belonging to the Character described. Yea,
there are Promises, which cannot be claimed by the particular Persons whose
Character and Case they point out; but can be pleaded only by the Church. Thus,
Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit also
will I put within you, and I will take the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I
will give you an Heart of Flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you; and cause
you to walk in my Statutes. Here the Character pointed out is that of the
ungenerate; but surely, the Promise cannot be considered as directed to that
Character. For then, the blessed God would stand engaged by Promise, to all of
that Character, to give them regenerating Grace, and each one might claim it,
as that which God could not refuse consistent with his faithfulness, or without
denying himself: but the Faith of the Church may rest upon it, and she may
plead it as a Promise of God's Presence in her with his own Ordinances, for the
Purpose of regenerating Sinners: And in every Instance of their Conversion, God
is fulfilling that Promise to his Church. Sinners are, indeed, hence encouraged
to call to cry to God for Grace, and to attend upon the Means of Grace, but
they can find no Claim upon it. Hence we may see, that to have Matter of
Encouragement, and to have a Ground of Confidence and Claim, are not the same
Thing, as some seem strangely to imagine.

The Church of Christ is usually, and very properly distinguished into visible
and invisible. By the invisible Church is meant, the whole Number of true
Believers wherever they are. All these are, by a vital Union with Christ by
Faith, savingly interested in the Covenant of Grace; in God as their God, and
in all spiritual Blessings. But their Consent to the Covenant, and their
Relation to God thereby, is altogether invisible, and known only to God and
their own Consciences. These are called a Church, because they are Members of
Christ by a common Union with him, and stand united with, and related to each
other in one Body in a Church State, as they are included in the Catholic
visible Church.

The visible Church consists of all those, who by an external Profession of the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and Subjection to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ,
appear as a Society separated from the World, and dedicated to God and his
Service. In this View, in this imperfect State, the Church comprehends Branches
that are withered, as well as those that bear Fruit. Now the Covenant of Grace
subsists between the blessed God and the Church, as such a visible Society In
no other Way can we conceive the Covenant to subsist between God and Believers
as a Church. In the Exercise of Faith, Believers have Union to, and Communion
with Jesus Christ; but by this alone, they could have no Fellowship with one
another; for each one could only be conscious of his own Exercise of Faith, and
could have no Society with any other therein. Whatever real Relation to each
other is founded in their common Union to Christ, yet they could not at all
perceive it. They would be Members of Christ, but utterly detached from each
other, and so not formerly a Body. It is only as incorporated in the visible
Church, that they are fitly placed in the Body, and can have any Knowledge one
of another, and to have any Fellowship.
, and is rendered visible, by a visible Transaction and external Administration
in various Ordinances; and comprehends sundry external Privileges for the
Advantage and spiritual Edification of the Church.

Here are not two Covenants, one for the invisible Church, and another for the
visible; for these are not two Churches, but a twofold Consideration of the
same Church, though undoubtedly considered as visible; she includes more
Members, than considered as individuals. -- The visible Church includes the
invisible. Wherever there is a true visible Church, there are, no doubt, a
Number of true Saints; from these as the better Part, the visible Church is
denominated; by their Faith, the Church lays hold on the Covenant, and her
Covenant Relation to God is maintained, and all visible Believers share in her
external Privileges, whatever their real internal State be. Accordingly then
one and the same Covenant, comprehends the whole Interests of the Church
considered both as visible and invisible, with Respect to internal, special,
spiritual Blessings, and external Privileges. The great God stands related to
the invisible Church, by Virtue of this Covenant, as her God by Way of special
Interest in him, and by the same Covenant to the visible Church, as visibly her
God and Lord.

It is the Covenant of Grace in this View, viz. as visibly subsisting between
God and his Church, considered as a visible Society, a public Body separated
and distinguished from the World, and dedicated to God, that the Sacraments are
annexed as visible Signs and Seals thereof. To this Purpose I would observe,
that when it pleased God first to set up his Church in Adam's Family, the Whole
was included. As there were none from whom to separate and distinguish his
Church, the Lord saw fit then to propose his Covenant more obscurely, and
designing that as a more imperfect Dispensation, he only taught them by
Sacrifices, thereby shadowing forth the Redemption of Sinners by Jesus Christ.
When Mankind greatly, though gradually degenerated, as he was not gathering his
Church out of the World, but Men went out of the Church, he did not still see
fit to appoint any public Badge of Distinction; but upon a general Apostasy, he
destroyed the old World, and the Church continued to exist in Noah's Family.
Thus he was pleased, as it were to give a new Edition of his Church, and the
whole World was again included in it. But when Mankind had again generally
revolted and turned aside to Idolatry, having promised and confirmed it by his
Bow in the Cloud, that he would no more destroy the World; he saw proper to
call Abraham out from amongst his Kindred, and erect his Church in his Family.
Here the blessed God more fully opens his great Plan, more explicitly proposes
his Covenant, and solemnly transacts it with Abraham, not as a private Person,
but as the Father of many Nations; comprising therein, not only his Family then
in being, but both the Jewish and Christian Church. It was proper, that a
Matter of so great and extensive Importance, should be transacted with peculiar
Solemnity, and that there should be some public Badge of Distinction between
the Church, thus separated to him, and the World. God was pleased, therefore,
to ratify his Covenant, and publicly distinguish his visible Church, from the
World, by the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. To
distinguish between the Church and the World, seems to be one important Design
of the initiating Seal of the Covenant; because in that, a Person's Membership
in the Church is publicly declared and ratified. Commemorative Signs, such as
the Passover of the Lord's Supper, are designed to establish, edify and quicken
those who are in the Church, rather than to distinguish them from those who are
without. But the initiating Seal, as Circumcision or Baptism, though it has
other Ends in Common with the other Sacrament; yet is particularly designed as
God's Mark set upon Persons, to distinguish them from the World, as his. Thus,
though he had indulged the Frailties in the Omission of Circumcision, while
traveling in the Wilderness I say indulged their Omission, not because he had
excommunicated them, for he had abundantly showed his Care of, and Regard to
the Congregation of Israel as still his People; and these who were
uncircumcised, were not the Subject of the resentful Sentence God had
pronounced, but those who fell in the Wilderness, upon whom it was fully
executed.
, partly because of their continual journeying, and partly because they were
then entirely at a Distance from all other Nations; (otherwise he could have
ordered them to delay their Journey for a Time, in Order, to perform it;) yet
when they came over Jordan among the Canaanites, they must not enter upon the
War until they were circumcised; as also, in order to the Celebration of the
Passover. This Day, says the Lord, have I rolled away the Reproach of Egypt
from off you, i. e. your being uncircumcised like the Egyptians from amongst
whom ye came. Josh. v. 9.

Hence appears the great Impropriety of private Baptisms, unless where real
Necessity requires it. Seeing it is God's public Seal, it should be publicly
applied; as it is a Sign and Seal of Membership in the visible Church of
Christ, it should be transacted in the Face of the Church.

V. Sundry important Uses of the Sacraments have been already suggested in the
foregoing Observations. Yet it may be proper here to recollect, and more
explicitly attend to them, together with some others not expressly mentioned,
that we may have them more fully before us in one View. And

First. As Signs of the Covenant of Grace; they serve in the first Place, to
give divine Truths a more easy Access to the Mind, with more fixed Impression.
Such is the strange Connection between Soul and Body in the present State, that
they mutually affect each other. Hence the Attention and Thoughts of the Mind
are excited to, and fixed upon Objects by the Exercise of the external Senses,
and by this Means it is more deeply affected. Thus, in Baptism, by the washing
with Water, the Efficacy of which is to cleanse, we are led to contemplate our
Guilt and moral Pollution by Sin, the Efficacy of the atoning Blood of Christ
to remove Guilt, and of the Holy Spirit's Influences to purify the Heart; the
Excellency, Freeness and Abundance of the spiritual Blessings, etc. The
Elements of Bread broken and Wine, which was pressed from the Grape in the
Lord's Supper; suggest to our Remembrance the painful Anguish and violent Death
of Christ, when his Body was broken on the Cross, and his precious Blood was
shed. 1 Cor. xi. 26. Bread, which is the Staff of Life, and Wine which chears
the Heart, points out Christ as the Source of Life, Strength and Consolation;
and while many partake of the same Bread, and the same Cup, it denotes their
Communion with one another, as Members of the same Body of Christ.

Second. They serve as visible Signs of the Existence of the Covenant of Grace
between God and his People, and so renders their Covenant Relation to God
visible. Yea, in the Participation of the Sacraments, the Covenant is visibly
transacted; consenting to the Covenant, whereby Persons truly enter into it, is
an internal Act of the Heart, invisible, and purely personal, in which there
can be no social Concurrence of the Church. It was, therefore, necessary there
should be some external Solemnity, some visible Transaction, whereby it should
be declared, rendered visible, and wherein the Church can unite and have
Fellowship. Thus God says of Circumcision, it shall be a Token of the Covenant
betwixt me and you. Genesis xvii. 11. Therefore, 3dly, these Signs are public
Badges of Distinction between the Church and the World. They are, as it were
God's Mark, whereby he publicly challenges the Church as his, and Persons are
visibly separated to his Service; and especially, in the initiating Sacrament,
one particular Design of which, is to signify and confirm our visible
Membership in the Church.

2dly. As Seals confirming the Covenant of Grace, they primarily Seal the Truth
and Certainty of Gospel Promises according to their true Tenor. They confirm
the certain Connection by divine Constitution, between Faith in Christ and the
Pardon of Sin, and the Vouchsafement of all spiritual Blessings; and that in
this Way, God will be his People's God, and not otherwise. 2d. They confirm the
Obligations of the Covenant upon all those who partake of them. They are bound
to cleave to the Righteousness of Christ, to give up their Hearts to God, and
to serve him in all holy Obedience; to observe his Statutes, and attend upon
all his Ordinances. Mat. xxviii. 20. Hence the Offenses and Disobedience of
visible Church Members are peculiarly resented as a Breach of Covenant. Hos.
vi. 7, ad Fin. 3. When Persons do truly consent to the Covenant by embracing
Jesus Christ, then, and not otherwise, the Sacrament Seal, is a personal saving
Interest in the Promises of the Covenant. The Seals of the Covenant confirms
its Promises only as they are proposed, and not as they are not. Therefore,
whoever only visibly consents to the Covenant, but not with the whole Heart,
though the Sacraments seal the Truth and certainty of the Promises in
themselves, s. gr. Whosoever believes shall be saved, etc. (the Connection
between Faith and Salvation is ratified. Hence Sinners have sure Ground to go
upon in venturing upon Christ) yet they do not confirm an Interest in the
Promise of Salvation to this Person while he does not truly believe; but when
he truly believes, the Seals of the Covenant, in sealing or ratifying the
certain Connection between Faith and Salvation, consequently seals his personal
Interest in the Promise of Salvation; as being one of the Characters to which
the Promise is made and ratified. 4. They seal to the Church, as a visible
Society, the external Privileges of the Covenant; such as the Care and
Discipline of the Church over her several Members; the Ordinances of Worship by
which the Covenant is administered, a Gospel Ministry, and the Care of divine
Providence both in correcting and in preserving and protecting her, etc. from
all which, completely taken, it appears,

3dly, The Sacraments are designed to promote and maintain the external Purity,
and visible Holiness of the Church, and this they do two Ways. First, they lay
Bonds upon the Conscience. Sacramental Transactions include in them the most
solemn Engagements to be the Lord's, to renounce the Service of Sin, and to
walk in the Way of God's Commandments. These Engagements affect the Conscience,
and, at least, lay Restraints upon Men, whereby they are kept in from the
external Practice of Sin, and excited to practice the external Duties of
Religion: hereby the visible Reputation of Religion is much preserved. Those
who look upon themselves free from these Obligations, though they own the
Doctrines of the Gospel to be true, and would rather claim the Christian Name
than any other, yet more generally live as they list, and still their
Consciences sleep pretty secure; hereby the Name of God is greatly dishonored.
I really think, the so general Neglect of the Lord's Table much promotes this
Security in the Indulgence of sinful Practices and Neglect of Religion. People
entertain an unaccountable Notion, that Baptism, which they received in
Infancy, does not so deeply bind them to such great Strictness in the Ways of
Holiness; and therefore, while they keep back from the other Sacrament, they
may take a greater Latitude. 2. They give Existence and Efficacy to Discipline.
In order to the very being of Discipline, there must be something from which
Persons may be debarred, or cut off, consistent with the great Design of the
Gospel; and it must be something of very great Importance. But this cannot
consist in debarring any from hearing the Word preached, and the other Means of
Instruction; for that would be to give up with them altogether, and use no more
Means for their Conversion. It must therefore lie in debarring them from the
Seals of the Covenant, till they appear penitent, where the lighter Censures,
such as Admonitions and Rebukes, are found ineffectual or inadequate, and
indeed these would not be regarded as Censures, if the Contumacious had no
higher to expect. The Government of Christ's House could not be kept up, if
there were no Penalties to be inflicted in his Name. The Efficacy of Discipline
lies in affecting and awing the Conscience; but what can so effectually do
this, as suspending Offenders from the Privilege of communicating with God's
People in the Seals of the Covenant, either in dedicating their Children to God
in Baptism, or approaching the Lord's Table, until they appear, in dealing with
him, to be brought to Repentance? Or finally cutting them off, when their
Conduct shall be found such as amounts to a full, obstinate, and avowed
Violation of their Covenant Obligations? If they have any Regard to
Christianity at all, they will dread the Thoughts of being reduced to the State
of Heathen Men and Publicans. See 1 Cor. x. 21, 22. Cap. v. Verse 3, 4, 5. 2
Cor. ii. 6, 7, 8.

4thly. These Holy Ordinances seem to be instituted to show, that the blessed
God is not to be put off with acknowledging in general Terms, the Truth of
Gospel Doctrines, and that Religion is good, and ought to be chosen. He demands
our avowed Choice of it, and that we avouch the Lord for our God. The Lord, by
these Institutions, as it were, says, I will bring the Matter to a Point with
you Sinners. You acknowledge me to be the only true God, and that you ought to
serve me; come then to a Resolution on the Matter. Here are the Terms of
Salvation, and on which I will be your God, proposed to you in a Way of
gracious Covenant, either accept or refuse; enter into solemn, openly avowed
Obligations to me, or disown me, and declare you will not take me for your God.
Choose you this Day whom you will serve, the Lord, or your own Heart's Lusts.
Either join yourselves openly to my People, or acknowledge you will not be of
them. Surely, if Men viewed Things in this Point of Light, it would have a
strong Tendency to awaken them to solemn Exercises of Heart about this Matter.

5thly, The Sacraments are, in a special Manner, calculated and designed to
cherish, quicken and strengthen the Graces of the Holy Spirit in true
Believers. They exhibit Jesus Christ and him crucified, (the great Object of a
justifying Faith) and the glorious blessings he has purchased to the Mind in a
very striking and lively Manner. Such Pledges of the divine Faithfulness; such
solemn Confirmations of the Promises of Life and Salvation through the
Redemption of Christ, lay the firmest Foundation for the Confidence, and most
intense acting of Faith. Here are the most affecting Representations of the
Love and Grace of God toward his Children. Surely then, the Influence of the
Holy Spirit concurring with all these Exhibitions, must needs envigorate Faith,
quicken and raise the Affections, and enliven every Grace. These Ordinances,
therefore, are often Means of the most sweet and near Communion with God.

VI. The foregoing Observations, if duly attended to, I think, throw
considerable Light upon this Question; viz. Who are the proper Subjects of the
Sacraments? as may, perhaps, more fully appear by and by. This Question has a
Respect to two Sorts of Persons, viz. those who are born out of the Church, and
so must enter at such Years of such Understanding as to be capable of
transacting for themselves, if ever they do; and such as are born in the
Church, i. e. of Parents who are themselves visible Church Members. The latter
have a Right to Membership by Virtue of the Covenant, as subsisting between God
and his visible Church. It is true, the Child's Right to Membership follows the
Right of the Parents, either both, or any one of them. Hence, if Parents be
suspended from Privileges by the Censures of the Church, or charged with such
Offenses as expose thereto, the Child's Right is in Suspense until that
stumbling block be removed; for hereby the Parents Right is called in Question.
The Reason is, that though the Parents are not cut off from Membership, but
only under a temporary Suspension from Privilege; by which Discipline, the
Church is dealing with them, in order to bring them to Repentance, and to
behave as becomes Members, and so recover their Right; yet, if to such Offense,
they should add obstinate Impenitence, and all due Pains to bring them to
Repentance, prove ineffectual; they would be cut off. In that Case, they would
be excluded all Right, and so could not be a Medium, by which their Child could
derive any. Therefore, their Conduct, in the mean while, renders their Right
doubtful until they appear to repent; consequently, the Child's Right is
doubtful also. But still, it is not the Faith of the Parents, ever considered
as visible, which immediately confers the Right upon the Child. For an Act of
Faith, considered simply as such, is merely personal, and can communicate
Nothing to another; but it is from the Parent's visible Interest in the
Covenant, and its external Privileges, in consequence of their visible Faith,
(of which Privileges, its comprehending their Infant Seed together with
themselves, is an important one) that the Child derives its Right of
Membership, i. e. from the Parent's visible Church Membership.

As to the former, viz. such as are born out of the Church, they have no Right
of Membership, until, by their own personal Transaction, they acquire it. This
is done by acknowledging the Doctrines of the Gospel to be true, yielding
Subjection to the Laws and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and publicly embracing
the true Religion and expressing a Consent to the Covenant of Grace in the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the Door of Entrance, and Seal of Membership.
Thus the Son of the Stranger joins himself to the Lord, by taking hold of his
Covenant. Isaiah lvi. 6.

But in Order to throw greater Light upon my Subject in my further
Consideration of it, I think it necessary to stop while I consider another
Question of great Importance here, viz. What is that Profession of true
Religion which constitutes Membership in the visible Church? I say, constitutes
Membership. For, to be visibly one of the true Religion, and to be a Member of
the visible Church, is the same Thing. Now, this includes in it an
Acknowledgment of the Doctrines of the Gospel as true, and Obligation of the
Laws of Christ, both verbal; for with the Mouth, Confession is made unto
Salvation. Romans x. 9, 10.) and practical by Obedience, and partaking of Baptism
as a Sign and Seal of embracing the true Religion, and Dedication to God and
his Service. In which Covenant Relation to God thus solemnly ratified, visible
Church Membership formally lies. Membership in the Church is pre-requisite to,
and supposed in approaching to the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, but
not constituted by it. In this Sacrament, former Engagements are recognized and
renewed; and the Edification and spiritual Advantage of those already Members
of the Church, is promoted. Now, the aforesaid Profession and Dedication is
either actual, when Persons are arrived to Years of Understanding, and transact
for themselves, or virtual; in the Profession and Transactions, in their
Behalf, of those who have a Right to dedicate them to God, as in the Case of
Infants. These are comprehended in the Covenant with the Church as the Seed of
professing Parents, and are visibly Children of the Promise, their Parents are
engaged to train them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, and teach
them, from their early Childhood, the Ways of true Religion. As they become
capable of Instruction, it is expected of them that they will be acquainted
with, and acknowledge the Truths, and practice the Duties of Religion; and are
reputed the Professors of it until they disavow it. If any Thing contrary to
this should appear, either in neglecting the known Duties of Religion or
Immoralities in Practice; they ought to be dealt with by the Discipline of the
Church, until they are either reclaimed, or regularly cut off. To the Neglect
of this, no doubt, it is in a great Degree owing, that there is so much
Negligence in Matters of Religion amongst Youth. Now all these together, and
none of them alone, amount to a visible Profession of true Religion. The most
orthodox Sentiments only show, that a Person owns sound Principles to be true,
at least understands them, but does not amount to a Profession of embracing
them. The Practice of religious Duties affords yet a higher Probability, that
the Doctrines of Religion make some Impression upon the Heart, yet does not
signify upon what Principles a Person professes to act; whether from a supreme
Regard to God, or merely from Custom, etc. but when to both these is added, a
solemn Covenant-Transaction, in partaking of a Seal thereof instituted on
Purpose, not only to confirm the Truth of the Gospel on God's Part, but to
express the Man's Consent to the Covenant of Grace, and Dedication of himself
to the Lord, to serve him upon the Principles thereof; then the Matter becomes
determinate and fixed; if he does all this with his whole Heart, he is a true
Christian. By this external Profession he visibly appears such, and never does
appear such, until he partake of, at least, the initiating Seal and Token of
the Covenant. As the Word and Sacraments are the Marks of the true Church, so
they are of the true Christian.

There are, indeed, who place a Profession of true Religion in something beside
the abovementioned, and altogether prior to coming to Sacraments, namely some
Declaration that they do so far as they know themselves, accept of Christ as
their Savior, and take God for their God, and give themselves up to his
Service with all their Hearts. Upon this Principle, many Ministers draw up a
Covenant in Form, containing such Expressions as the above. This they require
Persons to take publicly, previous to their approaching the Lord's Table. or
presenting their Children to Baptism. No doubt a Minister should be very
careful in examining such as he admits to Sacraments. Hereby he will detect the
grossly ignorant, who ought, on that Account, to be debarred. In this Way he
will be under better Advantages for apprehending what Views and Sense of Things
they have, and to judge what Advices it may be proper to give them; but I have
some Exceptions to the Requisition of a Declaration of such a Tenor, or taking
a Covenant drawn up in such a Set Form. I doubt it will rather prove a Snare,
than be of any real Advantage. Such a Covenant is designed either, as an
immediate Transaction with God, or as a solemn Declaration to the Church, for
their greater Satisfaction as to the Persons admitted. In the former View, it
is useless and superfluous; for it is only doing the same Thing that is done in
partaking of the Seals of the Covenant, which God has instituted as public
Signs, and solemn Ratifications of such a Transaction; with this Difference,
that instead of the public Actions of Divine Appointment as Signs, to which the
Word of God has affixed such a Sense, such a particular Form of Expression is
proposed as the public Sign; and with respect to Persons already baptized, it
seems to insinuate, that they are not already in the Church, and in Covenant
with God by Virtue of their Baptism, which is contrary to Fact. But are not the
Signs which our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed, and the Manner of covenanting
which he has prescribed sufficient, without the Addition of our own Inventions
to supply the Defect?

But if only a Declaration, as Matter of Satisfaction to the Church, is
designed; pray, will it afford better Evidence of a Man's Sincerity of Heart,
to hear him pronounce such Words, than to see him use Actions, which, by Divine
Appointment, signify substantially the same Thing? and therefore, of the same
Import with the aforesaid Declaration? To require such a Declaration is to
require a Person to pronounce or affirm something concerning the Exercises of
his own Heart as a Term of Admission. This cannot be considered as a
Declaration of a Matter of Fact, but only his Opinion, or, at most, Judgment of
himself. Now his Judgment may be formed upon Evidence, that is really such to
himself. But, pray, what Evidence is that to others? Here I doubt, the formal
Professor will be more ready to pronounce, than many a true Christian. I would
appeal to the Ministers who are in this Practice, whether on the one Hand, they
don't find Reason to fear that these Declarations, or even Covenants, are sunk
to Matter of mere Form; and on the other, whether they don't find a Number of
poor perplexed Souls, upon whom they must look in a Judgment of scriptural
Charity, as the Children of God; who yet are full of Apprehension they have not
the saying Grace of God. Yea, their prevailing Opinion may be on that Side, and
dare not make such a peremptory Declaration, either to their Fellow-men, or in
a Covenant-Transaction with God; and though many a Salvo be proposed, yet their
Conscience is not satisfied. May not a Christian really give up his Heart to
God, and yet not be able to declare he has done so, even in his own Judgment?
Others may flatter themselves that they have really consented to the Covenant,
when, indeed, it is otherwise. Can it be the Divine Will that Matters should be
set upon so precarious a Footing, and such a Snare should be laid for Men, to
embarrass their Way? Shall our Duty be directed by so uncertain a Rule;

If it be objected here, that I maintain sacramental Transactions to be
substantially of the same Import, and the Sacraments are Signs of our Consent
to the Covenant of Grace, and will not that involve the same Difficulty?

I answer, No. The Sacraments are indeed Signs of our Consent to the Covenant;
but they are not Signs of our Opinion of the Kind of that Consent too; they are
not Signs of our declaring that Consent to be true and saving. It is one Thing
really to consent; and another to be able to pronounce that Consent to be
Right; the Command of God is a plain Rule of Duty. A Person, therefore, under
great Perplexity about the State of his Soul, may yet find himself bound in
Conscience to attempt Obedience to God. Very true, he ought to have in View the
Nature of the Duty, and what is required of him in it. He is required to give
the full Consent of his Heart to the new Covenant, and yield himself up to God.
This is the Business that lies before him, and which he is to attempt in
receiving the Seals of the Covenant, but here is no Set Form of Words he is to
use; he will transact with God in such mental Language as best expresses the
Frame of his Heart. Perhaps, he cannot feel that Freedom of Heart he desires,
and dare not say, I do consent; I do give up my Heart to thee O God, but can
only say, I desire to cleave to Christ; O to be found in him! O that I could
get my Heart opened, and full of Cheerfulness in giving myself away to the
Lord. If he has just Apprehensions of these Things, and these Desires under
these Apprehensions are really from his Heart, he does conconsent, and yield
himself to God; and yet, at the same Time, may be far from being satisfied that
he has done so, but go away full of bitter Complaints. It is easy to see the
wide Difference in the two Cases.

But it is Time to return to the Question I left. When the Sons of the Stanger
are instructed in the Doctrines of the Gospel, are convinced in their Judgment
and Conscience, they are true and exhibit the true Religion; that they are
bound by the Authority of God to embrace it, and yield Obedience to the Divine
Laws; it is their immediate Duty to embrace it, and that publicly and avowedly
by joining themselves to the Lord, and his Church, in the Sacrament of Baptism;
and thus make a public Profession of the true Religion, come under solemn
Obligations to walk in the Ways of God's Commandments, and under the Care and
Discipline of the Church. The blessed God will not have Matters lying loose,
but has appointed the Sacraments to bring them to a Point, and to reduce
Persons to some Determination, either to appear for God and Religion, or reject
him; nor may they plead, by Way of Excuse, that though they are convinced of
the Truth of the Christian Religion, and that all this is their Duty, yet their
Hearts hang back and do not yield. God will not sustain this as a Plea. Shall
their Disobedience stand as a good Argument why they should not obey? Surely
they are more likely to obtain Divine Grace in the Church, than out of it among
the Heathen; they ought to stretch out the withered Hand, to attempt giving
themselves to the Lord in Covenant. They are to set the Terms of the Covenant
in View, and attempt to give the Consent of their Heart, and that in the solemn
Transaction which God has commanded. How know they, but while they are
attempting, the Heart may be made to yield? or, if it still hang back, and does
not go forth in Acts of Faith: Are they not likely to be more exercised about
the Matter, now they are under solemn Obligation thereto, than when they had
not come under it?

Now, all baptized Persons, I have already showed, are visible Members of the
Church of Christ. By this Dedication, they are bound to attend upon all the
Duties and Ordinances belonging to the Christian Character, as they shall
arrive to sufficient Strength of natural Powers; different Duties require
different Degrees of natural Ability. The Want of this will excuse from the
Discharge of Duties, which would otherwise be incumbent, but Want of moral
Ability, through our Default, does not excuse at all. Therefore, I say, they
stand bound, by their baptismal Dedication, to serve God in all the Duties of
the Christian Religion, for which they have a sufficient natural Capacity; and
it is given in Commission to the Ministers of the Gospel, to teach those they
have discipled to observe all Things whatsoever Christ has commanded. Mat.
xxviii. 20. Now the Lord's Supper is one of those Things he has commanded his
Disciples. Therefore, all baptized Persons are bound, as they come to Years of
Understanding, to attend upon it.

It is indeed here to be observed, that such as are grossly ignorant, (having
sufficient natural Capacity) or Guilty of gross Immoralities, or habitually
neglect the known Duties of practical Religion, are to be excluded from the
Sacraments by the regular Exercise of Church Discipline. till by Repentance and
Reformation they remove the Offense. The Reason is, that these Things are such
visible Violations of, and Contradictions to the Covenant, that to admit such,
would destroy one great Design of the Sacraments, viz. to preserve the external
Holiness and Purity of the Church, and be visible Signs of our Consent to God's
gracious Covenant, and avouching the Lord for our God; for they, who, by their
Works deny God, cannot be supposed to choose him. It would be, in Short, to
prostitute the Ordinance, and leave no visible Difference between the
Deportment of Church Members and the World, and destroy all Distinction of the
Church from those who are without. But all this is so far from infering, that
the Law commanding Attendance upon Sacraments does not bind them; that it
supposes the contrary. For how else can this Prohibition be considered as a
Penalty and Privation of Privilege? It is upon this Principle, viz. the
Obligation of the Duty, that such Censure serves to affect the Conscience, and
awaken the Offender to Repentance, that he may be restored. The Ground of such
a Censure must be some Fact or Facts, which can be certainly known and judged
of; and of such a Nature as, if obstinately persisted in, after all due Pains
taken with the Party, would cut him off from all Right of Membership. The
Obligation to attend those Holy Ordinances, binds such Offenders to shun the
Scandals which exclude them; and by thus excluding themselves, they very
criminally turn their Backs upon them.

But the Church has the Authority of Christ for thus excluding the Scandalous,
1 Cor. v. 11. But now I have written unto you, says the Apostle, not to keep
Company, if any Man, that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or covetous, or
an Idolator, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one,
no, not to eat. I am not so clear as some Commentators seem to be, that the
eating here mentioned does not mean eating at the Lord's Table, because
connected with the Caution not to keep Company, I rather think it does; for
they are plainly Matters of Discipline of which the Apostle speaks, and a
Conduct consequent upon the Church's passing Judgment, as appears by the next
Verse; and it was natural enough to observe, that such a Judgment passed upon a
Person, infered an Obligation on Church Members, to avoid even that civil
Society or Company with such a Person, which they might allow themselves in
with their Heathen Neighbors. However, if it intend eating in ordinary Meals,
the Argument from this Passage, in Support of Discipline, will still hold good.
For if we must avoid civil Society or Fellowship with a Person at his, or our
own Table, much more, such a solemn Act of Communion as eating with him at the
Lord's Table. But all regular Members of the visible Church of Understanding
sufficient to be able to attend to the Lord's Supper as a commemorative Sign,
are bound, by the Authority of Jesus Christ, to show forth his Death till he
come and are highly criminal in neglecting it; and such as are Parents, are
bound to dedicate their Children to God in Baptism. By this Means, the visible
Church is propagated and preserved. It is doubtless one End of the Ordinance of
Baptism, to collect Materials into the Church, and under the Ordinances of the
Gospel, as Subjects of divine Influences.

It will be objected here, that many baptized Persons, yea, it is to be feared
the greater Part, are unregenerate, and unbaptized Persons may be convinced in
their Consciences, that the Christian Religion is true, and it is their Duty to
embrace it, yet be still in a natural State; therefore it will follow, that the
unregenerate ought to come to Sacraments, this their unhappy State
notwithstanding. I admit the Consequence; they are under the same Obligation to
this as to other Duties of Religion.

If it be said, that if the unregenerate are bound to come to Sacraments, then
it will follow, that the Sacraments are not visible Signs of true Christians,
or of a visible Profession of true Religion.

I deny the Consequence. It no more follows on this than the contrary
Supposition; for on all Hands it is granted that many unregenerate Persons do
come to Sacraments: Indeed, if I alleged, no more was required of them in that
Transaction, than an unregenerate Sinner, continuing such, can do, then the
aforesaid Consequence would follow. For the Sacraments can be visible Signs of
no more than they signify or is required in them: But I only say, the Persons
who are unregenerate, are, notwithstanding, really bound, by the Authority of
God, to this, as well as any other Duty of Religion, they disobey him in
neglecting it; nor will their Unregeneracy be any Plea for their Neglect. But
yet they are bound to do all in attending that the true Christian does: To
accept Christ as their Savior, make Choice of God as their God, and to give
themselves wholly to him. He requires the unregenerate to make them new Hearts,
and turn into the Lord. Ezekiel. xviii. 31, 32. And surely he may justly require
them to do this with external Solemnity by Way of Covenant, and visibly avow
and ratify their joining themselves to the Lord. By the Institution of these
Ordinances, the Lord, as it were, says to Sinners, it will not do only to
entertain a good Opinion of Religion as true and necessary, but I insist upon
it, that you will either embrace or reject it; avouch me as your God, or
disavow me. Choose you this Day whom you will serve. here is my Covenant; here
are the Terms of Salvation; these Overtures I solemnly ratify; on my Part, by
these public Signs and Seals, as most sure Foundations, on which you may safely
depend, and I demand that you strike a Covenant with me, and openly confirm it
by receiving these Seals thereof. If, indeed, in this Transaction your Hearts
hang back, and don't consent, I cannot approve and accept you; yet if you
neglect this Institution, and will not so much as make the Attempt to yield
yourselves; I will consider this as an open and avowed Rejection of me and my
Service. Is there any Thing unreasonable in this Requisition? and who can tell
but that in setting these Matters solemnly before them, and attempting, in
Obedience to God's Commands to give themselves up to him in these solemn
Covenant-transactions, the Holy Spirit may concur, and make the Heart to yield?
If it do, the Business is done; they are true Christians; and who that beholds
these solemn Transactions, can say the Heart does not consent? Therefore, the
Sacraments are visible Signs of a Profession of true Religion, and the Persons
who partake of them are to be treated as Christians, till the contrary appears.

It is sometimes said, that the unregenerate are, indeed, obliged to come to
Sacraments, but not immediately: It is their Duty, but not their immediate
Duty. They are first to come to Christ, and then come to Sacraments.

To which I answer, then it is not now their Duty in present Circumstances;
therefore their staying back is so far from being criminal, that they do right.
To talk of the mediate Obligation of a Law prescribing Duty, is a
Contradiction. The Law either obliges a Person now, or it does not oblige him.
In a Covenant or Promise, there may be a conditional Obligation, which depends
upon some Event, or something to be done by another as the Condition. Yet even
then, until the Condition takes Place, there is no actual Obligation. But a Law
obliges without any other Condition than the rightful Authority of the
Legislator, and it obliges all, to whom it is given, to immediate Obedience
from the Time of its Promulgation, or Commencement; and the Neglect of it
exposes to Punishment as a Disobedience, Cases of natural Inability only
excepted.

As to the newly invented Plea, that God commands no unregenerate Duties (a
very odd Phrase) or does not command unregenerate Men, as such, to do Duties.
It really does not deserve a serious Answer; for the meaning must be, either,
that the Law of God does not command any Duties to be done upon the Principles
from which unregenerate Men act, or in the Manner, in which only they can
perform them, while they continue such, and then, it is nothing to the Purpose.
None of my Reasonings are built upon, or require any such Supposition. No, it
is a spiritual holy Obedience that is required of them; the same that is
required of the most holy Saint; and their Unregeneracy or moral Inability,
affords them no Excuse, -- Or else it must intend, that Persons, who are
unregenerate, are not comprehended in the Obligation of the Law; it does not
command them to do any Thing in Religion, till they shall be regenerated. The
very mention of which so glares with Absurdity, that I believe there will none
be found daring enough to assert it. For, upon that Supposition, the
unregenerate would be set free from all Obligation to the Practice of Duty at
once; their Neglect of all Religion would be no Disobedience.

But it is objected, there is a Difference between natural and positive, or
instituted Duties. The former, as Prayer for Instance, bind all Mankind, by
Virtue of the original Law given to Man in Innocence; but the latter are, by
the Qualifications required in them, limited to the Persons, in whom the
Qualifications are found.

Answ. Natural Duties are qualified, as well as positive. Gracious Principles,
and a holy Manner of Action are equally required in both. Nor will the original
Obligation of the moral Law natural, make any Difference in the Case. For it is
a Principle of that Law, that whatsoever positive Institutions God shall make
known as his Will, are to be obeyed. Positive Laws as universally bind all of
the general Character to which they are directed, as do natural. Nor do the
Qualifications required in Duties, at all limit the Subjects of the Law. The
divine Legislator does not give his Laws in this Manner, viz. Whosoever have
the Qualifications required in them, are to perform the enjoined Duties; but he
requires Duties so and so qualified absolutely, without IF or AND, of all who
claim a Share in the general Character to which they belong. All, who call
themselves Christians, stand obliged to all the Duties of Christians as such.

If it be objected, that partaking of Sacraments imports a Consent to the
Covenant of Grace, which unregenerate Sinners cannot give: And surely God does
not require Persons to declare a Lie, and that in so solemn a Manner.

I answer, the blessed God is so far from requiring any to declare a Lie, that
he commands them to transact in this Covenant with all their Hearts. As he has
instituted Sacraments, so he requires all to attend upon them with all the
Qualifications requisite in such Attendance. Their Want of the Qualifications
does not excuse the Neglect of the external Duty one Moment; for their rightful
Sovereign does not admit their continuing unholy one Moment; and therefore,
there is no Plea for Disobedience in any one Instance. The Obligation of God's
Law does not turn upon the internal Qualifications of the Subjects, but the
rightful Authority of the Lawgiver; and it is sufficient to justify this, that
Man had originally sufficient Ability to obey all the Will of God in a proper
Manner, but lost it by his own Default. The blessed God, therefore, has a just
Right to command all that is justly due from the Subjects of his Government, in
the most absolute Manner, whatever their present internal Qualifications may
be. Nor can it be said, that even the Unregenerate do not, in some Sense,
really consent to the Covenant. The Terms of the Covenant are set before them;
they acknowledge these to be the Terms, the only Terms of Salvation; they
yield, that it is just and right, that God should insist upon this as the only
Way of receiving Sinners to Favor; and consent that this Transaction shall
stand as a Winess against them if their Hearts stand back. It will stand good
against them as a visible public Consent, before God, Angels and Men; and be
pleadable, yea pleaded against them in the great Day of God, if their Hearts
shall be found wanting. This shows, it is not a vain Thing to require their
Attendance. Here is a sufficiently important, though not the only End of these
Institutions. The Transaction imports a Declaration, that they are at least
attempting to give their hearty Consent, but not a Declaration, whether that
Consent be truly sincere or not. The Sacraments are not instituted to be
visible Signs of Person's Opinion or Judgment concerning the Exercises of their
own Hearts; but Signs of visible Consent they are, which will be of great
Importance for the Illustration of the divine Justice, in the aggravated
Condemnation of Gospel Sinners.

It is further objected, that unregenerate Sinners, in partaking of Sacraments,
perjure themselves in the very Act, and sure God does not require Perjury.

Answ. It is not the Crime designed by the Name of Perjury. That consists in
calling God to Witness to the Truth of what the Party knows to be false. This
consists in the Non-Concurrence of the Heart in a solemn Engagement, into which
the Party enters. This is the unregenerate Sinner's great Fault in every holy
Duty, his Heart is not in it; and the greater Solemnity of a
Covenant-Transaction is no Doubt, a great Aggravation of his Crime: but it is
not taking God to Witness to a known Falsehood, he takes God to Witness,
indeed, to a solemn Engagement, which he visibly, publicly, and really enters
into, and declares. Though his Heart concurs not in the Manner God requires,
yet the Engagement is real; he will feel himself held and obliged to be the
Lord's. But he declares nothing herein about the Sincerity or Insincerity of
his Heart in this Transaction, or the Engagement he thus ratifies. Were it
understood to import so solemn a Declaration of the Person's Judgment of his
own Conduct, the Child of God, whose Heart sincerely consents, would often not
dare to make such a Declaration. To give Force to the Objection, it should be
supposed that the Person knowingly dissembles. That he publicly engages, only
to save Appearances, and to impose upon others for some Purpose or other, while
he explicitly and formally resolves in his Heart, he will not cleave to the
Lord to serve him, but walk after the Imagination of his own evil Heart; but
this is not to be alleged in this Case. The Person is supposed to set the
Terms of the Covenant in View, consider the Claim God has to him, and the
Obligations redeeming Love lays upon him; sets himself, from Conscience of
Duty, to present himself before the Lord, and attempt to give the Consent of
his Heart; and wishes, upon some Principle or other, there was such an Heart in
him. Thus far an unregenerate Sinner may go; and however his Heart fails in
this Matter, yet he constitutes a real Engagement which binds him to accept of
Christ, and be the Lord's forever. To this, God, Angels, and Men are Witnesses.
If these Things be duly considered, the Objection vanishes; and it will appear,
the unregenerate Sinner is no more chargeable with Perjury in receiving the
Sacraments, than with lying in Prayer; But would any one persuade him, by all
Means, not to dare to pray?

It is often objected, that the Unregenerate, when they partake of Sacraments,
put a Seal to a Blank.

Answ. If the Sacraments were primarily, and only Seals of a personal Interest
in the Covenant, there would be Weight in the Objection. But while the
Sacraments, in the Use of them, even by the Unregenerate, do really seal the
Truth and Certainty of the Covenant of Grace, in its true Tenor on God's Part;
and on the Communicant's Part a solemn Engagement, binding on his Conscience,
to embrace this Covenant, with all his Heart, and will stand firm against him,
for his aggravated Condemnation, if he does not; it is very far from being a
Seal to a Blank.

Again, it will be said, if the Sacraments were converting Ordinances, then all
should attend upon them as well as Prayer, hearing the Word, etc. but as they
are only sealing, and not converting Ordinances, the Case is otherwise.

Answ. All this is gratis Dictum, a mere Assertion without Proof. For my Part,
I know not how Divines have come by this Distinction of Ordinances into
converting and Non-converting. I don't know any Ordinance of the Gospel, which
is not a converting Ordinance. Surely, that the Sacraments are Seals, does not
hinder, but promotes their Tendency to the Conversion of Sinners. I think, we
have no Way to know, that any Ordinance is a converting Ordinance, but from its
native Tendency to that End, and its being used by God for that Purpose. Now,
what stronger Tendency can there be, to bring home Sinners to God, than the
Exhibition the Sacraments give of Christ; of the Way of Salvation through Faith
in his Blood; of the Grace of God, and the Stability of the new Covenant? their
very Design is to engage Men to come to a Point, and to close in with the Terms
of Salvation proposed in the Gospel.

If it be said, it will then follow, that the profane and scandalous ought to
be admitted to the Sacraments, that they may be converted.

Answ. So far from it, that directly the reverse is the Consequence. This is
one Circumstance, from whence arises the strong Tendency of Sacraments to
convert Sinners, viz. that they secure and promote the visible Holiness and
external Purity of the Church, and thereby distinguish her from the World. They
thus assert the Necessity of true Holiness, and point it out as the
distinguishing Character of God's People; but the Force of this Argument would
be lost, if no such Distinction was made. Yea, not merely be lost, but Sinners
would be greatly encouraged to continue secure in Sin.

It is an Objection of great Weight with some, that to admit unregenerate Men
to Sacraments, and teach them that they are bound to come, tends to flatter
their vain Hopes, make them secure, and build them up in Self-Righteousness. To
make out this Consequence, it is alleged, we must, in this Case, proceed upon
this Principle, viz. that some unregenerate Men have some good Principles, some
sincere Regard for, and liking to God in his proper Character; are in Heart
friendly to the Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ; have some real and proper
Desires for Holiness, (from a View of its Excellency, or for its own Sake, I
suppose) and an Interest in Jesus Christ; (which would be, I think, to suppose
they were not unregenerate, and so would be a Contradiction in Terms) and that
God so far approves and accepts them, as on that Ground to enter into Covenant
with them.

Answ. I think, it will appear from the whole I have said in the preceding
Pages, that the Matter depends on no such Principle. The Acceptableness of the
Persons and Duties of even the holiest Saints on Earth with God, is not at all
the Ground or Reason of his entering into Covenant with them. So far from it,
that their Acceptance with him is founded in the Covenant of Grace, and
provided for by it. To allege otherwise, would be to take the Arminian Side of
the Question indeed.

I readily grant the unhappy State and Character of all unregenerate Sinners;
they are at Enmity with God, and have no holy Dispositions, but are wholly
depraved. But is that any Reason why the great God, their rightful Sovereign,
shall not demand their immediate Submission and Return to him? He offers his
Mercy, and requires their Return in a Way of Covenant, and that transacted in a
visible public Manner. For this Purpose he instituted Sacraments, that they may
render the Covenant visible, and be a visible Expression or Token of Consent.
This Transaction, and that with the whole Heart, he requires without Delay.
Unregenerate though they be, yet since it is in the Way of his own Institutions
he meets with Sinners, they are to stretch out the withered Hand, and attempt
Obedience. It is the careless Admission of the profane and scandalous, and the
unfaithfulness of Ministers in neglecting to lay Matters fairly before People,
and address the Conscience with the Arguments arising from this Topic, that
depreciates the Sacraments, and promotes Security and Self-Righteousness.
Instead of the Consequences abovementioned, there would be the strongest
Tendency to convince and awaken the Conscience, and affect the Heart, upon
Supposition of the following Things, viz. that Discipline, whereby the openly
irreligious and profane are to be kept off, be duly exercised. That Ministers
deal faithfully with the Conscience, set the Terms of the Covenant fairly
before People, show them that a Consent to these is required in attending the
Sacraments, and nothing short of it will be accepted; that if their Hearts
refuse, they will grievously Sin, and be found Guilty before God; yet they may
not neglect his Institutions without ADDING to their Guilt by open
Disobedience. That they awaken them to look to, and carefully examine their
Hearts before and after such solemn Transactions; and press them to consider
their awful Guilt, if their Hearts are found wanting: yet show them, they are
under the Bond of the Covenant; are bound in Conscience to seek an Interest in
Christ with incessant Anxiety, and yield up their Hearts to God; and that, in
the great Day of Account, they will be dealt with as Covenant-Breakers if they
do not. Yea, those injurious Consequences rather follow on the other Side of
the Question. For, on that State of the Case, such unregenerate Sinners as come
to Sacraments, look upon their Admission as a Ground of Confidence that they
are true Christians; and thinking they are safe, sit down secure. Such as look
upon themselves as unprepared, apprehending they are not under a Necessity of
acting, conclude to neglect it, and so dismiss any further Care about
Preparation, and think themselves more at Liberty to indulge their Corruptions
through the Course of Life. Thus a Sense of Obligation by Virtue of their Baptism
is much destroyed.

I presume I have now taken Notice of the most weighty Objections to my
Sentiments, and by removing them, have gone, at least, a good Length toward
evincing the Truth of what I have advanced. However, there remain sundry
Arguments, which to me appear conclusive on the affirmative Side of the
Question; these I shall here take Liberty to propose, and

First, All those, who are convinced that the Christian Religion is true, are
immediately obliged to embrace and openly profess it; this is almost a
self-evident Proposition. For to suppose otherwise, would be to suppose, that
the blessed God had made known his Will, and proposed a System of Religion,
which yet Men, convinced of its Truth, were at Liberty to reject; and this
would be the same Thing, as to say, he had not a rightful Authority to oblige
them; the very Mention of this shows the glaring Absurdity. Now it necessarily
follows, that if such Persons are immediately bound to embrace the true
Religion, they are immediately bound to profess it, i. e. publicly consent to
it; for, when Religion is publicly proposed, not to profess and avow it, is
openly to disavow and reject it, there is no Medium. It is the most flat
Contradiction to imagine we embrace the true Religion, and at the same Time,
openly neglect and disavow it. But I have already showed, that to embrace the
true Religion is to enter into Covenant with God; without consenting to the
Covenant of Grace, there is no such Thing as embracing Religion. So to profess
Religion is openly and visibly to transact that Covenant; and this is done in
the Participation of the Sacraments, and not otherwise. There is no full formal
Profession of Religion antecedent to this; for without it, none are visibly in
Covenant, unless they can be visibly in Covenant without ratifying and sealing
it. In this Point of View, I think, the Scripture sets the Matter, Act. ii. 37,
38. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their Hearts, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins. The Apostle had laid before them the
Evidence of Christ's being the true MESSIAH, from the Fulfillment of ancient
Prophecies concerning him in his Resurrection from the Dead. The Consequence
was, they were convinced of the Truth of Christianity, and of their aggravated
Guilt in the Crucifixion of the Lord of Glory, full of Anxiety, they enquire
what to do. The Answer is, REPENT and be BAPTIZED, i. e. enter into Covenant
with God, publicly transacting and ratifying it by the Seal of Baptism. If it
be said here is the Order, first repent, and then be baptized. I answer,

First, This is no more than I have insisted on as necessary to be done, viz.
to set before Persons the Nature of true Religion and the Terms of Salvation,
and let them know that a cordial Compliance with all this is required, and
nothing short of it will do. This is fully consistent with what I have said,
and this they are to profess in their Baptism. Nor do they visibly profess
Repentance, while they stand back from this Ordinance. 2d. Though they are
called upon to repent, there is not the least Hint, that they were to defer
their Baptism until they should have Evidence, on which they might judge they
had saving Repentance. They were immediately to offer themselves to Baptism,
and were forthwith baptized; and in Consequence thereof, they went on in the
constant Attendance on all other Ordinances, they continued steadfastly in the
Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in the breaking of Bread, (i. e. the
Participation of the Lord's Supper) and in Prayer. Ver. 41.42. Also, Act. viii.
27, Philip tells the Eunuch, if thou believe with all thine Heart, thou may
[be baptized.] The Eunuch does not pronounce whether his Faith was saving or
not, but only professes a Belief of that Foundation Truth, that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and on this Declaration he was baptized.

The Heathen are not immediately obliged to embrace the Christian Religion, but
first to enquire into it; but such as are instructed and convinced in their
Judgment and Conscience of the Truth of Religion, are under a Necessity of
acting one Way or other about it, either to profess or reject it. This is one
Design of the Institution of Sacraments, that the Persons may be reduced to
this Necessity. What then shall they do? If they apprehend they are still
unregenerate, shall they, for that Reason, openly reject it? This is to go
against the Dictates of their own Consciences; or shall they publicly profess
their Belief of it, consent to its Obligation upon them, and resolve to appear
on the Side of Religion? One would think it very easy to decide on this Case,
and determine which Side was safest, and attended with least Guilt.

Arg. 2. All baptized Persons are, thereby, bound to perform all the Duties of
true Christians, as they shall become capable and have Opportunity, both as to
internal Exercises, and external Actions. I say, as they shall become capable;
for the greater Part are baptized in Infancy. But these, as well as all others,
are brought under the Bond of the Covenant. This should be early laid before
them, to let them see, that, by this Dedication to God, they are bound to
perform all Duties of Religion for which they have Capacity, to receive
Instruction, and appear for Religion as the Professors thereof. As soon as they
have a Competency of Knowledge, and are capable of the Discipline of the
Church, they are bound to commemorate the Death of Christ, and renew their
Engagements to him at his Table, unless regularly debarred by Discipline for
unchristian Conduct. When they shall become Parents, they are bound to dedicate
their Children to God in Baptism. In one Word, they are bound to continue
steadfast in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in the breaking of Bread
and Prayer. To say that Baptism, even when received in Infancy, does not bind
to all this, is to say, they are not bound by this Covenant to all Christian
Practice, till they come to the Lord's Table; that they are not obliged to
consider themselves as Professors of Religion in Consequence of their Baptism,
and that they are not chargeable with Breach of Covenant in neglecting to
appear for it, and standing back from the Lord's Supper; and that is, I think,
to represent Infant Baptism as a Matter of no great Benefit or Importance. Or,
are they hereby bound to all other Christian Duties, but not to come to the
Lord's Table? Where is the Ground or Scripture Authority for that Distinction?
Is there any Qualification requisite for this Duty; different in Kind from what
is required in other Duties? Is not true Grace or Holiness required in all
other Duties, as well as this? And is not this Ordinance among the all Things,
whatsoever he has commanded his Disciples, and which they are to be taught to
observe? Or, does the Unregeneracy of any, who, according to God's own
Institution, are visible Members of his Church, nullify this Obligation, so
that their Omission of this Ordinance is not their Sin? If it be said, as
indeed it frequently is, that they are, it is true, bound by the Divine Command,
and Non-Attendance on the Lord's Table is their Sin; yet such is their
Disqualification, that they sin more, and contract greater Guilt by coming,
than staying away; so that upon the whole, it is safer for them to abstain. I
answer, if there is any Weight in the Objection, it will hold equally with
Respect to all the other Duties of Religion; for such are equally disqualified
for the Performance of them; and so the Unregenerate are at once set free from
all Obligation, as visible Church Members or baptized Persons, to the Law of
God. A Consequence, which I believe few, but the Disciples of Sandiman, will
choose to admit; besides this Objection is Self-Contradictory. For if they Sin
more in coming, and upon the whole it is safer to abstain, it must be, because
it is not the Will of God they should attempt to obey him with Respect to this
Ordinance: They are excepted from the Command to observe it; if so, they are
under no Obligation to observe it. To abstain, is, therefore so far from being
their Sin, as this Objection supposes, that it is their Duty, they do right.
For to suppose two contradictory Obligations to take Place at the same Time, by
the same Law, is a gross Contradiction; for they either mutually destroy each
other, or, at least, the one of them makes the other void. And to suppose a
present Obligation, and yet that the safest Course is to counteract or violate
it, is a glaring Absurdity.

Arg. 3. The Authority of God, instituting and appointing Sacraments in his
visible Church, is the Ground and Reason of the Obligation on visible Church
Members to observe them; and his Command to observe them, is the Rule of their
Duty, and not any internal Qualification in them. Therefore, all visible
Church Members are immediately obliged to attend upon them, let their internal
State be what it will. The internal Qualification required in Attendance on
Sacraments, cannot be the Ground or Condition of the Command to attend upon
them; for God requires and commands the Qualification itself, however destitute
of it many may be. Surely he, who has a Right to command the Qualification, has
a Right to command immediately and absolutely the Performance of the Duty
itself, in which such Qualification is required, whether the Persons be
possessed of it or not. Consequently, all who share in the visible Character,
to which the Sacraments, by Appointment belong; i. e. all visible
Church Members, stand immediately obliged to attend upon them, and that with
the Qualification required whether they actually have it or not. They stand
obliged to this in the same Manner, as they do to any other Duty of Religion:
Now the Divine Command in the Case is the Rule, the only Rule of their Duty;
and if the Command extend to all visible Church Members, then it is an explicit
Rule which can be applied with Certainty. But, upon this Principle, viz, that
the Command to attend Sacraments is so limited and qualified, as to exclude and
prohibit all visible Church Members who are unregenerate; it will be impossible
to apply it with Certainty in many Cases; for then, the Rule of Interpretation
must be some Judgment of People's internal States; but none, whose Judgment
deserves any Notice, allege that Church Officers can judge in that Case, for
they know not the Hearts of others, and therefore many Ministers don't require
any Account of their Exercises from those they admit; but only a Profession of
having, so far as they know their own Hearts, embraced Jesus Christ, and given
themselves up to God, upon which they are admitted, Now this Profession is only
a Declaration of their Opinion or Judgment of their Exercises of Heart, or
internal State. Consequently, the Party's own Judgment, in this Case, is the
Rule of interpreting and applying the Divine Command; and according to this,
they are to conduct themselves. In this Declaration, they place that Profession
of true Religion, or their being visibly the People of God, which is required
in Order to their Admission. But surely, we have nothing made visible here, but
their Judgment of themselves. Pray how does this render their Profession of
Religion more visible, than their acknowledging the Doctrines of the Gospel as
Divine Truths, and manifesting their Influence, by a Practice agreeable to
them? Nothing does this, short of publicly transacting a Covenant with God in
the Way of his own Appointment; i. e. by partaking of the Signs and Seals of
his Covenant. Such a Judgment of themselves would be as precarious a Ground of
Conduct to Persons in coming to Sacraments, as any Judgment formed of them
would be to Church Officers in admitting them. For besides, that many judge
favorably of themselves without sufficient Ground to support it, and so
mistake their Case; there are others, who, though really the Children of God, are
in great Suspense, and cannot determine on which Side the Evidence
preponderates; while not a few, though at Seasons they have comfortable Hopes,
yet frequently labor under distressing Apprehensions that they have nothing
more than common Grace. Upon this Footing, I think, Persons, who doubt of their
gracious State, cannot with Safety come to Sacraments at all. For though they are
told the Sacraments are appointed to strengthen weak Faith, and cherish weak
Grace; yet that is the great Matter in Question, whether they have any true
Grace. The most plausible Thing that can be said to them is, that if upon
impartial Self Examination, they find stronger Ground of Hope than the
contrary; they are to follow the strongest Evidence. But here even to a Child
of God, the Ground of Doubt may often seem strongest; and though at Times he
may have Hopes, yet, perhaps, he more frequently fears his Hopes are false; and
in that Case, he is told, he will contract greater Guilt by coming than staying
away. How then shall he run so awful a Risque, when he fears that is more
probably his sad Condition? Hence probably, yea, in many Cases doubtless, the
exercised Christian is kept off, while the secure self flatterering Sinner
comes forward; yea, the doubting Christian cannot be certain, that the Command
so limited and qualified as aforesaid, includes him.

Arg. 4. If unregenerate visible Church Members contract greater Guilt by
abstaining from Sacraments than in coming to them, then they ought not to
abstain. But they do contract greater Guilt by abstaining, therefore they ought
not.

Here, to prevent Mistakes, I would observe, I mean coming in a conscientious
Manner, otherwise, if Persons should come to the Lord's Table merely to qualify
for a civil Post, or in a profane Manner, they would contract much the greatest
Guilt in coming. This would be to eat and drink unworthily with a Witness, and
to be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; but to return,

I suppose the major Proposition will not be denied by any. For if unregenerate
visible Church Members contract greater Guilt by abstaining, which is the same
Thing as to say they sin more; then certainly in coming, from a Conscience of
Duty, attempting Obedience to the Divine Command, they are less sinful, and
consequently act more as they ought to do, than in omitting it. The only Thing,
therefore, to be confirmed is the minor Proposition, viz.

That such unregenerate Sinners do sin more, and contract greater Guilt by
abstaining.

I readily grant, that by their Unbelief in so solemn a Transaction, which in
its very Nature so specially requires Faith in Christ; they sin and contract
great and aggravated Guilt. Their Want of Grace renders them altogether
unacceptable to God, he disapproves them. The only Question is, whether in
ommitting, they do not sin yet more, and God does not more highly disapprove
them?

Now, in order to decide on this Question, let it be considered, that it is not
to be supposed the blessed God, when he instituted these Ordinances, left Men
at Liberty to neglect them. All of the general Character to which the
Sacraments are appointed, are obliged by their very Institution to observe
them. But to suppose it to be the Will of God, that such as are unregenerate,
though visible Church Members, should not approach to Sacraments under the
Notion of being disqualified, is inconsistent with any present Obligation to
attend upon them; and that is to suppose that the Institution of Ordinances
obliges only when Men are suitably disposed toward them; their Want of Faith
and other Graces sets them free, so that their Non-Attendance upon them adds
nothing to their Guilt; yea, in that they obey God and do quite right, which is
an Absurdity, that, I believe, will meet with but small Reception; but if they
are under a present and continual Obligation to attend upon the Sacraments by
Virtue of their authorative Institution, then not to attend upon them is
Disobedience. In either Case, a gracious Heart is wanting; but in the Omission
of the external Duty, another Instance of Disobedience is added, keeping back
the Heart is, as it were, avowed, and no Attempt is made to yield it up. Surely
to act according to the Light of Conscience, impressed with a Sense of present
Obligation, must be less sinful, and infer less Guilt, than to go against the
Dictates of Conscience, and live in the Neglect of a known Duty. Even when
Persons abstain, in a Sort, conscientiously from a Reverence of the Ordinance,
and Consideration of their Unfitness, however that may extenuate the Guilt of
their Omission, yet such an Error in Judgment cannot alter the Nature of Things
and take away all Addition to their Guilt thereby, or render their Conduct
innocent.

But to neglect the Sacraments from a careless Neglect of Religion, and
Unwillingness to come under strict Obligations to it, is sinning with a high
Hand. It is to say with proud Pharaoh, who is the Lord, that I should obey his
Voice? Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness as Iniquity and
Idolatry. 1 Samuel 15.23. Surely none will hesitate to determine, that a
Conscience impressed with a Sense of Duty, and tenderly influencing to the
Performance thereof, is better, and discovers a less Degree of Wickedness and
Impiety, than such a Contempt of Religion and stubborn Temper of Mind. Thus, I
think, the minor Proposition is confirmed, and therefore the Conclusion stands
good.

Argument 5. That God should institute public Covenant Signs and Seals to be
administered in his Church, on purpose to bring the whole visible Church, in
the Celebration of them, to enter publicly into Covenant with him; and
consequently, require the whole visible Church to attend upon them, is
perfectly agreeable to his Conduct toward the Jewish Church in repeated
Instances. -- Notwithstanding their sacramental Covenanting in Circumcision and
the Passover, that Nation was exceedingly prone to Idolatry, which they mingled
with the true worship of the true God. Their Temptation hereto arose from the
Practice of the Heathen Nations round about them. To prevent this, and in order
to their avouching the Lord more explicitly as the only true God, and
Renunciation of Idols, Moses, Joshua, Nehemiah and Ezra, undoubtedly by Divine
Direction, led the whole People to a verbal Covenant-Transaction. Upon which I
beg leave to observe.

1. That a holy cleaving to God with all the Heart; a gracious closing in with,
and consenting to his Covenant, was as really, and as much required in these
Transactions, as in coming to the Lord's Table. In this View Joshua sets the
Matter before the Congregation of Israel. Josh. 24.19.20. And Joshua said unto
the People, ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is a holy God, he is a jealous
God, he will not forgive your Transgressions, nor your Sins. If ye forsake the
Lord and serve strange Gods, then he will turn and do you Hurt, and consume
you, after that he has done you Good. As if he had said, consider the pure and
holy Character of the great God with whom you have to do, in a very solemn
Manner; and consequently, the Holiness of that Service he demands of you, and
now requires your Covenant Engagement to practice. It is no easy Matter to
approve yourselves to him in this Affair: And terrible will be the Consequence
of turning aside from that constant holy Obedience he requires. In short, he
sets before them the Requisitions of the great God in that Transaction, in the
same solemn pungent Manner that Ministers of the Gospel are to do in
administering the Sacraments of the New Testament. -- It is not Holiness in a
diminutive Sense that he requires; it is the Holiness of true Saints. Yet,

2. He requires all Israel to enter into this Covenant, and brings them under
Engagements to this Holiness, without standing to inquire whether they are
already regenerated or not. -- He does not admit them to this
Covenant-Transaction from a Judgment of their appearing to be regenerate, upon
a previous Profession; but presses upon them then to choose the Lord for their
God, by an Induction of Facts, as so many striking Arguments to persuade them;
and their yielding and actually consenting to the Covenant then proposed, was
itself the Profession of Holiness they made. It was by that they appeared to be
a holy People. -- No Doubt a Number of them were unregenerate, but Joshua does
not consider that as an Obstruction in the Way. He considers them as rightfully
the Lord's, and however depraved in Consequence of their Apostasy, and the
Forfeiture they were under, yet he justly requires them to be holy; and upon
this Principle, consistently commands their Performance of all those external
Duties in which this Holiness is professed, and required to be exercised: And
consequently, requires them to profess and engage to it in a solemn
Covenant-Transaction. -- By a Parity of Reason, all this is still required of
all visible Church Members, and they are consistently required to profess and
engage to it. By the Participation of the Sacraments of the New Testament. And
in thus entering into Covenant, the visible Church appears as much, and as
really now to be a holy People, as Israel did then. It is as much the Duty of
Gospel Ministers now to lead forward the whole Church to Covenant-Transactions
with God, in the solemn Ordinances he has appointed for that very Purpose, as
it was the Duty of Moses and others to bring the People of Israel to such
verbal Covenanting then, which imported the same Profession, and as much
required true Holiness.

Argument 6. The steady Attendance of all regular Members of the visible Church
upon the Sacraments of the New Testament, greatly tends to promote, and give
Efficacy to the Discipline of the Church; and thereby one great End of their
Institution will be obtained. Consequently, it is the Will of God that all such
should attend upon them.

I have already observed, that the very Existence and Efficacy of Discipline
depends upon the Sacraments. The Weight of Censure upon the Conscience of an
Offender arises from his considering the Enjoyment of Sacraments, and standing
among God's visible Vovenant People as a great Privilege, which he would
otherwise have a Right to, but now is cut off from, in Consequence of his own
offensive Conduct. -- But if he is taught, that as an unregenerate Person he
would have no Right to them, were he never so regular, or externally religious;
and that it is so far from being a Privilege to him, that it would exceedingly
increase his Guilt, should he dare to approach; then the Argument is lost. Upon
that Principle, he is not cut off from any Thing he had a Right to, or had any
Thing to do with. When a scandalous Person is judicially dealt with, and upon
Conviction, Sentence is pronounced, viz. that, he is debarred from the Lord's
Table; what is done to him? In Consequence of the Instruction he had all along
received, he had no Tho'ts of asking Admission. He observes too, his very sober
Neighbor, who is not only orthodox in his Sentiments, but conscientiously
religious in his Practice, stands off as unfit to come: Yea the Officers of the
Church are not free to admit him, because he apprehends after all, he is
unregenerate. Is it then any Blot upon him to be in the same Case with his
reputable Neighbor? Does the aforesaid Sentence bring any Evil upon him, more
than he would be under without it?

Upon this Principle, that none but gracious Persons ought to approach, the
Sacraments are considered as designed to distinguish between the regenerate and
unregenerate Members of the visible Church (which yet can never be done in this
State) rather than as public Badges of Distinction between the visibly holy and
profane, the Church and the World. Hence not the vicious only, but
conscientious externally religious Persons, are kept off from Communion with
the Church. Now pray, to what Class of Mankind do these belong? They cannot
well be numbered with the Heathen, or the openly wicked? They some how belong
to the Church, yet are not esteemed proper Members, and may not come to
Sacraments more than the Heathen; how then can the Sacraments make Distinction
between the Church and the World? -- What does it signify to an obstinate
Offender, who will not hear the Church, though you esteem him as a heathen Man
and a Publican, while he sees so many of his apparently religious Neighbors,
upon the Matter, in the same Case? thus Discipline is depreciated and weakened.
But surely this is not according to the Will of God; but rather that Conduct of
visible Church Members, which will maintain and support Discipline.

These Arguments, I think, abundantly confirm the Truth of what I am
maintaining, viz. that all who are convinced of the Truth of the Christian
Religion, and the Obligation of it is Duties, are immediately bound to join
themselves to the Lord and his Church; and all baptized Persons, who have
arrived to a competent Capacity, are bound to come to the Lord's Table. -- I
shall conclude the whole with a few general Observations.

Observation 1. From what has been said we observe, upon what footing the
visible Church is called a holy, a special People to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 7.6, A
holy Nation. Exodus 19.6, Holiness to the Lord. Jer, 2.3. Saints. Psalm. 79.2.
and 89.5.7. And very commonly the Lord's People. It is from the
Covenant-Transactions which have passed between God and them, whereby they
stand related to him, and dedicated to his Service for the Purposes of
Holiness: And not from any previous Appearance of Holiness as the Ground of
their Admission thereto. -- Whatever Awakenings, Humiliations, or Affections
may be effected by the Word amongst Sinners, it is never to Purpose, until they
reject Sin, and cleave to God by Covenant. And therefore, nothing short of
public covenanting is a visible Sign of Holiness, as before observed. From the
Solemnity of such Transactions in their very Nature, and the affecting
Arguments and Considerations usually urged on such Occasions, Persons are
commonly excited to much Seriousness, which exhibits a more striking Appearance
of Holiness, than on any other Occasion. -- Hence says the Lord, I remember
thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, and the Love of thine Espousals, when thou
wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown. Israel was
Holiness to the Lord. Jer. 2.2.3.

Obs. 2. We may hence observe with what Propriety the sacred Scriptures require
of all, who have been entered as Members of the visible Church by Circumcision
of old, or Baptism now, that they live to God in the Exercise of universal
Holiness of Heart and Life; and urge it by all the Arguments belonging to the
Character of God's Children: Such as that he is their God; they are his People;
the Redemption of Christ; the rich Grace and Love of God; and the Glories of
Heaven. -- The great God addresses them in his Word, not according to his
Knowledge of their real internal State as the Searcher of Hearts, but according
to their external Character and visible Appearance, and the Obligations they
are bro't under. Hence their Sins are highly aggravated, and deeply resented as
a Contradiction to their public Character; and so reflecting great Dishonor
upon the Name and Ways of God. Isa. 63, 8, 9, 10. For he said surely they are
MY PEOPLE, CHILDREN, THAT WILL NOT LIE, so he was their Savior. In all their
Affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them: In his
Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all
the Days of Old, But they REBELLED and VEXED his holy Spirit: Therefore he was
turned to be THEIR ENEMY, and he FOUGHT against them. It is resented as
exceedingly offensive, that Israel walked in the Statutes of the Heathen; and
aggravated from this Circumstance, that it was against the Lord THEIR GOD. 2
Kin. 17.8.9. and that hereby, they rejected his Statutes and HIS COVENANT. V.
15.

Obs. 3. We may see from what has been said, the Propriety, and Necessity there
is that the Ministers of Christ should, in the Dispensation of God's Word,
distinguish Characters, and Address them to the Consciences of Men. For though
their public Character is that of Saints, God's Children etc, and accordingly
all the Holiness of Saints is demanded of them; yet the Word of God assures us
there are Hypocrites in Zion, Branches in Christ which are withered, foolish
Virgins amongst the wise, and Tares growing among the Wheat, in the best State
of the Church here below. Though the Ministers of the Gospel cannot distinguish
these, personally from true Saints, yet they can distinguish the Characters
which describe the one and the other, whereby the Consciences of Men may be
enabled to discern their own proper Character. It is one Thing to be visibly a
Child of Abraham, and another to walk in the saving Faith of Abraham. One Thing
to be a visible Saint, another to be really one in the Sight of the
Heart-searching God. Therefore, Professors had need to look well to themselves;
and examine, and know themselves whether they be in the Faith, and Christ be in
them. And not rest in this, that they have Abraham to their Father. Hence John
the Baptist dealt in so solemn and awakening a Manner with those he baptized.
Mat. 3.7.8.9.10, 11.12. In like Manner, let every Gospel Minister acquit
himself. Amen.

OBSERVATIONS ON REGENERATION, Wherein the Principle of Spiritual Life, thereby
implanted, is particularly considered.
AS no Truth is more interesting and important, so none has been more
frequently and fully treated in a practical View, by pious Writers, than the
Doctrine of Regeneration. Many have, in this Way, very excellently and largely
described the happy Change, which, by Virtue of the supernatural Work of the
holy Spirit, takes Place in the whole Man. I have therefore no Design at
present to enter upon a full Consideration of the Subject; but shall only beg
Leave to make a few very brief Observations, some of which have not been so
particularly considered in practical Treatises, but yet, perhaps, may be of
some Use to assist in the right Apprehension of, and tend to prevent Mistakes
about a Doctrine, which lies so much at the Foundation of all true Religion,

Observe. 1. Regeneration is the Communication of a Principle of Spiritual Life
to the Soul of a Sinner, naturally dead in Trespasses and Sins, by the Agency
of the holy Spirit.

I call it a Principle, not only because it is a Beginning of Spiritual Life,
but especially, because it denotes a settled Determination of the Mind to right
Activity toward spiritual Objects, under a moral Consideration of them, whence
results every right Exercise of Heart about divine Things. -- It is the
Determination of the Soul to a holy Activity about God and divine Things, or to
such a Kind of Action; not from the Impulsion of an external Force, but an
internal active Principle: And therefore is justly called Life. Life of the
most excellent Kind. It is the Life of Life. There is some Distinction between
a natural and a moral Principle of Action. the former lies in the very Essence
of the Being to which it belongs, or is a Determination to some particular Kind
of Action resulting from it is Frame or Constitution. Thus Self-Activity, or
natural Life, which is essential to the Soul, is a Principle of Action in
general. A Determination to particular Kinds of natural Action, such as we call
Instinct in Brutes, or Reason in Men, arises immediately from the Existence of
natural Faculties, or something in the Frame or Constitution of Creatures
respectively. But a moral Principle is a Determination to some particular Kind
of Action, arising from some settled Judgment or Sentiment in which the Will
acquiesces. Thus a Principle of holy Action is the fixed Impression of some
spiritual Truth or Truths upon the Heart.


But as our Apostasy from God has fixed in us, by Nature, a very contrary
Determination, to a Course of sinful Action; therefore, while that continues
(which will be till some Power subdue it) there can be no Tendency in the Soul
to an holy Temper. The Power of the Soul to any Activity lies formally in the
Will. Hence it is whole Power, by Nature, is to sin, and to reject God: For the
carnal Mind is Enmity against him. Romans 8.7. Consequently some other Power must
be exerted in Order to break this evil Determination, and reduce the rebellious
Creature to a right Temper. And that must be a Power that has Dominion over the
Will. This new Determination, therefore, is from the Almighty Agency of the
holy Spirit, it is he that communicates this new Principle of Life. Accordingly
it is every where ascribed to him in Scripture. John 3.3. -- 5. and 6.63. Tit.
3.5.

Obs. 2. This Principle of Spiritual Life and the Manner of it is Communication
are not immediately in themselves perceptible.

As Adam did not perceive when God breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
natural Life, but perceived it is Existence and Nature from it is Activity and
Effects: So the Existence and Nature of spiritual Life are known only by the
Experience the Christian has of it is Exercise and Efficacy. in this View, our
Lord observes, Joh. 3.8. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the Sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes: So
is every one that is born of the Spirit. There are, indeed, who greatly abuse
this Passage, thence flattering themselves, that they may be the Subjects of
Regeneration without perceiving any great Change in their Hearts and Lives. But
this is not only foreign to the Sense of the Place, but Contradictory to it.
For the Wind is very sensibly perceived. The Design of our Lord seems to be to
remove Nicodemus's Surprise at the Mysteriousness of the Doctrine, by showing
him it is a supernatutal Work, performed by the holy Spirit as a gracious
Sovereign: To which the Sinner himself is so far from contributing any Thing,
that he is not so much as sensible of the Article of Communication, nor
perceives the Manner of the holy Spirit's Operation. Q. d. There are Mysteries
in Nature which you cannot account for. You cannot immediately perceive the
Origin of the Wind, nor account for its ceasing when once in Motion, or
perceive the Reason why it continually, and often very suddenly Changes it is
Direction. You hear the Sound, and feel the Effects, but it is only by
Observations on these sensations, either made by yourself, or suggested by
others, that you can infer any Conclusions about it is Nature or Causes. Why
then should you be surprised to find Mysteries in the Manner of divine
Operations, when performing Works of Grace? In this new Birth, a Man can only
perceive the Exercises of divine Life in his Heart; and by Scriptural
Observations on these, infer what Sort of a Life he lives, or form Conclusions
about it is Nature and Principle. For any one therefore, to pretend to tell what
the Principle of divine Life is, antecedent to all Exercises of Life in the
Heart, and undertake from thence to demonstrate and explain those Exercises, is
a vain Attempt. When he distinguishes this Life from all its Exercises, and
goes about to tell us what it is antecedent to them all, he must talk in the
Dark about a certain something, of which he has no Idea. To give it a Name, to
call it, for Instance, a new Temper or Taste, is not to tell us what it is. Let
any Man explain what he means by a new or holy Temper, without including some
Exercise of Life in the Heart, if he can.

Obs. 3. Regeneration and Conversion, strictly taken, are not distinct Things;
but these different Denominations, express the same Thing under different Views.

I say Conversion strictly taken. For largely taken, it includes the first
Exercises of the several Graces of the holy Spirit, which are but the various
Modifications of the same Principle of Spiritual Life, such as a justifying
Faith, Hope, Joy, Zeal, Sorrow for Sin, etc. From which Regeneration (though the
Term is often also used in the same Latitude, yet) is so distinct in a strict
Sense, as to be altogether antecedent, not only in the Order of Nature, but of
Time too. -- But strictly taken, Conversion is the actual Submission or turning
of the Soul to God in the most simple Notion of it. This may perhaps, lie in
the Soul's submitting itself into the Hands of divine Sovereignty, as most
fitly having a Right to do with him as he pleases: Or in a supreme Regard to
God as a most glorious Being, and rightful Lord. Now this, (...) considered as
the Effect of the holy Spirit's Agency, enabling, or causing the Soul to turn
to God, is called Regeneration; but when considered as an Activity essential to
spiritual Life, and formally as the Soul's Act, it is called Conversion; but
these are only different Views, and Respects of the same Thing. For
Regeneration undoubtedly denotes a moral Effect produced by the Spirit of God.
But this Effect, which he produces, is the Soul's turning to God. Surely
nothing short of this can be called the new Birth. Regeneration is the
Implantation of Holiness in the Heart. Now certainly, there can be no real
Holiness without turning to God, The Soul that has not turned to God, is still,
without Controversy unregenerate. Hence it follows,

Obs. 4. That this Principle wrought in the Soul in Regeneration, is not
something antecedent to every Act and Exercise of Holiness, but includes in it,
or is a first Act or Exercise of Holiness, of the same Nature with all the
Exercises of Holiness that follow after, through the Course of Life.

To cause Life is to cause Action; for Activity is essential to the Idea of
Life. When the holy Spirit regenerates a Sinner, he communicates an active
Principle, otherwise it were not Life. But to talk of an active Principle
existing in the Soul absolutely without Action, would be a Contradiction; now
this Action must be cleaving to God. Hence arises,

Obs. 5. A fifth Observation, viz. that this Principle of spiritual Life
consists in, or includes some new View of the Mind, and Determination or
Approbation of the Will.

This must be the Case, because it is a moral Principle; otherwise, it could
not be the Principle of a Course of moral Action; when therefore, a Principle
of spiritual Life is implanted, a moral Effect is produced; but that Effect
which includes no Acts of the Understanding and Will, but is absolutely
antecedent to them, must be a mere physical, and not a moral Effect, and then
to regenerate, would be to create in a physical, not a moral Sense.

I think, the sacred Scriptures set the Matter in the same Light with the above
Observation. Sometimes this happy Change is expressed by the Term Light. Ephesians v.
8. Ye were sometimes DARKNESS, but now are ye LIGHT in the Lord. Sometimes it
is represented under the Notion of being made willing. Psalm. cx. 3. Thy People
shall be WILLING in the Day of thy Power. Either of these Expressions includes
the other. Thus when the regenerate are called Light, the Matter is not
confined to the Understanding only, but includes the Approbation of the Will,
and to be willing, certainly, includes the View of the Understanding; for there
can be no Act of the Will without it; sometimes both are set in View together,
as Acts xxvi. 18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan to God, Certainly to open the Eyes and turn from
Darkness to Light, is to enlighten. the Understanding, and to turn to God is an
Act of the Will. To the same Purpose is 2 Cor. iv. 6. For God has shined into
our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ. To see the Glory of God, must include both the View of the
Understanding, and the Approbation of the Will. It is no Objection to this, to
say, these Scriptures speak of this Change largely taken. For admitting that,
yet it is not by Way of Contra-distinction from, or exclusive of the first
Instance; but the first Existence of Life comes under the same Predicament.
Thus they, who were sometimes Darkness, are not said to be enlightened only but
to be Light. God in the new Creation, shines into the Heart, in a Manner
analogous to his shining in the natural World, when he created Light in it. It
is very easy to say, that in Regeneration, a holy Temper is produced whence
this Knowledge and Volition arise; but perhaps, it would not be so easy to
tell, in that Connection, what we are to understand by that Temper. Surely we
are not to conceive of a moral, in the same Manner as of a natural Temper. In
the Latter, we take into the Consideration such a certain, yet various
Construction of the human Frame, as is apt to produce such and such Passions
and Feelings of Nature. Now, if we have an Idea of the Former any Thing like
this, we must then consider it only as a new Faculty created in the Soul, and
has nothing moral in it, any more than the Understanding or Will considered as
natural Faculties. But if we conceive of it as a moral Determination of the
Soul toward God, then we must consider it as including some Apprehension of
God in the Understanding, and an Act of the Will embracing him, which brings
the Matter to what I have said. Thus we are, as it were insensibly led to some
Apprehension of what this divine Principle is, or wherein it consists, though we
cannot comprehend the Manner of the holy Spirit's Operation in producing it, or
explain how it exists. It is an experimental practical Knowledge of God, or it
is a new View of the infinite Perfections of God, with the Approbation of them
in the Will as most excellent; or, which is, indeed, the same Thing under its
proper Denomination, it is a supreme Love to God: Supreme Love to God, is the
very Essence of true Religion. Hence it is called the fulfilling of the Law.
Romans xiii. 10. Our Lord mentions Love to God and our Neighbor as the Sum and
Substance of the whole Law. Mat. xxii. 37, 38, 39, 40. No Action can be called
true Obedience, if it don't flow from Love to God, and every Exercise of true
Grace may be reduced to this as its Principle.

Obs. 6. The holy Spirit makes use of the Word of God as a Mean in the Work of
Regeneration, which he renders irresistably efficacious for that Purpose.

I am far from thinking with the Arminians, that the only Influence of the holy
Spirit in this Matter lies in what they call moral Suasion; that is, as I
understand it. The holy Spirit having set before us the Arguments and Motives
of the Gospel in the Word, both by his Providence, and an Influence upon the
Mind, excites its Attention to these Things, and assists the natural Facuties
in weighing those Arguments and Motives, and thus strives to persuade the
Sinner to a Compliance with Gospel Overtures, but still leaves it with himself
to yield to, or reject those Arguments by a sovereign Act of his own Will.
According to this, it is only an objective Light that is set before Mind, as
contained in the Word; a Representation of Objects, as yet at a Distance, of
which the Mind has no Knowledge but by the Report and Description of the Word;
and perhaps the most, if not all the Light, which is usually called common
Illumination, may be obtained this Way.

Nor can I agree with some, even eminent Calvinistic Divines, that there is
only a gradual Difference between common and saving Illumination; I believe
there is a specific Difference; there is in Regeneration a subjective Light
created in the Soul, which, though it is the Knowledge of a glorious Object
presented to the Mind, yet may fitly be called subjective in Respect of the
Manner of its Communication, as contra-distinguish'd from, though not opposed to
the mere objective Light of the Word before described; it is an immediate
intuitive Sense, or Knowledge of the moral Perfections and Character of God,
not gained by Way of Conclusion from Premises or by Argumentation, but arising
from the Approach of God to the Soul, by Way of gracious Presence; he thus
takes Possession of the Heart, and fills it with a Sense of himself by his
Presence in a peculiar Manner; and this is a Way of knowing, very different
from that received merely by the Description and Report of the Word; and
therefore a different Kind of Knowledge, viz. by Way of spiritual Sense and
Experience. -- Though we cannot perceive or explain the Manner of this divine
Presence or Access to the Soul; yet the Fact is abundantly witnessed by the
Experience of God's People; notwithstanding, they have an habitual spiritual
Knowledge of God and divine Truths, yet, at one Season, they are distressed
with Darkness, and cannot get any proper Views of God; at another, they shall
be full of Light, and astonished with the View of divine Glory; now what is the
Reason of this vast Difference? surely, not from any Difference in the
objective Light of the Word, or their Capacity to meditate upon it. But the
Reason of it is, the Absence of God in the one Case, and his glorious Presence
in the other; therefore, their first such Knowledge of God was from such an
Approach to the Soul, or divine Presence in it. And for the Reality of this
Experience in God's People, I refer to the Account the sacred Scriptures give
us* sometimes of their bitter Complaints of God's hiding himself, and panting
for him as the Heart for the Water Brooks; at other Times, of their rejoicing in
his Beauty and Glory, with which they are, as it were transported; and, I think
these Words of Job, xlii. 5. I have heard of thee by the Hearing of the Ear,
but now mine Eye sees thee, fully justify this Distinction of objective and
subjective Knowledge; for admit that the Design of the Words is to represent
the very lively Views he had of the divine Excellency, so that comparatively
speaking, all his former, even experimental Views were but like Report; yet, by
a Parity of Reason there is a vast Difference between Experience in the lowest
Degree and Report; and he goes upon this Principle, That Report, or by the
Hearing of the Ear, is a very languid and imperfect Way of knowing, compared
with Sight and intimate Acquaintance. These are very different Kinds of
Knowledge, as different as Knowledge a Man has of a Country from an historical
Account and Map of it, or the Report of Travelers; and that he has from
traveling through, and seeing it himself. Thus then, by this Presence of God
in the Soul, it has a Knowledge of him, which it could not possibly have
without it, by the most animated Descriptions and Representations of the Word.
It was thus, even innocent Adam knew the moral Character and Excellency of God,
not only by objective Evidence from without, but also by subjective Evidence,
from his Experience of the divine Presence.

But all this does not exclude moral Influence by Way of Argument, the
Arguments contained in the Word; but rather accounts for their irresistible
Efficacy. Though mere moral Suasion will not do the Business, yet it is not
excluded; it is a moral Effect that is to be produced; -- therefore, it is
natural enough to expect that the Power producing it should be exerted in a
moral Way; and consequently, a moral Mean with great Propriety be admitted.

That this Matter may be better apprehended, I beg Leave to observe, that the
blessed God must be exhibited to the Mind as an Object of Contemplation, in
order to any Act of the Will toward him. The Will approves him as most fit and
worthy to be chosen, which must be founded upon the Contemplation of him in the
Mind. Length of Time is not, indeed, necessary for this Purpose. The Operations
of the Mind are very quick. -- Were we to suppose an Adult, who had no
Opportunity of the Word, to be regenerated; no Doubt, a Reflection upon his own
intuitive Perceptions would exhibit the blessed God to the Mind, as an Object
of Contemplation. For it is absurd to suppose a new Heart to exist in an adult
Person without any Ideas of God and divine Things in the Understanding; for
that is to suppose a Person regenerated, and yet altogether ignorant of God; to
turn to God without any Knowledge of him, which, I think, is a Contradiction,
and the same Thing as to say, a Man is changed without any Alteration; the
Thief on the Cross seems to be an Instance of the Contrary: Though he lived in
the Land of Judea, and had Opportunity of the Word of God, it is not probable a
Man of his abandoned Character sought any considerable Acquaintance with it;
yet his Speech to his Fellow-Criminal, and his Address to Jesus Christ, showed
very considerable Discoveries of God, and the Character of his Savior.

But let it be considered, that with Respect to Sinners who live under the
Means of Grace and enjoy the Word of God, though, by Reason of their Estrangement
from God, they have no proper Views of divine Truths, yet their Understandings
are possessed of some general speculative Knowledge of them: yea, convinced
Sinners have more, they have such an experimental Knowledge of the Law
convincing them of Sin, as is effectual to arouse them out of their fatal
Security, and confute their false Notions, and awaken them to a very solemn
Attention to the Word of God. -- Now in Regeneration, the intuitive Views,
impressed on the Mind by the divine Presence, are exactly the same with the
Descriptions and Delineations of the divine Character in the Word. The Mind
therefore, instead of reflecting immediately upon its own Perceptions, looks
forward to the Word. Now the Man's Eyes are opened, and he understands the
Scripture in a Manner he never could before; there he sees this glorious Object
represented as in a Glass; from thence the Reflection is so strong and lively
as irresistably, though in a moral Way, to determine the Will; for surely, it is
very apprehensible, that the Views of the Mind may be so experimental, strong,
and full of Evidence, that it is impossible for a rational Being to withold
the Approbation and Consent of the Will; and thus this divine Temper is formed
in the Heart: In this Point of Light, I think, the Apostle sets the Matter, ii
Cor. 3.18. But we all with open Face, beholding, AS IN A GLASS, the Glory of
the Lord, are CHANGED INTO THE SAME IMAGE, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Though these Words comprehend the gradual perfecting the
Image of God, in the Progress of the Work of Grace; yet certainly the first
Step of the Process is in the same Way with all the subsequent, in the whole
Series. Nor does the Use of the Glass at all derogate from the Efficiency of
the Spirit, in causing and conducting this whole Matter; and, indeed, there is
as really an immediate Agency of the Spirit upon the Soul, in every progressive
perfecting of the Image of God, and every Instance of the quickening of Grace
in Believers (where yet the concurring Instrumentality of the Word,
notwithstanding, is acknowleged) as there is in the first begetting of the
divine Life.

Here I would take Notice, how very different this View of divine Illumination
is from the wild Conceits of Enthusiasts; their pretended extraordinany
Discoveries and Inspirations consist in unaccountable Impulses without the
Word, the warm Flights of Imagination, and Agitation of their Passions; in all
this they either have no Reference to the Word of God, but rather set light by
it in Comparison of their own great Light; or else in pretending to the Word,
put inconsistent ridiculous Constructions upon it; -- but these intuitive Views
of God, I mentioned as primarily arising from his Presence in the Soul, are but
the Impressions of such Truths as the Word of God describes; they lead to the
Scriptures, and give a rational consistent View of them; this Light is tried
and judged by the Word of God: To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Isa. viii.
20.

I cannot but think the Instrumentality of the Word in Regeneration, in the View
I have given of it, is once and again asserted in the sacred Scriptures; thus,
i. Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible,
by the Word of God which lives and abides forever. The Word, here rendered
born again, is the same which is used, John iii. 3. of which new Birth the Word
is declared to be an Instrument or Mean; in the same View, the same Apostle
tells the Christians to whom he wrote, that by the great and precious Promises,
they were made Partakers of the divine Nature. ii. Pet. 1.4. and to be made
Partakers of the divine Nature is to be regenerated; another Passage, is Jam.
i. 18. Of his own Will begat he us with [or by] the Word of Truth. The Word
here used, cannot, with any Propriety, I think, be understood of any Thing else
than the first Infusion or begetting of spiritual Life; when this is said to be
done with, or by the Word, it must intend that it is used as an Instrument or
Mean; in this View, this blessed Change is expressed, by putting God's Law in
the inward Parts, and writing it in the Heart. Jer. xxxi. 33.

Doubtless the Holy Spirit could as easily accomplish this great Work without
using any Mean; yet as it appears very plain, he has chosen to do otherwise; we
may not only suppose, but readily see great Propriety in his making use of the
Word in this Matter: This Change is to be tried and judged of by the Word;
therefore must answer to the Descriptions and Characters there given, as the
Impression on the Wax answers to the Characters of the Seal. The Views of God
in the Mind must be such as exactly agree to the Descriptions and
Representations of him in the Word. It was, consequently very fit that these
Characters of the Word should be impressed upon the Soul, as a Medium of
determining the Will in Regeneration.

When the Holy Spirit takes the Sinner in Hand, in order to bring him home to
God; the first Step he ordinarily takes, is to convince him of Sin, confute his
false Notions, and slay his (...) Hopes; in this he makes use of the Law as a
Mean^ (...) all acknowledge. Yet in order to this effectual Access of the Law
to the Conscience, there is as really an immediate Exertion of Power and
Influence upon the Soul, as there is also in Regeneration; and though this
Convinction does not make the Sinner more worthy of the Grace of God, yet the
great Design of it is to prepare the Way for the opening of divine Truths upon
the Mind with the brighter Evidence, in its passing this saving Change; which
reflects the Image of this Glory upon the beholding Soul, and determines the
Will. ii. Cor. 3.18 Psalm. cx 3.

Obs. 7. From this new View of the Mind, and Determination of the Will, or
supreme Regard to God, result the various Exercises of Heart, which are called
the Grace of the Holy Spirit, and distinguished by particular Names, as their
proper Principle.

From this View of the divine Character in the enlightened Mind, naturally
arises a Discovery of the Necessity of Christ's Satisfaction to divine Justice,
and the Fitness and Glory of that Way of Reconciliation with God. Hence Faith
in Christ. This Plan of Mercy still more illustrates the Glory of the divine
Character; for it shines in the Face of Jesus Christ; by these Views of Faith,
spiritual Affections are excited, Sorrow for, and Hatred against Sin raised;
hence an habitual Watchfulness against Sin and Opposition to it, and Delight in
the Service of God; and all this infers a great and permanent Change in the
whole Course of Life and Action; but practical Writers have abundantly
explained and described these Things; to whom I refer my Readers, and shall
insist no further upon them here.

I therefore, conclude with this general Remark, viz. that it is of vastly more
Importance and Concernment to us, to inquire into the Reality of a gracious
Change, as discovered by the Alteration, and holy Exercises which the
Regenerate Experience; than spend our Time and Zeal in disputing about the
Principle of spiritual Life, wherein it consists, or what it is antecedent to
all Exercises thereof. While we are warmly interested in deciding the
speculative Dispute, we are apt to forget the practical Consideration of the
important Subject, and the Application of it to ourselves; and those who attend
to us are led to treat the Matter in the same Manner; by this Means the
Interests of vital Piety languish. While we justly lament the low State of
experimental Religion, to devote ourselves to these speculative Refinements
will not be found the Way to revive it. Experience will always show, that to
keep up a practical View of divine Truths, and the solemn Application of them
in serious pungent Addresses to the Conscience, is the best calculated for that
Purpose. Besides, if we lay down, by Way of Hopothesis, a certain something, of
which we can have no Idea (as of a Principle of Life, antecedent to all
Exercises of Life, we cannot; nor can we infer any Conclusions about its Nature
from any Exercises of the Heart, if it include neither Idea nor Volition, but
is something absolutely antecedent to both) then we shall be in Danger of a
Superstructure, as unintelligible as the Basis upon which we build. Thus some
have wildly dreamed, that the Principle of spiritual Life may exist in the Soul
without any Act or Exercise of Life, as a Taste, which lies dormant until a
proper Object be applied to it; and if it may exist thus one Moment, why not
Two? and if Two, why not a Minute? and so on, till they bring the Supposition
to Hours, Days, Months, and Years; and so a regenerate Person may still
continue an Unbeliever, and of Consequence, in an unjustified State: And I see
not why it would not be as easy to continue the Supposition (...) Death, and so
send him to Hell, with his dormant Principle along with him. Thus the Cause of
vital Religion is greatly disserved.

But if we attend to the plain practical Views the Scriptures give us of this
Matter, consider the Exercises of divine Life, which discover the happy Change
produced in Regeneration, and trace these to their first Principle, which, from
the Nature of these Exercises, we conclude to be something of the same Nature
with them; to be a first Act of the Series of Acts or Exercises that follow
after, which the holy Spirit causes the Soul to exert; ( i. e. causes it to
live) we are in no Danger of any fatal Mistake. In this Way, the Heart will be
more likely to feel itself interested; and thus People become more solemn and
exercised in examining and judging the State of their own Souls; and that this
may be more extensively the Case among Professors, may God of his infinite
Mercy grant for Christ's Sake, AMEN.

AN ESSAY ON THE MEANS of GRACE.
I. THE great God stands in no Need of Means, in order to accomplish his
Purposes. He could, if he pleased, cause all Events he sees meet to effect, to
come to pass in the same Way he caused the World at first to exist, viz. by the
Word of his Power or Sovereign Act of his Will; yet it does not at all derogate
from his Efficiency, but rather serves to illustrate his Power, to use Means,
because all their Efficacy upon the Effect, is from him. Accordingly it has
pleased him, that rational Creatures might more distinctly observe his Works,
to use Means, and appoint a Connection between them and the End in View, both
in the natural and moral World; yet such a Connection as always depends upon
the divine Pleasure. Means are effectual or ineffectual, as he affords or
withholds his Concurrence -- particularly, in the Adminition of his moral
Government, he deals with the Subjects thereof in a Way suited to their
rational Natures, and uses Means of a moral Nature, in carrying on the
Interests of Religion in our degenerate World. To this Purpose, he has given
his holy Word, appointed a Gospel Ministry and Ordinances of Worship, such as
the Sacraments of the New Testament, Praise and Prayer.

II. These Divines commonly call Means, not of Instruction only, but of Grace;
the Reason is, because it is in the Use of these Means, the holy Spirit,
ordinarily communicates or bestows Grace on Sinners, and builds up his Children
in Holiness, until he brings them safe Home to Glory. Now, whatever can be
considered as a Mean with Reference to an End, must have some Tendency to, and,
in its own Way, have Influence upon, or concur in attaining it; for that which
has no such Tendency or Influence, has no Manner of Connection with the
Existence or Accomplishment of the End; and consequently is no Means of it at
all. If therefore, these Ordinances are Means of Grace, they must have a
Tendency to, and in the Hand of the Holy Spirit, Concurrence in the
Regeneration and Conversion of Sinners, and thence forward, in carrying on the
Work of Grace in them. As all Ordinances of Worship are but various Manners of
administering the Word of God, it is especially to be considered as a Mean for
these Purposes.

III. That we may see with what Propriety these are called Means of Grace, let
us attend to what we find ascribed to, or predicated of the Word, in the Bible;
which only can be said of it considered as an Instrument or Means, and not as
an efficient Cause; which it cannot be. The Conviction of Sinners is ascribed
to it, By the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. Romans iii. 20. Peter's Hearers upon
hearing his Discourse, wherein he proved from the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, that Jesus, whom they had crucified, was the true Messiah, Were
pricked in their Hearts. Acts ii. 37. By this God distinguishes his Word
delivered by the true Prophets, from that delivered by the false, viz. this
That his Word is like a Fire, and like a Hammer that breaks the Rock in
Pieces. Jer. xxiii. 29. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of
the Heart. Heb. iv. 12. it kills the legal Pride of Sinners. I through the Law
am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Gal. ii. 19. I have already
taken Notice in my Observations on Regeneration, that Christians are said to be
born again, begotten, and made Partakers of the divine Nature, by the Word of
God. 1 Pet. i. 23. Jam. i. 18. 2 Pet. i. 4. to which I would add, Psalm, xix. 7,
8. where the Word under the Terms, Law, Testimony, and Commandments, is said to
convert the Soul, make Wise the Simple, and enlighten the Eyes; all which Terms
plainly express the saving Change wrought in Regeneration: This Change is an
Inscription of the divine Law upon the Heart. Jer. xxxi. 33. all these
Expressions signify much more than merely instructing the speculative
Understanding. They must import the Concurrence of the Word as a Mean or
Instrument in the Hand of the Holy Spirit, both in the preparatory Work of
Conviction, and also in effecting the saving Change in Regeneration. It is
unnecessary to recite the many Passages which represent the Word and Ordinances
as Means of quickening, supporting, comforting, sanctifying, perfecting and
strengthening of God's People. I would only observe, that the Efficacy of the
Word for these Purposes, depends upon the Presence and immediate Agency of the
Holy Spirit in the Heart; which as really takes Place in these Instances, as in
the Regeneration of a Sinner, and the latter as easily admits the Use of Means
as the former.

IV. The Efficacy of the Means of Grace lies not in any intrinsic Virtue in
themselves, nor depends upon the Power or Will of those who attend upon them;
for the Effect to be produced is supernatural, to which Sinners are by Nature
entirely averse, and destitute of a true Discernment of the Excellency of the
Truths and Weight of the Arguments proposed in the Word; but they are rendered
effectual to the Attainment of the End, by the Blessing of the holy Spirit upon
them, and his Energy in them; they are Means in the Spirit's Hand, rather than
the Creature's. And Sinners are to attend upon them in that View, that they may
lie in the Way in which the Spirit meets with such, and works upon them; like
the poor impotent People, who lay at the Pool, waiting for the Descent of the
Angel to trouble the Waters. John v. 3.4. With Respect to Creature Agents, the
Application or Use of Means depends upon them, but the Causality itself, or
Energy of Means in order to the End is not in their Power, nor depends upon
their Will. Hence they often fail of Success in the Use of the best adapted
Means; but when this Divine Agent ondescends to use Means, he causes their
Efficacy, and makes them effectual when, and with Respect to whom he pleases. I
say, condescends to use Means; for the very Circumstance I have mentioned,
shows he needs them not; he could immediately Will whatsoever he pleases; when,
therefore, he is pleased to make Use of Means, it is in Order to the more easy
Discovery of himself to his Creatures. Hence it follows, that the Great God is
not the less an efficient, for his using Means, nor the less displays his Power
in accomplishing the End by them.

V. Yet, notwithstanding, there is an Aptness and Tendency in the Means, in
Order to the End in View; otherwise they would not be properly Means. Those
Things which have no Aptness or Tendency to the Attainment of the End, can have
no Sort of Influence upon it; the Existence of the End has no Kind of
Connection with them, and consequently they are no Means at all of its
Existence. Now, the Aptness or Tendency of the Word of God to reduce Sinners to
the Obedience of Christ lies in. 1st. The Clearness of Representation, whereby
divine Truths are set before the Mind; Divine Truths are clothed in the most
plain and intelligible Language, their sublime Nature will allow of; they are
descriptively expressed, so as not only to declare their Nature, but also to
describe their true Influence, and the Impressions they should make upon the
Heart. They are also illustrated by the most familiar Similitudes. 2d. In the
interesting Manner in which these sacred Truths are urged, or the Weight of the
Arguments with which they are pressed home. 3d. In the awful Authority and
great Majesty with which they are delivered, whence they bind and affect the
Conscience; they are set before us with a Thus says the Lord or Jehovah, our
rightful Sovereign, with whom is terrible Majesty, and your God, who has a
Covenant Claim upon his professing People. Hence then, when the holy Spirit
takes the Word in his Hand, and makes Application of it to the Heart, it is
most apt and fit, as a Mean, to instruct the Mind and inform the Conscience,
and thus to convince and awaken the Sinner; to lay Restraints upon Men, and
repress, or in some Measure, restrain even the natural Enmity of the awakened
Sinner; and when the Holy Spirit effectually opens the Sinner's Eyes, and makes
him understand divine Truths as they are represented in the Word, they have a
most apt Tendency, by Way of Argument, to persuade and determine the Will; and
to promote the Life and Exercise of all the Graces of the Holy Spirit, in true
Christians. I would here refer the Reader to what I have said in the 6th
Observation on Regeneration, concerning the Instrumentality of the Word therein.


I have said that when the Word is so effectually applied to the Conscience as
to convince the Sinner, it is a Means of repressing or restraining his natural
Enmity. As this will probably be, in a particular Manner, called in Question, I
beg Leave to offer a few Thoughts further upon it. I do not at all suppose the
Sinner's Enmity is, in this Case, subdued; for then he would be regenerated,
which is contrary to the Supposition. The Wickedness of Men may, yea, in many
Instances is restrained, when its governing Power is not at all broken. Hence,
those who were clean escaped from them who live in Error, and escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, may be allured through the Lusts of the Flesh, and much Wantonness, and
be again entangled; yea, it too often proves to be the Case, that according to
the true Proverb, the Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that
washed to her Wallowing in the Mire. 2 Pet. ii. 18, 19, 20 -- 22, The acting of
the Sinner's Enmity is, indeed, more direct against God and spiritual Objects,
thus brought near and set in View before him by Conviction, and this, no doubt,
is a great Aggravation of those Exercises of Enmity; yet it will by no Means
follow that Enmity, as an evil Principle in the Heart, is more prevalent, or
has, in this Case, acquired a greater Degree of Power. The Power of this, as
well as every other evil Habit, lies in the Sway and Dominion it has in the
Heart. Enmity reigns in the Heart ever while it is destitute of true Love to
God; but yet the more peaceably it possesses the Heart, and the more fully it
has its Consent, the more powerful it is. While the Sinner is in a State of
Security, though he don't feel so explicit Opposition to God in his Heart, as
being more out of View; yet it is the same Principle of Enmity that carries him
on in casting God's Law behind his Back; in neglecting the Divine Service; and
giving a loose Rein to his Corruptions, while he despises, and perhaps derides
strict Religion. His Enmity lords it over him without Control, and hardens his
Heart against Reproof and Conviction. It is unmolested in its Sway, and carries
the Sinner headlong whichever Way it directs; and he justifies himself in all
this, and refuses to take Blame to himself; but the awakened Sinner, while
Conviction is born home upon the Conscience, confesses the just Authority over
him, that he has most unjustly trampled upon it, and violated his Law; though
he has no Holy Acquiescence in, or Choice of the divine Government, yet he has
a rational Conviction that it is rightful, and that he deserves Punishment for
contradicting it; that he feels his Heart averse, greatly alarms him, and
convinces him, of the Existence of Enmity in his Heart. Instead of spurning at
his Convictions, trampling them under Foot, and casting them off, which would
be the Case if his Enmity acquired Strength in Proportion to his Convictions,
he cherishes them, and is afraid of falling back into Security again. Though he
feels Risings of Heart, yea, some Sinners make some Attempts to shake of their
Convictions, with whom they are too powerful, and are increased till they so
break their stout Spirits, as that they give up their Stuggles to stifle them,
and become afraid lest they should leave them again to fall into an hardened
State; yet this is so far from proving the Increase of Enmity as to Strength or
Prevalence, that, in Reality, it proves the Restraint of it by the Authority of
God's Law in the Conscience, and convincing Influences of the Holy Spirit. Upon
a Discovery of the exceeding Depravity and Wickedness of his Heart, the Sinner,
upon some Principle, wishes his Heart was changed. True, he does not choose
Holiness or turning to God in itself considered, for that he does not, is one
main Thing that fills his Conscience with so much Guilt; yet he earnestly
desires there was such an Heart in him as did see the Beauty of Holiness, and
truly choose it. He desires this, indeed, upon no higher Principle, than a
Regard to his own Happiness. This, where there is no higher, is not a Holy
Principle, nor is this Sort of Desire of Grace such as denotes true Grace in
the Heart; yet it is not, in itself, a wicked Principle. That this Respect to
his own Happiness does not regard Holiness as an Ingredient in it, and is not
subordinate to, and under the Influence of an higher and more noble Principle,
is his Crime; but that it is in him, and has Influence upon him, is not.
Surely, the Sinner's Enmity is not as prevalent and unrestrained, when he is
thus anxiously solicitous to obtain Heart-changing Grace, even on this
Principle, as when he utterly disregarded the Matter, and justified himself in
refusing to return.

When it is said, that the awakened Sinner still continues to reject Christ,
and hate God with all his Heart; The Meaning must either be, that under all his
Convictions, the Sinner exerts himself to the utmost with all his Might in
Opposition to them; that he the more pours Contempt on the Gospel, and stoutly
resolves to reject Jesus Christ; that he casts about to find out how he may
bear himself up in a determined Opposition to the Gospel Overtures of
Salvation, and the more he is convinced, the more maliciously does he oppose,
and impudently justify himself in refusing Christ and his Redemption, like the
Scribes and Pharisees of old, which would argue the Increase of Enmity with a
Witness; and then, the Proposition is not true, yea notoriously contrary to
Fact. Or else the Meaning must only be, that notwithstanding all his
Convictions and Increase of Light, his Enmity is not at all subdued, but if
present Restraints were removed, it would return to its old stubborn Stoutness
in the Way of Sin; and all the Faculties and Powers of the Soul are still under
the reigning Power of that hateful Principle; and then I have no Controversy
with any Man about it: But this is no Way inconsistent with what I have said,
unless we say, that to lay Restraints upon the Lusts and Corruptions of Men, is
inconsistent with their Dominion in the Heart; or else, that they have as great
a Degree of Power under Restraints as when most unrestrained; neither of which,
will any Man, in the due Use of his Reason assert, for that would destroy all
Ideas of different Degrees of Wickedness. The Sinner's Convictions awaken his
Attention to those glorious Objects, God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and the Way
of Salvation through him; and thereby the Actings of his natural Enmity are more
direct and explicit, which, doubtless, more aggravates them as particular Acts,
and exposes the Malignity of that hateful Principle. Yet that very Discovery,
and the Sinner's condemning himself for it, and Cries to God for Deliverance
from it, show that it has not as quiet Possession of the Heart, and as
prevalent Energy in it as formerly. -- Now it is from the Principles, good or
bad, which have the governing Prevalence in the Heart, that Persons have their
Character; a Course of Action only fixes the Character, as it indicates the
Prevalence of the Principle from which such Actions flow; and the Degree of
that Prevalence determines the Degree of the Character, especially in the Eye
of the Heart-searching God; if then under solemn Convictions by the Authority
of God's Law, and the convincing Influences of the Holy Spirit, the Sinner's
natural Enmity be restrained, it will follow, that the awakened Sinner's
Character is not, on the Whole, rendered more vile and odious in the Sight of
God, than it was in the Days of his Security and contented Course of Sin
against him. It will by no Means follow, that awakened Sinners are in a Degree
accepted of God, on Account of their being less sinful than they were in the
Days of their Security; for the divine Law still condemns them as falling
short, infinitely short of its Demands; and their less Sinfulness makes no
Atonement for the smallest past Transgression: It only follows that in their
present Case, they demerit a less Degree of Disapprobation and Punishment; i.
e. they are less offensive; and this we must admit, or else deny any different
Degrees of Wickedness; or assert that the lowest Degree of Wickedness is as
offensive, and disapproved in as high a Degree as the greatest.
-- Can it be imagined, that the Sinner's Enmity has as strong an Energy in him
when brought to break off from his Course of external Sins, as when he pursued
them with Greediness? when he earnestly attends to the Duties of Religion, as
when he neglected them with Scorn and Contempt, or trifled with them in a
listless Formality? and when he eagerly seeks the Company of God's People
asking their Advice, as when he hated to be near them, could not bear their
Conversation, but took Delight in the Company of the Profane and Ungodly? but
to return;

That the Means of Grace have a Tendency to the Conviction and Conversion of
Sinners, as well as the Edification of God's People, appears by the
Expostulations God uses with them in his Word, as utterly inexcusable and
perverse in continuing Impenitents after all the Pains he has taken upon them,
and Means used with them. Isa. v. from the Beginning of the Chapter, the Lord
represents the abundant Provision he had made for their Fruitfulness, in Point
of Means and Advantages which he had afforded them; on which he expostulates
with them. V. 4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not
done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, bro't it
forth wild Grapes? Jer. vii. 23.24.25.26.27.28.29. But this Thing commanded I
them, saying obey my Voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my People:
and walk ye in all the Ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto
you; but they hearkened not, nor inclined their Ear, but walked in the Counsels
and the Imaginations of their evil Heart, and went backward and not forward.
Since the Day that your Fathers came forth of the Land of Egypt unto this Day,
I have even sent you all my Servants the Prophets, daily rising up early and
sending them. Yet they harkened not unto me, nor inclined their Ear, but
hardened their Neck, they did worse than their Fathers. Therefore thou shall
speak all these Words unto them, but they will not hearken unto thee: thou
shall also call unto them, but they will not answer thee; but thou shall say
unto them, this is a Nation that obeys not the Voice of the Lord their God,
nor receives Correction: Truth is perished and cut off from their Mouth. Cut
off thine Hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a Lamentation on
high Places, for the Lord has rejected and forsaken the Generation of his
Wrath. Here we see, their Disobedience to, and Abuse of the Means he had used
with them, was the Reason why they were so peculiarly the Generation of God's
Wrath, and of the sad Issue of their Case. -- If it be said, the Instruction
they get from the Word is sufficient to render impenitent Sinners inexcusable;
I answer, either this Light and Instruction has a Tendency to their Conversion,
(and if this be admitted, the Matter is fairly given up) or it has no such
Tendency at all; and then how does it at all render them inexcusable in
continuing impenitent and unconverted?

The Conversion of Sinners to God is, in a Word, the great Scope of the Means
of Grace; this the Word of God calls for at their Hands, commands and presses
it with the greatest Importunity. It is needless to recite Authorities for this
to such as are acquainted with their Bible, since we might quote a great Part
of that sacred Book to this Purpose. Therefore it is, that the Gospel Ministry
is called the Ministry of Reconciliation, and it is the Business of Gospel
Ministers to pray Sinners in Christ's Stead to be reconciled to God. Yet,

VI. There is no certain or infallible Connection between the most diligent and
earnest Attendance on the Means of Grace, that unregenerate Sinners are capable
of, and their obtaining the saving Grace of God. This Issue of the Matter is
entirely from the sovereign Mercy of God. If we suppose a certain necessary
Connection in this Case, it must arise, either from the Nature of the Thing,
viz. some Constitution or Law of Nature, or from some Promise and positive
Appointment of God to that Purpose; but in the Case before us, there is no such
Connection in either Way. Not the former; for the Means of Grace are positive
Institutions, and don't fall under the Laws of Nature; nor do they operate by
Way of Influence upon God, to move him to show Mercy, but are Means whereby the
blessed God deals with Sinners, and works effectually on whom he pleases; their
Efficacy depends upon his Blessing and Energy. In this View he has appointed
Means, and requires fallen Men to attend upon them. Guilty Sinners lie at
Mercy, upon which they have no Claim, but it lies in the Breast of God as a
Sovereign of his own Grace, to show Mercy or not as he pleases; and therefore,
according to his sovereign Pleasure, he renders the Means of Grace effectual or
not; and as to the latter Part of Connection, viz. by Promise or positive
Appointment; there is not the smallest Evidence of it in the Word of God; if
there be, let any one show it, who thinks he can. I must confess, I have not
met with one such Promise in all the Book of God. As to such Passages, as Luke
xi. 9. and Mat. vii. 7. Ask and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find;
knock and it shall opened unto you. There the Conduct of God as a Father
toward his Children, is plainly spoken of; and therefore, asking, seeking, and
knocking in Faith, asking, etc. in a gracious Manner, is intended; and they are
the Children of God who are spoken of. If the moral Efficacy of the Means of
Grace terminated on God, to move him to give Grace (the very mention of which
shows the Absurdity of the Supposition) or the Sinner's Use of them were at all
the Ground or Reason of his showing Mercy; then, indeed, the very Appointment
of Means would imply a Promise of Success, or something equal to it, in the
required Use of them; but this is so far from being the Case, that on the
Contrary, the Tendency of the Means to the End lies in their moral Influence
upon the Consciences and Hearts of Sinners; yet whatever Aptness to such an
Influence there is in the Means of Grace, such is the Blindness, Deadness,
Enmity and Prejudice of poor Sinners, that until the Holy Spirit accompany them
with his Presence and Energy, no such Influence will effectually take Place in
their Hearts. Now he works in or by these Means as a Sovereign; hence he
strives with many only in such a Way, as that he suffers them still to resist,
until in just Resentment, he forsakes them: But with Respect to the Vessels of
Mercy, he prosecutes his gracious Design, until by the Rod of his Strength (the
Word of his Grace) he irresistibly conquers and rules in the Midst of his
Enemies. Psalm. cx. 2. Therefore Sinners are to use the Means of Grace as
Creatures lying at Mercy, seeking pure Grace, which depends on the mighty
Energy of the Holy Spirit; but they can found no Claim to Grace on their most
diligent Use of said Means. It is enough to engage Sinners to the Use of Means,
that God has appointed them as such, has required their Attendance upon them;
there is an Aptness in the Means themselves and a proper Tendency, and it is by
these Means the Holy Spirit works; in this Way he meets with perishing
Creatures in Mercy, and they cannot expect the Grace of God in the Neglect of
his Institutions: While there is a MAY BE the Lord will be gracious (Amos v.
15.) an WHO KNOWS if the Lord will return, and repent, and leave a Blessing
behind him. (Joel ii. 14.) Sinners will be utterly inexcusable in neglecting
them, and justly charged with choosing their own Destruction.

VII. From what has been said it will follow, as a Conclusion on the Whole,
that all Sinners, where the Gospel comes, are under the most indispensible
Obligations to attend the Means of Grace. The Design of their Institution as
Mediums of the Spirit's dealing with their Souls about their eternal Interests,
lays them under Bonds of Gratitude. For why, shall the offended Majesty of
Heaven, thus seek after rebellious Sinners? Would it not then be the basest
Ingratitude to treat him with Neglect? The gracious Authority of God binds
their Consciences, he requires their Attendance upon his Ordinances; their very
Institution implies such a Requisition, and it will be a Disobedience, highly
criminal, to neglect them.

We also hence see what Ground of Encouragement Sinners have for their
Attendance on the Means of Grace; they have not the Assurance of a Promise that
they shall be successful; the great God has come under no such Engagement: they
have no Ground of present Peace and Security from their most diligent and
earnest Use of them. Such Apprehensions would lead to, and support a
self-righteous Spirit, and be an Abuse of the Means of Grace. They have great
Reason of deepest Anxiety lest they fail of the Grace of God, and provoke the
Holy Spirit to forsake them. Yet they have sufficient Motives from the
aforesaid Design of their Institution; their moral Aptness and Tendency,
whereby they are adapted to our rational Natures and the Spirit's Operations,
and suited to affect the Hearts of Men in a moral Way: It is the stated Way of
the Spirit's dealing with the Souls of Men; by his Word and Ordinances he
strives with Sinners, and by the same Means he accomplishes his special Work of
Grace; and in this Way there is the only Probability of meeting with Mercy. In
the continued Neglect of God's Ordinance there is certain Destruction, but in
waiting on God in this Way, there is a Peradventure the Lord may have Mercy.
The Holy Spirit has rendered the Means of Grace effectual to Multitudes, and
how knows each Sinner, but of his rich Grace, he may effectually reach him?

Hence also we may see that the Ministers of the Gospel not only may with
Safety and Propriety, but are bound in Duty to urge unregenerate Sinners, as
well as others, to a diligent Use and Improvement of the Means of Grace, and in
that Way seek unto God for regenerating Grace. If the preceding View of the
Matter he kept up, such Exhortations can have no Tendency to settle People in a
legal Dependence on the Means, nor promote Security and carnal Confidence. Yea,
it is highly incumbent on the Ministers of Christ to give particular Directions
to poor Sinners in order to their Improvement of the Means, in such a Manner as
has the most likely Tendency, and wherewith it is most probable the Holy Spirit
may concur for their Conversion to God. -- Certainly a mere external Attendance
upon the Administration of Ordinances, while the Heart is secure and careless,
is not likely to answer any good End. Undoubtedly, such have Need to be
directed so to attend to the Word of God as to compare themselves therewith, to
examine themselves and enter into a serious Consideration of their own State
and Character, and lay to Heart the Danger they are in. -- Awakened Sinners are
inclined to seek Shelter in the Duties of Religion, and to expect Healing and
Relief to their Consciences from their earnest Use of Means. These need to be
warned of that dangerous Rock, and be directed to such a View of God's Law as
may more deeply convince them of their utter Depravity, and slay them dead to
the Law. Gal. ii. 19. Their Attention to the Overtures of the Gospel should be
urged. Our safe Path lies between two dangerous Extremes, viz. of those who
only try to convince Men of their unregenerate State, call upon them to embrace
Jesus Christ, and there leave them under all their perplexing Exercises and
Distresses, without any Counsel or Direction; and thus their various
Temptations, Discouragements and Despondencies are overlooked, and no
Assistance is administered when they most need it. It is a Matter of great
Consequence, into what Hands poor convinced Sinners fall; an unskilful
Treatment of them is vastly injurious. The other Extreme is of those, who
direct Sinners to Duties and Attendance on the Means of Grace in such a legal
Manner, as to encourage their Dependence upon them; such lead poor Creatures to
think they can do something to recommend them to God; their utter Insufficiency
in themselves is never fairly opened up. On the contrary, they are told, if
they do their Part, God will do his; and thus they are made to believe, there
is a certain Connection between their own best Endeavors and the Saving Grace
of God; that if they DO WHAT THEY CAN, God will do the Rest. Thus the Nature
and Design of the Means is misrepresented. They are considered as Means which
Sinners use with God, in order to prevail with him, rather than Means whereby
he deals with them, in order to call them back again to himself, and renders
them irresistably efficacious for that Purpose when he pleases. The first of
these Extremes tends to make Sinners neglect all Attempts to perform the Duties
of Religion, or if they give their Presence at Ordinances, yet make no Essay to
strive with their own Hearts; as being altogether in vain, without any Tendency
to promote their Good, and not required of them in their present Circumstances.
While this Doctrine is believed, Satan is not much afraid of Damage to his
Interest from all their Convictions of being in an unregenerate State; for the
Consequence is, they quench the Spirit. If Convictions startle them, they, upon
this Principle, make no Attempt to cherish their Convictions, easily fall
asleep again, and lie still in a careless Indolence. By the latter Extreme the
striving of Sinners is turned into a wrong Channel, and they are directed to
the Use of Means upon Principles entirely wrong. The Directions they get, send
them to the Law for Life, and settle them upon a Righteousness of their own.
Both the Extremes are injurious to the Interests of Religion, and destructive
to the Souls of Men; Both are to be avoided; the Ministers of the Gospel are to
endeavor the Conviction and awakening of Sinners; and where there are any
Awakenings, they are to attend to, and cherish them, and, by prudent seasonable
and evangelical Council to direct their Way, and point out the Method of
Salvation to them. They have sufficient Encouragement to such a Conduct, upon
this Principle, that however dead, miserable and helpless Sinners are, yet, it
is by such Views and Impressions as evangelical Councils and Directions tend
to, that the Holy Spirit carries on his Work in the Souls of Men; and
therefore, when he concurs, they shall be rendered effectual. May the God of
all Grace teach his Servants how to negotiate the Treaty of Peace and
Reconciliation, and make them abundantly wise to win Souls to Jesus Christ,
AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9, Line 9, read ((...) Disciple.) l. 11, read (...). l. 5, from Bottom,
for or read and. Page 11, l. 18, for III. put 3. Page 13, l. 17, leave out, to
call. l. 18. for find read found. Page 14, l. 16, for Individuals read
invisible. In the Note, 4th l. from the Bottom, for formerly read formally.
Page 19, l. 2. for Sacrament Seal, is read Sacraments seal. Line 14, for
completely read complexly. Page 23, l, 1. for ever read even.


