Mr. Cogswell's Election SERMON, MAY 9 th, 1771.

A SERMON, Preached before the General Assembly Of the Colony of CONNECTICUT,
At HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THEIR Anniversary Election, May 9th, 1771.

By JAMES COGSWELL, A. M. Pastor of the First CHURCH of CHRIST in Canterbury.

NEW LONDON: Printed by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY,
M,DCC,LXXI.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, holden at HARTFORD, on the Second Thursday of May, A. D. 1771.
ORDERED, That SHUBAEL CONANT, Esquire and Mr. JOHN CURTISS, return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Rev'd Mr. JAMES COGSWELL, for his SERMON delivered before
the Assembly on the 9th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof, that it may be
printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr.

An Election SERMON.
JEREMIAH XVIII. 7, 8, 9, 10. AT what Instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it:

If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will
repent of the Evil that I thought to do unto them.

And at what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom to build and to plant it:

If it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not my Voice, then I will repent of
the Good wherewith I said I would Benefit them.


THE Attention of Americans has of late been uncommonly roused, and deeply
engaged about the public Good. We have looked on our invaluable Liberties, and
important Privileges to be in Danger. And such a general Concern relative to
these Things, and Zeal for their Preservation, has prevailed among us, as
Regard for Liberty is wont to inspire a free People with. -- In such an
alarming Situation, many invincible Reasons have been offered in support of our
just and important Rights; many Expedients of a political and prudential Nature
have been urged with great Force, and pressed upon us by very weighty Motives:
And may they have their Effect -- The Design of them is certainly Noble and
Important.

BUT there are doubtless Considerations of a moral and religious Nature, which
ought to command our Attention, and which are really of far greater Importance,
both to our present and future Happiness, than any Thing merely civil or
political can be. -- Indeed the chief and ultimate Design of Religion, as it
respects Mankind, is to deliver us from the fatal Effects of the Apostasy, and
to fit us for a State of perfect Holiness and Happiness in the coming World.
But this is not all; Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well
as of that which is to come. And it tends to the present Happiness not only of
Individuals, but the Love and Practice of it has a most friendly Aspect on
public Weal; and the neglect of it the most direct Tendency to the Misery and
Destruction of a State. -- Several Considerations of this Nature, and of great
Importance, are suggested to us from our Text and Context.

THE Jews were become a very wicked and abandoned People, at the Time when God
sent this Message to them by the Prophet. Many Threatenings, and of fore
Calamities had been frequently denounced against them, which had as yet, very
little, or rather no Effect to reform them. The Prophet Jeremiah is directed
therefore to go to the Place where the Potter fashioned his Vessels of Clay:
There he observed that the Potter had an uncontrolled Power to form these
Vessels as he pleased: If they would not serve for one Purpose he could very
easily turn them to another. From this lively Similitude, the Prophet is
ordered to represent to the Jews God's sovereign Power over the most formidable
States and extensive Empires: And with how much Ease God either exalts or
depresses them, prospers or afflicts, increases or diminishes, or in a Word,
preserves or destroys them. And God has certainly a greater Right to do this,
than the Potter has to new Mould the Clay of which he is not the absolute
Proprietor.

THIS was true in Jeremiah's Time, and is equally true now; and really it is a
Truth of very great Importance to be considered and realized; for it shows us
that we are absolutely dependent on God for our all: -- Prosperity or
Adversity, whether private or public, is entirely from God.

BUT God gives us to understand in our (Text, that whatever his Power and
Sovereignty might enable him to do,) he conducts not only according to the
invariable Rules of Justice and Equity, which gives us the greatest Assurance
that he never will wrong any People, or bring any Evil upon them, merely to
show himself Sovereign, but farther that he is disposed to treat Mankind
according to the Rules of Clemency and Kindness: So that when a Nation or
Kingdom have been guilty of a Conduct criminal to that Degree, that they have
greatly provoked God, and which would justify him in proceeding to the last
Extremities with them; yea, if God had proceeded so far as to threaten them
with utter Ruin, if after all this, they should even then repent, and turn from
their evil Ways to God, he would avert the Tokens of his Displeasure, recall
the Threatenings, prosper and establish them.

ON the other Hand, God lets them know that whatever Encouragement he had given
of granting Enlargement and Prosperity to any State; if they after this
degenerate and backslide, to that Degree, that their Character becomes that of
Evil Doers, an unrighteous, ungodly People, they forfeit his Promise and
Protection; and if they continue irreclaimable, he will not build them up, but
destroy them.

IT is worthy of Observation, that the Declarations made in our Text relative
to God's providential Dispensations, are not confined to the Jews; they are of
a general Nature, and published in an indefinite Manner: Whence it appears that
God Almighty designs here to exhibit a general Rule of his Conduct toward
public Bodies or Communities.

IT is indeed true that we have no Reason to expect an exact Correspondence
between God's providential Dispensations toward the Jews and other Kingdoms or
civil Communities. Yet as God is the moral Governor of the World, and approves
of Virtue and Holiness wherever it appears, and always hates Sin and Wickedness
among all Nations; so it is reasonable to believe he will show his Approbation,
Favor and Protection to the one, and frown upon and punish the other. The
State of the Case is very different (as to the Time of Rewards and Punishments)
between Individuals and public Bodies of Men. The future State is the Time of
Retribution to Individuals. -- Though therefore many among the godly may suffer
very grievous Things in this present State, they shall be abundantly Rewarded
hereafter: In that happy World Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness
for the upright in Heart. And however the wicked may flourish and prosper here,
their triumphing is short, for it is that they may be cut off and destroyed.
But the Case is very different with regard to civil Communities. Whatever Forms
of Administration they assume, they are the Creatures of Time. They have no
Existence but in this World -- All their Bands of Society, as Bodies-Politic,
are dissolved, and have no Existence in a future State. If therefore they are
not rewarded or punished in some Proportion to their Character as righteous or
sinful in this World, they never are at all. It appears therefore agreeable to
the Divine Perfections, that God should show visible Marks of Approbation of
public Virtue, and frown upon and punish a sinful People, as in our Text he has
expressly declared he will do.

IT appears then that God speaks to us in these Days as really, though not in the
same Manner as he did to Nations and Kingdoms in ancient Times. To them he
spoke by immediate and particular Messages from Heaven, pointing out their
Sins, and the particular and special Judgments which they might assuredly
expect if they continued Incorrigible. To us he speaks by his written. Word and
his Providence. In his Word he shows us what is the Character of such a People
as have Encouragement to hope for his Favor, or Reason to fear his
Displeasure; -- and what he justly expects from such a People as have wickedly
departed from him, that they may be restored to Favor, and enjoy his Smiles.
Many Examples are left us in sacred Scripture for our Instruction and
Admonition. Thus God speaks to us now, and surely the Man of Wisdom will hear
what God speaks to the City and to the Country. We must carefully examine
into our real Character, and compare it to that of other Communities, and then
consider how God has declared he would treat them, and what Treatment they have
in fact met with, and from thence collect what we have to hope for, or to fear
from the Hand of God.

THAT which may be further attempted, by Divine Assistance, will be to show, I.
THAT the Love and Practice of Religion has the greatest Encouragement of God's
Favor; and therefore is the surest Means of the Happiness of a People. II.
THAT the prevalence of Irreligion and Wickedness have a dreadful Tendency to
their Destruction;


And, III. THAT if a People have revolted from God, Repentance and Reformation
will be the surest and best Means to prevent their Ruin, and restore them to
the Divine Favor.


I. THE first Thing proposed is to show, that the Love and Practice of Religion
has the greatest Encouragement of God's Favor, and therefore is the surest
Means of the Happiness of a People.

THIS is implied in the Text. It Is indeed taken for granted, that God will
bless and prosper a People who continue holy and obedient. Such who do not Evil
in his Sight, but obey his Voice. These are Phrases frequently used in the
Writings of the Prophets to decypher true Religion. But we must always remember
that a right Temper of Heart is always included in this Obedience to the Voice
of God: otherwise it is destitute of the most essential Property of Obedience.
-- A supreme Love to God, on Account of his transcendent Excellence and
absolute Perfection: an ultimate Regard to his Honor, and a Disposition to be
subject to his Will, are essential Ingredients in Obedience to the Voice of
God. This Voice of God is no other than his Word, and when we have such a
Temper of Mind as the Word of God requires; when we believe and live as God
requires we should do in his Word, then are we religious.

ALL the great Truths and Duties of Morality are adopted by Christ, and
incorporated into his Laws, are refined and purified, and set in the fairest
and strongest Point of Light, and raised to their highest Perfection in the
Christian Institution. This Word or Voice of God discovers his glorious Nature
and amiable Perfections, in Conformity to which, the Happiness of all
intelligent Beings consists. -- It shows that Mankind, though originally created
in the Image of God, have fallen from him, and are become both guilty and
polluted by Sin. -- The surprising Method of Redemption by Jesus Christ, the
great Mediator; and the Recovery to a holy Temper and Life, which (through Divine
Influence) always takes Place in all who are by Faith in him, made partakers of
the great Salvation. All these glorious Truths in one connected View, all that
Holiness that is required, and those Duties which are directed to in God's
Word, tend to promote the Happiness of civil Communities; for God has most
plainly shown in his Word

THAT, Religion, and this only, will recommend to his Favor.

THAT, the Religion which God's Word requires, is so framed, as in the very
Nature and Genius of it, to have a tendency to promote the public Good.

AND this Word of God points out many Duties to Men, in all Characters,
Relations and Circumstances, which directly and immediately tend to promote the
best Good of the State.

1. GOD has most plainly shown in his Word, that Religion, and only this will
recommend to his Favor. Very many are the Promises of this Kind. God promised
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 28. 1.
that if they would hearken diligently to the Voice of the Lord their God, to
do all his Commandments, the Lord their God would set them on High, above all
the Nations of the Earth. And thus also said the Lord to them by the Prophet
Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
Hear ye me Asa and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you while ye be
with him; and if ye seek him he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he
will forsake you. Many other Promises of this Kind, taken in connection with
our Text, are so plain as to put this Matter beyond all Doubt; for they are
made not only to particular Persons, but to civil Communities as such.

I proceed therefore to say,

2. THAT Religion, which God's Word requires, is so framed, as in the very
Nature and Genius of it to have a tendency to promote the public Good. It might
easily be shown, (were there Time) that the more general Requisitions and
Prohibitions contained in that Religion which is described and required in the
Word of God, have all a tendency to promote the Good of civil Society: But what
I would especially insist on under this Head is, that the Religion of Jesus
Christ forms Men to such a Temper as powerfully inclines them to promote the
Interest of the Public.

THE Depravity of humane Nature, the corrupted and vitiated Temper of Men's
Minds, is the real original Source of all those wicked Practices, which are
prejudicial both to their private and public Interests. Hence proceed all those
open, bold Violations of God's Law, those enormous Crimes and Debaucheries,
which tend to the Ruin and Dissolution of a State. This Fountain must be
cleansed, or putrid Streams will continue to flow. And when this Temper is
changed, the Heart renewed and made holy, the Man will be strongly and
vigorously engaged in all the Duties of Holiness; and consequently to promote
the public Tranquillity.

Now, ( The Rev'd Mr. Lockwood, of Weathersfield, in his Election Sermon for
1754.
as one says) the Gospel and Religion of Jesus is admirably designed and
calculated to produce this blessed Effect; and this blessed Effect it does and
will actually produce, wherever it is cordially and sincerely entertained and
submitted to. Hence we are said to be sanctified by the Word; to be born again,
not of corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives
and abides forever. The Gospel of Christ, attended by the sacred Influences of
the Divine Spirit, is the powerful Means of rectifying the sinful Nature of
Man, and forming it to Purity and Holiness, and a governing Disposition to
please and obey God in all Things. As the Laws of Religion require the
universal Practice of Virtue and Holiness; they that are truly Religious,
choose to obey God and live holy Lives; there is a blessed Agreement and
Harmony, though not a perfect one between the Temper of their Minds, and the
sacred Laws of Religion; they are not only awed and influenced by the Authority
and Command of God, but they find an inward Propensity and Disposition to
devote and approve themselves to God, not only in the Duties of Piety and
Godliness, but in the Performance of all relative and social Duties, and to
exert themselves in their Places, to promote the Welfare of Mankind, and the
Tranquillity and Happiness of the State.

I proceed to say

3. RELIGION requires and implies many Duties in the various Characters,
Relations and Circumstances of Life, which tend immediately to the Good of the
State. And an inward Principle of Piety will prompt Men readily to perform
them. A hint of the principal of these Duties as they respect Rulers and
Subjects, will be all I have Time now to mention. And,

UNDER the Influence of Religion, Rulers will discharge the Duties of their
important Trust with strict Fidelity. In the height of Elevation, they will not
forget they have a Master in Heaven, to whom they are accountable, before whom
they must shortly stand, stripped of all the Robes of State and Ensigns of
Grandeur, to give an Account of their Stewardship. They know God requires them,
while they rule over Men, to serve the Lord, to serve him with Fear and to
rejoice with Trembling. -- Religion will influence and embolden them to
distribute Justice with Impartiality and Intrepidity; knowing that it is an
Ordinance of Him that rules among the Gods, That he that rules over Men must
be just, ruling in the fear of God. In Obedience to this great Lord, they will
endeavor to let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
Stream, as an irresistible Torrent, bearing down all Opposition, and sweeping
away Wickedness, Oppression and Injustice from the Earth. -- Religion, in the
Life and Spirit of it, would dispose Rulers to be so far from any Aims after
arbitrary Power, as to be zealous Guardians of the just and important Rights of
the Subject. It would greatly Influence, not only by making them afraid to set
themselves against the Lord, and against his Anointed; but would temper the
Thoughts of Dignity, cure a godless Thirst for Despotism, and so keep them back
from all guilty Reaches after arbitrary Power, and teach them to conduct as the
Ministers of God for the good of their Subjects. -- Religion would, above all
other Things inspire them with paternal Tenderness, and engage them to act as
Fathers of the People. There is no other Principle of true Patriotism equal to
that of Religion. Men have indeed sometimes from lower Principles than those of
Christianity done well for the Public: But certainly no other Principles can
actuate them with equal Force and Alacrity to pursue the public Good. A
Principle of Holiness is of a divine Original, and not only fills the Mind with
Veneration and Awe of the Divine Majesty, but inspires the Heart with Love to
God and Man. Such a Principle will enlarge the Ruler's Heart, and engage him
with unrestrained Benevolence to pursue the Good of all. Such Rulers would
therefore willingly exert all their Powers, and employ their whole Time for the
Interest of their Country. And no doubt their greatest and most valuable
Interests will proportionably excite the generous Concern of such Rulers. --
The Regulation of Commerce -- The Encouragement of Agriculture and Manufactures
-- The Promotion of Learning -- The Preservation or Restoration of Liberty --
But above all, Religion will meet with their warmest Encouragement, be
patronized by their Example, and their Hearts will bleed for their People when
under the Rebukes of Heaven, or dreadfully exposed to the Frowns of an angry
God for their Apostasy from him. -- In a Word, what like Religion will be a
source of Magnanimity and Fortitude in Seasons of special Danger?

WHEN nothing but the Testimony of an unreproaching Conscience, and the plaudit
of the Omniscient Judge can yield Support, what but this will support them when
repaid with I gratitude for their noble and Self-denying Exertions for the
Good of their Country? What but Religion will inspirit them with Resolution to
persist with unremitted Vigor and unabated Diligence, though the more abundantly
they Love the less they are beloved? What like Religion will arm those in Power
against the Temptations to Pride and Luxury, Venality and Oppression which an
elevated Station peculiarly exposes to? In fine; Religion and this only will
Influence them to exhibit such an Example as shall have the greatest Tendency
to reform a degenerate and backsliding People. As they are Gods by Office,
Religion will render them God-like in the Temper of their Minds, in their
public Administrations, and in private Life. Such an Example as this would have
a peculiar Tendency to give Charms to Virtue, to make Religion appear reputable
and amiable, and to reform a vicious Age.

FROM these particulars it appears that Religion in Rulers, not only in
Speculation, but in Love and Practice; not only protected by wholesome Laws,
but appearing in real Life, and in high Life, would have a Tendency directly to
promote public Felicity.

AND no less would it do so with Regard to Subjects. The Religion of Christ
directs Mankind in general to many Duties which have the most direct Tendency
to render a State prosperous at home, and respectable abroad; and, when it is
cordially embraced, will effectually incline them to such a Conduct: For
Righteousness, i. e. Holiness exalts a Nation. The Word of God strictly
enjoins that Deference and Submission to Rulers, which is absolutely necessary
for the public Peace and Happiness; and severely threatens and condemns a
disobedient, mutinous and unruly Temper and Conduct. In this Word God commands,
Romans 13.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers. I Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, (viz. which is agreeable to the
Ordinance of Heaven) "for the Lord's sake." He that resists the just Commands
of lawful Authority is threatened with no less Punishment than Damnation. --
Religion, in the Power of it, would engage Men conscienciously to adhere to the
Rules of strict Justice. -- To speak the Truth in Love. -- It would sweetly,
yet powerfully incline them to lead quiet and peaceable Lives, in all Honesty
as well as Godliness. -- It would banish Luxury and Intemperance from the
Earth; for the Grace of God teaches to live soberly as well as righteously and
godly. -- These Things most manifestly tend directly and greatly to increase
the public Tranquillity. -- But beside and above all this, the noble and
generous benevolent Spirit which real Christianity does not fail to inspire the
Mind with, would have an unfailing Tendency (if generally imbibed) to promote
general Good, and diffuse Happiness all around -- A selfish, narrow, contracted
Temper is very inimical to the State. When Men are wholly intent on private
Advantage, grudge every Farthing which goes beside their own Coffers, and coil
themselves up in the narrow and dirty Shell of private Interest, the Public
will be neglected -- The State cannot prosper. Religion is calculated in the
highest Degree to cure this Distemper. It enlarges the Heart, greatens and
sublimates the Views of the Mind. That Benevolence which is the very Life and
Soul of the Religion of the Gospel, embraces the whole System of Beings, through
the Universe, in the Arms of disinterested Love. This then will be the noblest
Principle of public Spirit: 'T will engage and dispose us to love our Neighbor
as ourselves, to pursue the public Happiness as our own, and greatly to deny
ourselves, from a generous and ardent Desire to promote the Good of Mankind.

THIS brings me to the Second general Head, viz.

II. THE prevalence of Irreligion and Wickedness have a dreadful Tendency to
the Destruction of a People: As Righteousness exalts a Nation, so Sin is a
reproach to any People. The general Practice of Wickedness, necessarily
diminishes and weakens a State, and if Impenitently persisted in will terminate
in their final ruin. -- If such Persons as are promoted to Places of Power and
Trust, and fill the Seats of Government, are destitute of Principles of Piety,
void of Integrity and Honor, it will have a baleful Influence on the State of
the People whom they govern. Whatever Talents or Accomplishments they are
Masters of, while destitute of these, there can be no sufficient Security of
their proving public Blessings: Most probably the noblest Talents will be
abused and prostituted to serve the vile Purposes of Ambition, Avarice or
Luxury, as their leading Passion chances to direct. And what can be expected
under such Rulers but a perpetual Series of Distresses and Judgments? What but
Scenes of Oppression, Violence, Corruption and Effeminacy?

THE Examples of such Men will be very fatal. If Magistrates have the
Characters of Rulers of Sodom, it may be expected that their Subjects will be
the People of Gomorrah. The wise King of Israel observes, If a Ruler hearken to
lies, all the People are wicked. When therefore Rulers take no Care to make and
execute such Laws as are calculated to suppress Vice and Wickedness, and to
encourage Virtue and Religion, much more if Oppression, Venality or any Kind of
Iniquity is encouraged; or if by their evil Example they enervate the force of
Laws, and put it out of their own Power to execute them to Advantage; they give
a public Invitation to their Subjects to shake off all Restraints to Sin, and
to commit Iniquity with Greediness. Such Rulers have brought infinite Mischief
on the State. They have (as one says) like baleful Comets, spread Plagues and
Desolation through a Land, by their malignant Influences. -- But,

HOWEVER virtuous, wise, faithful and exemplary Rulers are, if Vice and
Irreligion prevail among the People, so that their governing Character is that
of a sinful People, they have awful Reason to Tremble at God's Displeasure:
Indeed, according to that Degree in which Sin prevails, it naturally weakens
and injures the public Interest, as plainly appears from what has been already
observed. For in the same Proportion that Religion tends to the public
Emolument, Irreligion tends to the Damage of the State. -- God, the moral and
righteous Governor of the World, has so constituted the Nature of Things, and
ordered the general Course of his Providence, that the Consequences of Sin in
general, should be very pernicious to the Temporal as well as the future and
eternal Interests of Men. Nothing is more obvious than that many Sins tend to
bring Misery, and indeed swiftly to hasten Ruin and Destruction on that People
among whom they prevail.

THUS Pride and Luxury, Venality, Injustice and Oppression, Intemperance and
Debauchery will have a most fatal Influence and swiftly hasten on every Kind of
Misery. Dissipation, Indigence and Beggary tread on the Heels of Luxury, Pride
and Prodigality. Men of this Character, thus reduced by their evil Courses,
often betake themselves to Practices pernicious and ruinous to their Country,
such as Robbery, Theft, Counterfeiting, or if not to these, to others, if not
so scandalous, yet very hurtful and pernicious; such as sharping,
overreaching, and the like. -- Idleness often clothes a Man with Rags, and
reduces whole Families to the most forlorn and pitiable Circumstances. How
often do the slothful and indolent plunge deep into some of the abovementioned
Vices? or into Intemperance, which is a Vice which may properly be more
particularly mentioned and insisted on, as it contains in Embrio all other
Vices. Riot, Excess, Debauchery, Gaming, Profaneness, neglect and contempt of
all Religion; these all are the common Attendants on Intemperance: The Person
who wallows in this worse than brutal Vice, invites every Temptation, enfeebles
and emasculates himself, and is therefore in the high Road to Ruin. And with
Regard to States and Kingdoms, all History Witnesses, that when such Sins have
prevailed so as to become the general Character, they have been on the very
Brink of Destruction. Those mighty Empires of the World, which had for Ages
been growing respectable and happy, by Industry, Temperance, Economy and
public Virtue, whenever these Vices prevailed, have sunk by swift Degrees into
total Dissolution.

THERE are other Sins, such as Idolatry, Profaneness, contempt of the Grace of
God, Incorrigibleness under Chastisements and the various Means which God is
using for the Recovery of a backsliding People, which are daring Affronts and
aggravated Provocations to Almighty God, and more direct and immediate insults
upon his Honor; and therefore that People who are and continue Guilty of them,
may expect severe Frowns and special Judgments from Heaven. -- The God who
governs universal Nature will often specially interpose to distress and punish
such a People. -- When therefore all these Kinds of Iniquity prevail and abound
among a People, natural and moral Causes concur to render their Situation
gloomy and dismal. God severely threatens them; he says of such a People, Jere.
5. 9.
Shall I not visit for these Things? and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? His Treatment of the Jews, (to wave all other Instances) may
serve for a just Comment on his Promises and Threatenings of this Nature. By
viewing their Circumstances at any given Time, a pretty exact Judgment might
have been drawn up of the State of Religion among them: And that complete
Destruction which they finally suffered for obstinate Perseverance in Sin and
Rejection of Grace, when God overthrew them, even as he overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, is left on sacred Record, as a monitory Example to all other Nations.

THIS brings me to the last Observation;

III. THAT if a People have revolted from God, Repentance and Reformation are
the most certain and best Means to prevent their Ruin, and restore them to the
divine Favor. Indeed these are the only Things mentioned in the Text. It is
true, when a People by their own Folly and Prodigality are reduced into low
Circumstances, or are threatened with sore Judgments and heavy Calamities, they
are to use all proper Means of a civil and prudential Nature, as well as those
which more strictly speaking are of a religious Kind. Frugality, a prudent
Regulation of civil and commercial Affairs, a vigorous Exertion to preserve
their just Rights, are all highly reasonable and necessary; they are no ways
inconsistent with Religion or contrary to Repentance. But all these are
insufficient without Repentance. They cannot ensure Success; they have no
Promise from God. In a Word, whatever be their Struggles and Exertions;
whatever the Expedients they use, yet if they leave Repentance out of the
Question, they are very far from any certainty of Success; rather they have
Reason to fear that the best concerted Plans will prove abortive, and that God
will teach them by Experience, that the Race is not to the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong, that their own Strength is Weakness, and that Salvation
is only from the Lord.

IT is allowed that in some extraordinary Cases God has for some Time spared a
very sinful People from immediate and impending Ruin upon the Intercession of
eminently godly Men. Thus he spared Israel at the request of Moses on their
Behalf. But in this Case God took sufficient Care to secure the honor of (...)
Law, by the signal Punishment which he inflicted on them who were (...), though
he did not destroy the whole (...) Notwithstanding he heard the Prayer (...) he
says; Number. 14. 21.
But as truly as (...) the Earth shall be filled with (...) the Lord. This
threatening God accomplished when he shut those murmuring, stiff necked
Israelites out of the Land of Canaan, and their Carcases perished in the
W^^de^^^^s.

BUT though God has in his great Clemency spared a People for some Time, whose
general Character was very bad, on Account of the godly living with them, and
especially when with Fervency and Importunity they have interceeded for them;
or though he may have suspended the immediate Execution of Punishment on the
Account of a partial or merely external Reformation; I believe Repentance
attended with Reformation as the general Character of a People, has the only
certain Encouragement of the divine Forgiveness and Favor. Such Repentance as
is sincere, universal and evangelical; as implies an inwrought godly Sorrow for
Sin, as against a God of infinite Purity, Righteousness and Goodness; as
produces an inward, real aversion to all Sin, and endeavors against it. Such a
Repentance, wherein the Soul taking its whole Encouragements from the Mercy of
God revealed and manifested in the divine Redeemer, returns to God by a
glorious Christ, as its rightful, original Sovereign and only Happiness (...)
in a Word, such a Repentance wherein every Sin is forsaken. Reformation from
all evil Ways, and a Practice of all moral and christian Duties will accompany
true Repentance.

AND where such a Repentance takes Place, though among a People who have been
very wicked, and whose backslidings have been attended with the most crimson
Aggravations, it will be a Means of averting the divine Displeasure. God will
return in Mercy to them, and build them up. The many clear and positive
Declarations which God has made in his Word, that Repentance and Reformation
are agreeable to him, are indispensibly required by him, and are the only Terms
on which he will turn away from his Displeasure and be reconciled; and the
undoubted Evidence which we have that these have been frequently the Means of
averting impending Danger, and saving from deserved Ruin; are sufficient to put
this Matter out of all doubt; and therefore should be an effectual Inducement
to a People, however sinful and degenerate, however afflicted, or however
threatened, though on the very Borders of Extermination, to turn to God, through
Christ, by unfeigned Repentance. The kind Declarations and Promises which God
made to the Jews, of this Nature, are very many and express; and they were
continued even to the last; when they were on the Brink of Ruin. Such was their
Degeneracy that God says of them, Isai. 1. 5.
Ah sinful Nation! a People laden with Iniquity! a Seed of evildoers! The
whole Head is sick: The whole Heart is faint. In fine, such was their
Degeneracy, such their Obstinacy, that the Threatenings of Almighty God are
levelled directly against them; threatenings not merely of paternal
Chastisement, as in the earlier Days of their State, but of the entire
Destruction of the Kingdom. The Measure of their Sins was full, and God seems
to be bringing Evil on them, even to the uttermost. He was just about to pluck
up, to pull down and to destroy. -- The Nation is here compared to a Vineyard;
the Similitude is pertinent, and the threatened Destruction complete. If the
Fences be thrown down which surrounded the Vineyard, the Vines plucked up by
the Roots, and the Beasts of the Field let in and suffered to lay it waste, and
to tread it down so that it should grow up no more, the Vineyard is completely
destroyed. Further God says, Jer. 19. 11.
Thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, even so will I break
this People and this City as one breaks a Potter's Vessel that cannot be made
whole again. But behold the Clemency of God, If that People against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to
do unto them. Again, God says, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your Doings from before mine
Eyes; Cease to do evil, Learn to do well. -- Come now and let us Reason
together says the Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white
as Snow, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. If ye be
willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land.

I MIGHT also show many Instances in which God has appeared in his providence,
and signally delivered a penitent People from multiplied Distresses; but it is
needless to recite particular Facts for the Purpose, since every one acquainted
with sacred History especially cannot be at a Loss for them. Many a Time Psalm.
107. 11, 12, 13.
when they rebelled against the Words of God, and contemned the Counsel of the
Most High; so that he brought down their Heart with Labor, they fell down and
there was none to help. Then they cried unto the Lord in their Trouble, and he
saved them out of their Distresses.

FROM what has been said may be inferred the superlative Excellency of
Religion, which is calculated to promote the noblest Ends, viz. to form Men in
every Character and Relation to love and honor God, and to pursue and promote
the highest Interest and truest Happiness of Mankind.

WE may also infer the inexcusable Folly of wicked Men, who while they are
inordinately persuing their present and private Interest, in the neglect and
contempt of Religion, act in direct Opposition to both, and so expose
themselves to everlasting Destruction, for less, for worse than nothing.

WE learn further, that it is a Thing of the last Importance to a People who
are under the evident Frowns of Heaven, critically to examine what is their
real Character: And if it should appear that they have done Evil in God's
Sight, and have not obeyed his Voice: If it should appear especially that they
have gone away backward, and forsaken the Lord, that they speedily hearken to
the Warnings of God's Word, and repent and reform what is amiss. -- It appears
of indispensible Necessity that every Order of Men in their various Capacities,
exert themselves vigorously to promote a Work of such Difficulty and
Importance. And as in this critical Day this is the Duty of all, so it is in
many Respects, eminently the Duty of Rulers.

As therefore in Obedience to his Honor's Command I stand in this Place on the
present Occasion, may I be allowed, with all due Deference and Respect, yet
with a Freedom becoming the ministerial Office, to address the honored
Legislative Body of this Government, present in the general Assembly this Day.

WORTHY and renowned Fathers, I TRUST it is the ardent wish of many in this
Government, that you may have Success equal to your Desires and Endeavors for
the public Good; and that you may be long continued in your important Posts of
Government, to exert your well known Abilities in defending our invaluable
Privileges, watching for the public Peace, and at the same Time protecting,
encouraging and promoting Religion.

IT is a signal Honor to you, (revered Senators) that by the Suffrages of a
People, who still enjoy and highly prize Freedom, you have been be trusted with
the important Affairs of Government in a Season so peculiarly Dangerous and
critical as this. The Confidence reposed in you is indeed great, and we trust
and have Reason to hope, your Vigilance, Firmness, Zeal, Prudence and Exertion
will be answerable to our Expectations and to the Exigencies of the State.

WHAT Expedients of a political Nature are requisite at this Day to guard our
just Rights, to regulate Commerce, to encourage Manufactures, Agriculture and
Economy, we leave to your Wisdom, not doubting your Care. These Things have
been frequently and most pertinently urged, especially of late. -- My Subject
leads me to Considerations of another Nature, however not less important.

THAT we are involved in great Calamities, and have Reason to fear still
greater, in this Day of perplexing Uncertainty and doubtful Expectation, is so
Obvious that it is needless to enlarge on the disagreeable Theme. And whatever
are the immediate Sources of these Distresses, our Sins are no Doubt the
procuring Cause. Our Iniquities have separated between us and our God. That
Profaneness, Impiety and Sensuality which have prevailed, and do still prevail
among us, (may I be allowed to say) with too much Impunity; Our stupid
Forgetfulness of God, and our general neglect (under all our Struggles and
Concern) of the only effectual Way of Deliverance, from all the Calamities we
feel or fear, these things point to us in a striking Light the Necessity of
Repentance and Reformation.

UNDER God, our Eyes are unto you, our Dependence is upon you, to exert
yourselves in your Places of Dignity and Authority, with yet greater Spirit and
Vigilance, that you may not bear the Sword in vain, but be a Terror to evil
doers, and a Praise and Encouragement to them that do well. We hope for the
Continuance of your friendly Care to the Seminary of Learning in this
Government, that you will promote Learning, and encourage a learned Ministry,
between which and Religion there is so close a Connection. We also trust you
will with Firmness support our religious Constitution in this Government, as
being well calculated to subserve the Interests of Religion. And if it be
possible, either by enacting other Laws, or more punctually executing the many
good and wholesome Laws now in being, to suppress the growing Profaneness,
Intemperance, Contempt of Worship and Profanation of the Sabbath, which are
visible and awfully increasing among us, it would have a happy Tendency to
promote Reformation.

ONE very honorary and expressive Character given to Rulers in God's Word, is
that of Gods; this implies that they should be God-like, and (as far as humane
Infirmities will permit) imitate the God of Gods. And what a glorious Pattern
is held up to the Rulers View in this particular? What boundless Compassion God
has shown to a guilty apostate World? What has he left undone to reduce guilty
Rebels to Repentance, Love and Obedience? We trust you will imitate this
glorious Example. That you will sympathize with your People in their
Difficulties and Sorrows, and sensibly resent all the Evils they groan under,
even when they suffer by their own Default: That your Bowels of Compassion will
peculiarly move toward them, when they are under deep Apostacies from God, and
under terrible Impressions of his Wrath, both in Temporal Judgments and
Spiritual Plagues. As the Head in the natural Body sees the uneasy State of the
whole and each Member, so you will have a most sensible Share, in all the
Losses, Reproaches, Burdens and Dangers, that are among this People; and your
Tenderness will be expressed in taking the best Measures for their Relief and
Comfort.

SUCH Rulers as have been Friends to God and to Religion, who have been nursing
Fathers to the Church, have mourned for her Afflictions, critically observed
her Declensions, and nobly exerted themselves to bring about a Reformation,
have embalmed their Memories with Posterity, and their Names have been
transmitted to future Generations, with peculiar Honors. Much more precious are
their Memories than those of the most renowned Heroes, or Men of the most
exalted Geniuses, who were yet destitute of and paid no regard to Religion.

SUCH a Ruler was Moses, a Man mighty in Faith and Prayer, eminent for Patience
and Meekness, willing to relinquish Fame, and even to lay down his Life for the
good of God's chosen People.

How glorious is the Character of Nehemiah and of Hezekiah and Josiah Kings of
Judah, as Reformers and lovers of Religion? Such have been many of our Rulers
in this Government. Such in an eminent Degree was our late Governor. And was
not he The Honorable ZEBULON WEST, of Tolland, who was a great Promoter of
Peace and good Order in the Town and Church where he belonged; for many Years a
Justice of the Peace, one of the Judges of the County Court, a Judge of the
Probates, a Member and Speaker in the Lower House of the general Assembly, and
elected into the Honorable Upper House in May last.
in some good Degree also deserving of the same Character by whose Decease a
Breach is made in the honorable Council Board? He who had with strict Fidelity
and to universal Approbation executed the various Important Trusts which were
reposed in him, and might have been serviceable to the State yet for many
Years, had God seen fit to have spared him to us. But Rulers as well as others
must die. Though Gods by Office, they are Men by Constitution, and must in this
Regard stand on a level with their Subjects. Animating Thought! How uncertain
the Term of Life and Opportunity of Usefulness! And how glorious and
incomprehensible the future Reward and Happiness of faithful and religious
Rulers?

MAY you (honored Fathers) be the happy Instruments of promoting Religion, of
effecting Reformation; may you be indeed Fathers to this People, the imitators
of God, and late be received to those distinguishing Honors which await them
who have served their Generation by the Will of God.

So great a part of the special Business of the Ministers of Christ, is to
inculcate Repentance, and promote Reformation; and such is the general
Character of this Order of Men in this Government, that I cannot doubt of their
cordial Concurrence and sincere Endeavors to promote a Work so Important and
necessary at this Day.

Reverend Fathers and Brethren, IN this apostate and sinful World it has ever
been the Errand on which God has sent forth his Ambassadors to preach
Repentance, and Reconciliation to God, through a Mediator; and at special
seasons to give Warning of impending Danger, and inculcate Repentance and
Reformation, by all possible Motives.

1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
NOAH warned the antediluvian World of imminent Destruction, and inculcated
Repentance for a long Space. This was the great Errand on which the Prophets
were sent to the Jews. The Burden of all their Messages was, Turn now unto the
Lord with all your Hearts. And as their Sins increased and God's Judgments were
more numerous and awful, and especially when the impending Storm thickened, and
seemed ready to burst on their guilty and defenseless Heads, the Prophets were
ordered to redouble their Efforts, and with an honest Freedom and pious Zeal,
point out their Danger, and the Reasons of it. Thus Isaiah is directed to Isai.
58. 1.
cry aloud and spare not, to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, and to show unto
God's People their Transgression. -- The weeping Prophet is sent with many such
Messages as that in our Text. -- When John, the immediate Forerunner of Christ
appeared, he cried, Mat. 3. 2.
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. -- And our blessed Savior, as
the first of all his Messages, proclaimed, Mark 1. 15.
Repent, and believe the Gospel. And to add no more Instances, St. Paul in few
Words tells us what was the main Business and Practice of the first Preachers
of the Gospel, (and which no doubt we should imitate them in) 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Now then we are Ambassadors of God, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray
you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. And does not the Providence of
God point out to us many peculiar Motives and loud Warnings, to be very
earnest, vigilant and diligent in pressing Repentance and Reformation, on the
People of this Government? Perhaps never in this Land was there greater need of
Reformation, or louder calls to it. God expects we should join with our worthy
Rulers in this most important Work, and not only faithfully show this People
their Sins and Deserts, but sincerely bewail their and our own Sins, and
deprecate God's Judgments. In this Day of Darkness and Distress, ought not the
Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, above all others, to weep and to say, Spare
thy People, O Lord, and give not up thine Heritage to Reproach. In brief, it
appears clearly that Repentance and Reformation are that one Thing needful at
this Day, on which our political and temporal Salvation, as well as our eternal
depends; and that God justly expects that we, above all others, should be
sensible of it, and endeavor to promote them. This then should engross our
Thoughts, engage our Solicitude, and employ our Time.

AND I would humbly suggest, that as we would succeed in our Endeavors, we
must hold fast the Form of found Words, and adhere inviolably to the Doctrines
of Grace, those great Important Doctrines, which our pious Ancestors held, and
for which they suffered: It Is the plain, faithful preaching of these which is
like to be attended with Success. It was observed by The Rev'd Mr. Lockwood, of
Weathersfield, in his Election Sermon, 1754.
a worthy Gentleman some Years ago, on this Occasion, that, It Is the plain,
serious, affectionate preaching of Christ crucified, and his unsearchable
Riches, the merit of his Cross, the Prevalence of his Intercession, and the
Power of his Grace, and the other peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel, that are
nearly connected therewith, God has been wont especially to own and bless, to
the producing of Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and Repentance from dead
Works, and all the excellent Fruits of Righteousness in Life and Conversation.

MAY I be allowed just to add, that Union among ourselves is greatly necessary,
that we may be successful in our Endeavors to promote the Interest of Religion
among others.

SCARCE any Thing has given a greater Advantage to the Enemies of the Church,
than that Discord which has prevailed among Christians; or any Thing stabbed the
Cause of Religion with deeper Wounds than those Contentions and unchristian
Alienations which have took Place among the Clergy: may they never prevail
among us; may we let alone Contention before it is any further meddled with.
While we contend for the Faith, may we take heed that it is indeed the Faith of
the Gospel, and those plain, great, important Truths which have a Tendency to
promote practical Godliness, and not subtle Speculations and scholastic
Niceties: And while we look upon ourselves obliged to contend earnestly, let us
also contend meekly, and not loose Sight of Charity, in the Defense of
Orthodoxy. Should not this thought, that there are cruel Foes enough abroad,
watching for our halting, and rejoicing in our Divisions, cement us in the
closest Union to one another? Should we not, as Servants of the meek and lowly
Jesus, forbear one another in Love, and unite in this Day of great Degeneracy
and Calamity, in every probable, suitable and prudent Method to promote the
common Good: -- Above all, are we not under the most sacred Obligations to join
in humble fervent Supplications, to that God who hears Prayer, who loves
Unity and Fervency in our Requests, who has never said to the House of Jacob,
Seek ye me in vain; who has often in answer to the united, humble Petitions of
his Servants, appeared for Zion, and for New England in particular. In this
therefore I trust there will not be a dissenting Voice, or a disuniting thought
among us.

THIS brings me to conclude with an Address to this numerous Assembly.

YOU have been often told, my Brethren, that this is the important Day which
will probably decide the Fate of America: That to be unconcerned therefore in
this Conjuncture of Affairs must be the Effect of the most stupid Dullness, or
unaccountable Frenzy: And that we are under indispensible Obligations to use
the most vigorous Efforts, and practice much of Self-denial (if called to it)
for the good of our Country. All this is undoubtedly true: And God's Word
directs us to the only certain and effectual Expedient to obtain Help in our
Troubles, and Deliverance from our Dangers. In one Word, this is Repentance.
This would be very reasonable and important, were we in no peculiar
Circumstances of Danger, or under no special Frowns from Heaven: But as the
Case now stands with us, it is necessary, in every View necessary to our civil
and religious Interests, necessary to the Preservation of the State, as well as
to the Salvation of our Souls. Is not God now in his Providence directing that
same pathetic Exhortation to us which he did once to the Church of Ephesus;
Rev. 2: 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
Works. This Land, New England in particular, was planted a noble Vine. We have
the Honor to be descended from Ancestors who really deserved the Name which
was given to them in Derision, I mean that of Puritans. -- They were indeed
fast Friends of Liberty, but abhorred Licentiousness. -- They were inviolably
attached to Purity and strictness in Faith, in Worship and Conversation. God's
Promise in our Text was fulfilled to them. He spoke Good concerning them, and
performed it to them. He marvellously preserved them from surrounding Savages,
when they were few in Number. -- He increased them almost to a Prodigy --
Defended them from powerful Enemies abroad, and rendered abortive many
deep-laid Plots for their Ruin. -- The Time would fail, though in the briefest
Manner, to recount the signal Appearances of God's Providence for them and us;
or to describe the distinguishing Privileges, civil and religious, which we
have enjoyed. Is there a Spot upon the Globe, happier in these Regards than the
British Subjects in America have been? or a Government on the Continent which
has exceeded Connecticut? But we have evilly departed away from the God of our
Fathers, and are in many Respects become the degenerate Plants of a strange
Vine. How inexcusable is our Ingratitude herein? And now when God is holding
the Rod of Correction over us, let us not continue Incorrigible, and give
Occasion for the mournful Complaint of the Prophet, O Lord when thy Hand is
lifted up they will not see: Lest God should put in Execution the threatening
annexed to the fore mentioned Exhortation: In these awful Words, Or else I will
come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his Place,
except thou repent. May God mercifully grant that this dreadful Threatening may
never be executed against us, as it has been long since, on all those renowned
Churches in Asia. Who that has the smallest Degree of Love to God, or Regard to
the Kingdom of Christ? who that wishes well to his Country? or who that has not
put off all the Bowels of a Parent, or has any feelings of Humanity in his
Breast, but must shudder at the Thought of New-England's ever sharing the
dreadful Fate of those Churches?

BUT unless we repent, have we not awful Reason to fear this will be our Case?
Should we plead that notwithstanding our general Declensions, we have many good
Things to be found among us, and many good Men who are mourning for our
abounding Sins, and the visible Decays of Godliness; fervently praying for
Zion, and willing as it were to thrust themselves into the Gap and stop the
Plague? This is no doubt true; but could not all this and more be said in
favor of some of those Churches, and of the Church of Ephesus in particular.
Hear his Testimony, whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire: Rev. 2. 2, 3.
I know thy Works and thy Labor and thy Patience, and how thou can not bear
them which are Evil, and have born, and have Patience, and for my Name sake
have labored and have not fainted. All this notwithstanding, Christ threatens
to dissolve their Church state, and to take his Gospel from them except they
repent. The Reason was, because they had left their first Love, were declining
in their Affections and Regard to God and Christ, his Worship, Ordinances and
Ways. Now we must be sensible that this is our sad Condition, unless we are
still in a more lamentable Situation: That of Israel (I mean) when gray Hairs
were here and there upon him, and he knew it not.

AND now behold God is waiting to be gracious: He says, Turn ye, why will ye
die? How shall I give thee up, O New England! O that my People would hearken to
my Voice: -- May we then to Day hear his Voice, and not harden our Hearts.

MAY we hear the faithful Warnings of the compassionate Redeemer, and flee for
Refuge to him, and by Faith in him lay hold on the Hope set before us.

Acts 5. 31.
HIM has God exalted with his Right Hand, to give Repentance and forgiveness of
Sins.

IN his Name let us pray:

Habbak. 3. 2.
O LORD, we have heard thy Speech and were afraid; O Lord, revive thy Work in
the midst of the Years, in the midst of the Years make known, and in Wrath
remember Mercy.

AND may God hear and save us, for his Name's sake, and for Christ's sake.

AMEN.

