REMARKS ON President Edwards's Dissertations concerning the Nature of true
Virtue: Showing that he has given a wrong Idea, and Definition of Virtue, and
is inconsistent with himself. TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ATTEMPT to show wherein
true VIRTUE does consist.

By WILLIAM HEART, Pastor of the first Church in SAY-BROOK.

Great Men are not always wise.

ELIHU. Beware lest any Man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

PAUL. NEW HAVEN: Printed and Sold by T. and S. GREEN, 1771.

PREFACE.
DUE respect to great and good men, is doubtless consistent with supreme regard
to truth. The late Reverend President Edwards, is remembered with great honor;
but we ought not to be biased in our judgment by partial favor. God accepts
no man's person. If his sentiments upon the subject before us were wrong, (as I
believe they will appear to be) he does not now approve them, and would be well
pleased to know they are disapproved, so far as they are so, by his brethren
dwelling in the flesh, and that right sentiments prevail. I have therefore no
apprehension of giving offense to him, or his companions, the spirits of just
men made perfect, by the present attempt, to serve the interest of truth and
virtue, by exposing the falsehood of his peculiar notions. For I have no
sinister views in this business.

If what I have wrote in the following pages is such, as to commend itself to
the acceptance of the wise and impartial, I am satisfied, and can patiently
endure the unjust censures of the unwise. -- If any of the sons of truth and
virtue read the following piece, I hope they will judge and treat it according
to truth; and the writer as they would reasonably desire to be treated
themselves. He asks no more.

I have aimed to transcribe enough to give the reader a true idea of the
author's doctrine. If I have failed of this in any particular, it is without
design.

REMARKS, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Mr. Edwards's notion of the essence or root of true virtue.
MR. EDWARDS in his first chapter gives us his idea of the essence and root of
all true virtue. By virtue he tolls us he means true holiness or grace. This he
calls the true, moral beauty of all moral beings. He says True virtue most
essentially consists in benevolence to being in general. p. 117.
By being in general, he tells us he means intelligent beings in general, not
inanimate beings that have no perception or will. -- True virtue primarily
consists, not in love to any particular beings because of their virtue or
beauty; nor in gratitude, because they love us, (therefore not in love to God
as a being of infinite moral excellence, and love) but a propensity and union
of heart to being, simply considered, exciting absolute benevolence to being in
general. -- I would express what appears to me to be the truth on this subject,
in the following particulars.

The first object of a virtuous benevolence is being, simply considered: And if
being simply considered, be its object, then being in general is its object.

The second object of a virtuous propensity of heart, is benevolent being. -- A
secondary ground of pure benevolence, is virtuous benevolence itself, in its
object. When any one under the influence of general benevolence, sees another
being possessed of the like general benevolence, this attaches his heart to
him, and draws forth greater love to him, than merely his having existence --
as it were out of gratitude to him for his love of general existence.

Several things noted -- concerning this secondary ground of a truly virtuous
love. First, That loving a being on this ground (as God for instance)
necessarily arises from pure benevolence to being in general, and comes to the
same thing.

2. This which has been mentioned as a secondary ground of virtuous love, is
the thing wherein true, moral, or spiritual beauty primarily consists. Yea
spiritual beauty consists wholly in this, and the various qualities and
exercises of mind, which proceed from it; and the external actions which
proceed from these. And in these things consists all true virtue.

3. As all spiritual beauty lies in these principles and acts, so it is
primarily on this account, they are beautiful, viz. that they imply consent and
union, with being in general. This is the primary and most essential beauty of
every thing that can justly be called by the name virtue, or is any moral
excellency.

4. This spiritual beauty, that is but a secondary ground of a virtuous
benevolence, is the primary ground of a truly virtuous complacence. p. 21 -- 24.


Let us stop here a little, and make a few reflections on the doctrine before
us. -- The primary object of virtuous regard in pure benevolence, which true
virtue or holiness does radically and most essentially consist, is being,
simply considered, or regarded only as having perception and will, or
intelligent being in general, abstractly considered. This primary object of
virtuous regard, considered as such, has no personal, or moral, or relative
characters. It has but two attributes, perception and will. It is neither wise
nor foolish, neither morally good nor evil, neither self-existent nor created
and dependent, neither God nor a creature. It has no relation to the benevolent
mind. It is mental being in general, simply considered, as such. The virtuous
mind viewing of it as such, unclothed with any other characters, personal or
relative, wishes away in the dark, that it may enjoy all the perfection, honor
and happiness it is capable of, be it what it will. All true virtue consists
most essentially in this general benevolence; yea, it consists wholly in this,
and in those mental affections and actions which arise out of it. Does it so
indeed? Is this the root, out of which love to God, and all particular moral
beings springs? Are all particular virtues branches which spring from this
root? May all these be resolved into this pure or simple benevolence to being
simply considered, as their first principle? It must be so, according to the
doctrine before us. How different is this from that divine philosophy taught us
from heaven!

According to this fundamental principle of Mr. Edwards's scheme, God is not
the primary object of virtuous regard, nor is love to him the root of virtuous
affections. For God, and being simply considered, are exceeding diverse from
each other. Our author indeed sometimes says, they are the same, in effect, and
that benevolence to the one is, in effect, the same as love to the other. But
in this he is totally inconsistent with himself, and confounds his own
fundamental doctrine. Of the love of complacence which arises out of
benevolence to being, simply considered, God may be the primary and chief
object, consistently with this scheme; but of the love of virtuous benevolence
he is, and can be but a secondary object. Benevolence to God, a particular
being, is but a secondary virtue, or particular great branch of benevolence to
being, simply considered. For true virtue primarily consists not in love to any
particular beings as virtuous (so not to God) but in a propensity and union of
heart to being, simply considered, exciting absolute benevolence to being in
general.

According to this doctrine, there ought to have been three great commands. The
first, greatest, and most fundamental of all should have been this, viz. Thou
shall love being in general, simply considered as having perception and will:
for simple benevolence to this is the root and mother of all particular
virtues; and all moral excellence and spiritual beauty primarily and most
essentially consists in it.' -- Secondly, 'Subordinate to this, and as the
first great branch of this root, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart. And thirdly, thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. But on the two
last hang all the law and the prophets. The first is wholly overlooked. A
strange oversight, if all true virtue, or holiness and grace, primarily,
radically, and most essentially consists in it!

Some gentlemen, perhaps, unwilling to give up Mr. Edwards's doctrine, will
say, 'These two commands imply, the first, as containing the whole of mental
being.' This is no answer to the objection. According to this notion of the
root, or first principle of true virtue, love to God, as well as to our
neighbor, is the offspring of this general, indeterminate benevolence. And if
it is fit to command or require the daughter affection, much more the mother
love. And besides, Jesus Christ says, to love the Lord our God, is the first
and greatest command in the law. He has given no intimation of his knowing any
thing of this hidden root, and spring of all virtue. And the holy prophets and
apostles knew nothing of it.

CHAP. II. How supreme love to God results from absolute benevolence to being,
simply considered, and is in effect the same thing.
MR. Edwards begins his second chapter thus, From what has been said, it is
evident, that true virtue must chiefly consist in love to God. -- This appears
whether we consider the primary or secondary ground of virtuous love.

1st. It was observed that the first objective ground of that love wherein true
virtue consists, is being simply considered; and as a necessary consequence of
this, that being who has the most of being, has proportionably the greatest
share of virtuous benevolence, being known as such. But God has infinitely the
greatest share of existence, or is infinitely the greatest being. So that all
other beings -- is as nothing in comparison of him. According to our author,
True virtue primarily and most essentially consists in pure benevolence to
being in general: Yea it wholly consists in this and those affections and
actions that arise out of it. If so, virtue must chiefly consist in love to
being in general. And this general benevolence must, in the order of nature, at
least, be conceived of, as antecedent to any truly virtuous regard to any
particular being whatever: for such are regarded with benevolence, primarily,
as having a share in general being.

Upon Mr. Edwards's principles the absolutely great Being, must have an
incomparably greater share of the primary benevolence to being, simply
considered, than all other particular beings. Compared with them he has chief
and supreme benevolent regard: but not so, compared with the primary object of
virtuous love, viz. Being in general. That must be the chief object; for the
great Being does not exhaust all being, so as to reduce all others to
nonexistence, or no degree of being. He infinitely outweighs all other beings,
as put into the scale against him. But if his infinite degree of being is put
into one scale, and the same be put into the opposite scale, and together with
that the degrees of existence of all other beings, it is obvious this great
Being's weight in the opposite scales will balance itself, and the whole weight
of the other beings will remain clear, and turn the scale. This scale has in it
the whole of the primary object of virtuous love, the other not; and the
virtuous attraction, or tendency of primary benevolence to being simply
considered, is in proportion to the quantity of being. -- How do false
metaphisicks entangle and mislead the greatest and best men, when they wander
in them! It is as dengerous a thing to attempt to be wise overmuch, as to be
overmuch righteous.

But let us attend to the second thing mentioned by our author, as an evidence
that true virtue does, upon his first principle, consist chiefly in love to
God. If we consider the secondary ground of love, viz. Beauty or moral
excellency, the same thing will appear. viz. That virtue chiefly consists in
the love of God: for God is infinitely the most beautiful and excellent being,
as well as the greatest. Therefore he that has true virtue consisting
(primarily, radically and most essentially) 'in benevolence to being in
general, and' (secondarily) in complacence in virtue, and benevolence to
virtuous being, must necessarily have a supreme love to God, both of
benevolence and complacence. p. 1^6.
Our author says, as quoted above, a secondary ground of pure benevolence is
virtuous benevolence it self, in its object. -- And loving a being on this
ground, necessarily arises from pure benevolence to being in general and comes
to the same thing. From these principles it necessarily follows, that love to
God, both of benevolence and complacence, considered as having infinitely the
highest benevolence to being simply considered, is but a secondary and daughter
virtue. The mother virtue is demonstrably no other than pure benevolence to
being simply considered. God, as most benevolent to being in general, is the
first object of virtue's secondary love: Being simply considered, has the first
and supreme regard. For it cannot be that the daughter love, should usurp the
place and honor of the mother, or that the stream should be prefered before,
and be greater than the fountain.

Indeed God is, upon these principles, the chief and supreme object of virtuous
complacence. But such complacence is itself the offspring of benevolence to
being simply considered, and may be resolved into it. He that is governed by
love to being in general, must of necessity have complacence in him, who he
sees has the same benevolence, and the greater degree of benevolence to him, as
it were out of gratitude to him, for his love to general existence, that his
own heart is united to, and so looks on its interest as its own. p. 123.


Can these things be right? Is true, religious love to God such as Mr. Edwards
here represents it? Does the virtuous or holy mind first entertain a benevolent
affection for being in general, abstractly considered, simply as intelligent,
and in the next step direct this benevolence chiefly to God, considering him as
having the greatest share of mental being? and thus viewing him as most
benevolent and beneficent to being simply considered, does the benevolent mind
rise in greater benevolence to him, and settle in complacence in him, on this
account, from a sort of gratitude to him, as thus befriending the grand object
of his primary love? Does not this represent being simply considered as the
supreme object of virtuous regard, and make it an idol, and virtue itself
idolatrous? Does it not in effect represent love to God, as the result of our
own virtuous love to simple being, virtue's idol, rather than of his virtuous
attraction, and quickening love to us while we were sinners? Do we receive any
such ideas from inspired teachers in holy scripture? -- These views are too
shocking. Mr. Edwards could not admit them in open light, though his doctrine
leads to them; but often turns off his eye, and relieves both himself and his
reader, by giving a truer view of love to God. I wish he had been uniform in
this: But he is very inconsistent with himself. I believe it is not possible
for so great and good a man as he was, building on so false a foundation, to be
self-consistent throughout. -- He says, All true virtue* must radically, and
essentially consist in a supreme love to God, both of benevolence and
complacence. I here present the reader with a remark of an ingenious Gentleman,
in a letter to me, which I think is very just. Mr. Edwards's unusual, improper
manner of using the word benevolence is worthy, I should think, of being
particularly noticed. To say a subject, a peasant, a poor beggar should
exercise benevolence toward his Prince, that a child should be benevolent to
his father, etc. sounds very odd; but to denominate that regard which an
intelligent creature owes to that Being, who possesses independently an
inexhaustable fullness, and who is the creator and father of all living, to
denominate the regard we owe to this Being, benevolence, is more than odd; it
is quite improper, and sounds irreverent. Nor will it suffice to say (as Mr.
Edwards's admirers have said) that a man may use any word he pleases, provided
he ascertains the sense in which he uses it: For by that rule the most familiar
or vulgar, yea, and profane expressions might be used concerning the blessed
God, with innocence. -- I think Mr. Edwards has greatly debased the idea and
character of that reverent love we owe to the great God, in his account of the
root and progress of love to him, as above. In truth he has changed the nature
of virtue and piety, as will more fully appear in the sequal.
And yet he lays it down as his fundamental principle, that true virtue most
essentially consists in benevolence to being in general; the first object of a
virtuous benevolence, or of virtuous love is being simply considered. Being in
general, or simply considered is not God: It has none of the peculiar,
distinguishing characters of the Godhead. It Is impossible that virtue should
primarily, radically and most essentially consist both in love to God, and to
being simply considered, unless it may thus consist in love to two very
different objects, God, and a mere abstract idea, a creature of the mind. Our
worthy author also says, Being in general -- is by right the great, supreme,
ruling and absolutely sovereign object of our regard. (p. 30.) This is not God.
He is one only, and distinguished from all other beings in the universe, who
are almost infinite in number and weight. But he soon comes about right again,
and says, A truly virtuous mind is under the sovereign dominion of love to God.
(p. 133) -- It may be asserted in general, that nothing is of the nature of
true virtue, in which God is not the first and the last; or which, with regard
to their exercises in general, have not their first foundation and source in
apprehensions of God's supreme dignity and glory, and in answerable esteem and
love to him, and have not respect to God as their supreme end. (p. 134)

This is most true. And yet it is said, true virtue primarily consists not in
love to any particular beings, because of their virtue, -- but in propensity
and union of heart, to being simply considered.

Let us carefully gather up the scattered wheat, and let the wind drive the
chaff away.

Mr. Edwards presents us with three grand objects of virtue's primary and most
essential regard, viz. Being in general, considered simply, as intelligent,
uncloathed with any personal, moral or relative characters; the universal
system of intelligent beings, and God the author of being, and head of the
system; and says, these are in effect one: and primary and chief regard to
being in general, simply considered, to the universal system of beings, and to
God the Being of beings, and head of the system, is represented as, in effect,
the same thing. But each of these objects has peculiar characters, which give
ground for distinguishing ideas: Our author does often distinguish them from
each other, and they ought never to be confounded. There cannot be three first
and supreme objects of virtuous love.

There is indeed a strange confusion and inconsistence in this great man's
ideas and reasonings upon this subject. And it must necessarily be so whenever
men attempt to blend true and false principles together. Therefore it is said
in the law, Thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts. Thou shall not plow
with an ox and an ass together. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse
seeds; lest the fruit of thy seed which thou have sown, and the fruit of thine
vineyard be defiled. Deuteronomy. 24.9, 10, 11.


Suffer me just to mention one thing more. Our author says, The virtue of the
divine Mind, must consist primarily in love to himself. -- There is no need of
multiplying words to prove that it must be thus on a supposition that virtue,
in its most essential nature, consist in benevolent affection or propensity of
heart toward being in general; and so flowing out to particular beings in a
greater or lesser degree, according to the measure of existence and beauty
(benevolence to being simply considered) 'which they are possessed of.' p. 131,
132.
He also says elsewhere, God's own holiness must primarily consist in love to
himself. p. 42.
According to this notion all other divine virtues, or moral excellencies of
the Divine Mind, such as love of justice, equity or moral proportion,
faithfulness, etc. are only secondary virtues, which arise out of pure
benevolence to being simply considered, and derive all their virtuousness or
moral excellence and beauty from their subordination and subserviency to it; as
will more fully appear in the next chapter. But it is doubtless more natural
and just to consider all moral virtues or perfections in the Divine Being as
equally original and primary, and virtuous and beautiful, in themselves simply
considered. All these moral attributes of the divine Mind, seen by the divine
eye, together with those that are called natural, God is worthily the primary
and chief object of his own virtuous or holy love. He is not virtuous and holy
because he loves himself, but he loves himself because he is holy.

CHAP. III. Concerning Mr. Edwards's notions of the primary and secondary
beauty of moral things.
MR. Edwards, in his third chapter, says many things concerning what he calls
the primary and secondary beauty of moral beings and actions, which are very
extraordinary, and I think, very injurous and destructive to true virtue. -- I
must make some extracts that the reader may be under advantage to judge of the
justness of the remarks.

'Tho' that which has been spoken of,' viz. benevolence to being simply
considered, etc. alone is justly esteemed the true beauty of moral agents, --
and alone is the moral amiableness of beings that have understanding and will,
in the eyes of him that perfectly sees all things as they are: Yet there are
other qualities, sensations, propensities and affections of mind, and
principles of action, that often obtain the epithet of virtuous, and by many
are supposed to have the nature of true virtue; which are entirely of a
distinct nature from this, and have nothing of that kind. (p. 134.)

The propensity of minds to mental existence may be called the highest and
first, or primary beauty, being the proper and peculiar beauty of moral beings.
-- Yet there is another, inferior, secondary beauty, which is not peculiar to
spiritual beings, but is found even in inanimate things; which consists in a
mutual consent and agreement of different things in form, manner, quantity, and
visible end and design; called by the various names of regularity, order,
uniformity, symetry, proportion, harmony, etc. such is the mutual agreement of
the sides of a square -- of the colors, figures, dimensions and distances of
the different spots on a chess-board -- of the figures of a piece of chints, or
brocade. Such is the beautiful proportion of the various parts of a human
countenance. And such is the sweet mutual consent and agreement of the various
notes of a melodious tune.

This secondary beauty, consisting in uniformity and proportion, not only takes
place in material things, but in things immaterial. -- This is evident in fact
in numberless instances. --

There is a beauty in the virtue called justice, which consists in the
agreement of different things that have relation to one another, in nature,
manner, and measure: And therefore is the very same sort of beauty with that
uniformity and proportion, which is observable in those material things which
are esteemed beautiful; (with that of a chess-board for instance.)

Things are in natural regularity and mutual agreement, when he whose heart
opposes the universal system should have, (has) the hearts of the system or --
of the head of the system against him, and that in consequence he should (does)
receive evil in proportion to the evil tendency of the opposition of his heart.
-- So there is a like agreement in nature and measure when he that loves has
the proper returns of love: -- as there is a kind of justice in a becoming
gratitude.

Indeed most of the duties incumbent on us, partake of the nature of justice.
There is some natural agreement of one thing to another; some adaptedness of
the agent to the object; some answerableness of the act to the occasion; some
equality and proportion in things of a similar nature and direct relation one
to another. (Or, to speak more properly and intelligibly; from the various
characters, relations and connections of moral beings, there arises a natural
and moral fitness, suitableness and equity in some dispositions, affections and
actions of one toward another, and a like unfitness, unsuitableness, and
inequitableness in others. But this, though the clearest and justest manner of
expressing the matter, does not so well agree with the favorite scheme of
reducing all moral fitnesses of relative virtues into the order of secondary
beauties, and of representing their beauty as altogether of the same sort with
that of a beautiful face, and so as having nothing of the nature of true virtue
in them simply as such; and therefore this is carefully avoided, and such a
manner of expression is chosen, as is more applicable to the beautiful harmony
of parts in material things. But to return, our author adds) so it is in
relative duties: duties of children to parents, and of parents to children;
duties of husbands and wives; of rulers and subjects; of friendship and good
neighborhood; and all duties that we owe to God as our creator, preserver and
bountiful benefactor; and all duties whatsoever, considered as required by God,
and as branches of our duty to him; and also considered as what are to be
performed with regard to Christ, as acts of obedience to his precepts, and as
testimonies of respect to him, and of our regard to what he has done for us,
the virtues he has exercised toward us, and the benefits we have and hope for
from him. There is a manifest justice and moral fitness in all these relative
duties, and a high degree of secondary beauty, like that of a piece of flowered
chints, but nothing virtuous in them merely as loved and practiced from a view
and regard to their relative fitness and great equitableness; but only as they
flow from simple benevolence to being, simply considered, or as unclothed
either with moral or relative character. Could you have thought it? Can you
believe it? -- Our worthy author proceeds thus.

It is this secondary kind of beauty, which belongs to the virtues and duties
required of us, that Mr. Wallaston seems to have had in his eye, when he
resolved all virtue into an agreement of inclinations, volitions and actions
with truth. He evidently has respect to the justice there is in the virtues and
duties of one being toward another; which consists in one being's expressing
such affections and using such a conduct toward another, as has a natural
agreement and proportion to what is in them: which is as much a natural
conformity of affection and action with its ground, object and occasion, as
that which is between a true proposition and the thing spoken of in it, (yet
there is nothing of the nature of true virtue in all this.)

But there is another and higher beauty in true virtue, and in all truly
virtuous dispositions and exercises, than what consists in any uniformity or
similarity of various things (or in the moral fitness and equitableness of the
dispositions and actions of moral beings toward each other) viz. the union of
heart to being in general, which appears in those virtues; and which, those
virtues when true, are the various expressions of. Benevolence to being in
general, or to being simply considered, is entirely a distinct thing from
uniformity in the midst of variety; (or from an equitable behavior to God and
man, from a regard to their personal and relative characters) and is a superior
kind of beauty. p. 140, 141, 142.


Enough, I presume, has been quoted on this head to give the reader a clear
idea of this great man's notions concerning what he calls the only true moral
beauty, of moral beings, in which he places the essence of true virtue; and
what he calls the inferior, secondary beauty, in which, he says, virtue does
not consist, any more than in a harmonious tune. -- Let us now examine them a
little. But their falsehood and absurdity are so open and glaring, that it is
difficult to say any thing to render it more striking. However we may view this
doctrine in various lights, and observe some of its consequences.

1. If this doctrine is true, God's revealed law, which is professedly the
guide to true virtue, the rule and standard of it, no where commands,
recommends, or once mentions that in which all true virtue primarily and most
essentially consists; but only injoins and recommends it in regard to its
secondary beauty.

If I mistake not, Mr. Edwards does implicitly acknowledge this in what has
been transcribed above. -- Now certainly, that the law and standard of true
virtue should take no notice of that in which it does most essentially consist,
is a more wonderful mystery than any of those that belong to revealed religion.

2. If this doctrine is true, it may be suspected, that the holy and inspired
men of old, prophets and apostles, never knew or practiced true virtue.
Whenever they recommend those works or actions which are virtuous, they do it
by representing their secondary beauty, in which virtue does not consist, any
more than in the beauty of a square. -- When they praise and honor the virtues
of God, and Jesus Christ, in their rapturous devotions, they dwell upon their
relative aspects, and inferior beauty, consisting in mental proportion and
harmony, and are profoundly silent about their primary, and only true moral
beauty. They don't ' go to the bottom of things,' and lay open their root and
first spring. Probably they knew nothing of it. Thus David praises God, saying,
The Lord rewarded me according as I did aright -- With the pure and upright
thou will show thy self pure and upright: With the froward, thou will show
thyself froward. He is here praising God for the proportion and agreement of
his works with their objects and occasions, which is not the thing in which
their virtuousness consists. -- Indeed he says, God's tender mercies are over
all the works of his hands; and the Apostle says, he is the father of the whole
family of heaven and earth: Which perhaps may be thought by some, to refer to
the first principle of all true virtue, viz. Pure benevolence to being simply
considered. But it is observable that they put more into the character of these
objects of God's paternal care, and tender mercies, than belongs to being
simply considered, or as only having perception and will. They are thus
regarded, as being the works of his hands, and members of his family. They are
therefore, relatively considered, objects of God's benevolent, paternal regard:
And in this view of them there is a natural suitableness, and a kind of justice
in their being so regarded. This is an inferior kind of beauty, not virtuous in
itself, but only as this paternal, tender care for his own creatures, arises
out of pure benevolence to being, simply considered. Is it indeed so?

Moreover, the angels of God, and the whole church in heaven, appear to take as
little notice of the primary and only true moral beauty, as the prophets and
apostles have done. In their songs of praise to God and the Lamb, they dwell
upon the secondary beauty of their virtuous works, and are in raptures in their
contemplations of it. Thou art righteous, O Lord, -- because thou have judged
thus: for they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. Rev. 16.5, 6.
It is the beauty of God's judgment, as righteous or just, consisting in the
agreement, and harmonious proportion of different things, that have relation to
one another, in nature, manner and measure, that is here praised; but this is
the very same sort of beauty with that uniformity and proportion which is
observable in those material things which are esteemed beautiful. Why did not
the angel of the waters, on this great occasion, take notice of that first
spring, benevolence to simple being, which influenced this judgment, and
sanctified the righteousness of it, and raised it into virtue, and gave it the
luster of the primary and only true moral beauty? Doubtless he though it its
virtuousness and true beauty consisted in its righteousness. It Is also
observable that the wisest and holiest men in the church, through all ages, have
expressed themselves in their writings, and books of devotion, as supposing the
secondary beauty of virtuous affections and actions was their true beauty. That
it is not so, but only an inferior kind of beauty, like that of bodies, is a
new discovery, reserved for our age and country. But it is more probable that
one truly great and good man should have unhappily reasoned himself into
speculative error, than that the whole church in heaven and earth should, till
now, have overlooked the primary and only true moral beauty and excellence of
moral beings.

3. Let it also be observed that there is no such object of God's attention and
regard, as being simply considered. God is his own first object. He sees
himself as he is, as possessed of an absolute fullness of being, enriched and
adorned with all possible mental perfections. As such he is the primary object
of his first and chief love, both of benevolence and complacence. How
ridiculous would it be to represent him, as first viewing himself, as possessed
of infinite degrees of being, simply considered, and in this view exercising
primary, pure benevolence to himself; and then reflecting on himself as thus
virtuously benevolent, making himself, as such, the secondary object of greater
benevolence, and the first object of his own complacence? Yet so it must be,
upon this scheme.

All other mental being, whether future or actually existing, is seen by God,
as shared in various proportions among a great number of distinct beings, and
these are all regarded as his creatures and property, made for certain valuable
ends. As such they are objects of his paternal benevolence and care, in various
degrees, wisely and equitably proportioned to the various importance of their
respective being, and destined use and end.

What now is become of being simply considered, the grand, primary object of
virtuous love? It is vanished as a shadow, or a night vision.

4. Let us next consider the destructive influence of this notion of virtue,
upon virtue itself. All relative duties which we owe to God, to Jesus Christ,
and our fellow servants, in all our various relations to them, and connections
with them, partake of the nature of justice: they are equitable, fit and right
in their own nature: they have a natural agreement and harmonious
proportionableness to the nature and characters of their respective objects, as
compared with our own, and to the relations and connections between the agent
and the objects of these duties. All this you see and approve, and the
dispositions and exercises of your mind or heart toward all the objects of
these relative duties, are natural, harmoniously proportionable to them, and in
concord with them, equitably suited to them. Your heart then is very beautiful,
but not at all virtuous, if these harmonious and equitable dispositions and
exercises of your mind do not arise from pure benevolence to being, simply
considered, which is the true and moral beauty of beings that have
understanding. So then the beauty of your mind as adorned with all these
relative, equitable and harmonious dispositions only, is of the same sort with
that of bodies. Your heart is as b^^^tiful as a square or a cube, and no more
virtuous than they. It Is true that benevolence to being in general, when a
person has it, will naturally incline him to justice or proportion in the
exercise of it to particular beings. -- But then, as Mr. Edwards adds. It
appears that just affections and acts have a beauty in them distinct from, and
superior to the uniformity and equality there is in them; -- and that is the
expression and manifestation there is in them of benevolence to being in
general. p. 142, 143.


Mr. Edwards sums up the matter thus, From all that has been observed
concerning this secondary kind of beauty, it appears that, that disposition or
sense of the mind which consists in a determination of mind to approve and be
pleased with this beauty, considered simply and by itself, has nothing of the
nature of true virtue, and is entirely a different thing from a truly virtuous
taste. For it has been shown that this kind of beauty is entirely diverse from
the beauty of true virtue. And therefore it will follow that a taste for this
kind of beauty, is entirely a different thing from a taste of true virtue. Who
will affirm that a disposition to approve the harmony of good music, or the
beauty of a square, is the same with true holiness, or a truly virtuous
disposition of mind? p. 143.
No man, I presume, ever will. But if some one should, he would not talk more
absurdly than this great and worthy gentleman does, when he reduces moral
harmony, and just proportion to a beauty or excellence of the ' very same sort'
with that of music or a square.

If this good man had attended to one obvious distinction he might have saved
himself from falling into this grand absurdity, viz. The difference there is,
in the nature of the things, between the mind's seeing and approving the
harmonious proportion and justness of virtuous dispositions and exercises of
heart, toward God and our neighbor, and having such dispositions and
exercises himself. A man may see and approve the beauty and excellence of
virtue, in some degree, and yet his heart not be in this beautifully harmonious
and equitable temper and state. Nothing is more common, and nothing more to be
lamented, than this monstrous inconsistence between the moral sense or taste of
the mind, and the ruling dispositions and exercises of the heart of man.

Mr. Edwards concludes this chapter with this observation, which closes the
proof of his doctrine, Not only reason, but experience plainly shows, that
men's approbation of this sort of beauty (the secondary beauty of moral beings
and actions) does not spring from any virtuous temper, and has no connection
with virtue. For otherwise men's delight in the beauty of squares, cubes, and
regular polygons, and the beautiful figures in a piece of embroidery, would
increase in proportion to men's virtue; and would be raised to a great height
in some eminently virtuous and holy men. p. 144.
Wonderful! Here an appeal is made to experience, and the argument is built on
this supposition, that moral proportion and harmony is a beauty of the same
kind with that of material things. It is not possible to conceive any thing
more absurd. I desire any one to take a human mind, adorned with all right,
relative affections and exercises to Jesus Christ, harmoniously agreeable, and
beautifully proportioned to his characters and relations to us, (only excluding
benevolence to being simply considered, and let the faith of him be their
spring) and carefully compare it with a square, a cube, and a beautiful piece
of embroidery, and try if he can discover any such likeness in their beauties
as to lead him to pronounce them 'beauties of the very same sort' or order. He
will as soon discover the actions of a spirit to be of the same kind with the
action or motions of a clock.

The truth is, this mavelous scheme has changed the natural, moral beauty and
glory of true virtue, into an image made like to the beauty of an equilateral
triangle or a chess-board.

Mr. Edwards, speaking of what he calls the only true moral beauty, or the
first principle of true virtue, says, It is impossible that any one should
truly relish this beauty, consisting in general benevolence (to being in
general, simply considered) who has not that temper himself. p. 125.
After benevolence to being in general exists, the proportion which is observed
in objects, (or, as it is expressed a few lines above the degree of being, and
the degree of benevolence to being, that particular beings have) may be the
cause of the proportion of benevolence to those objects: But no proportion, is
the cause or ground of the existence of such a thing as benevolence to being.
The tendency of objects to excite that degree of benevolence, which is
proportionable to the degree of being, etc. is the consequence of the existence
of benevolence, and not the ground of it. Even as a tendency of bodies one to
another, by mutual attraction, in proportion to the quantity of matter, is the
consequence of the being of such a thing as attraction, and not attraction the
effect of proportion. According to this doctrine the nature and character, or
perfections of God, are no cause or ground of the first existence of a virtuous
or holy principle in the hearts of created, intelligent beings. Our minds must
first attract toward universal being, simply considered, by pure,
undistinguishing benevolence, before God can attract them toward himself, by
the virtue of his glorious character. No possible manifestation of his glory,
in the face of Jesus Christ, can have any influence in drawing our hearts to
him, unless they first attract toward him as a part of general being, by a
general benevolence, existing independently of, and prior to any moral
influence of the divine character upon the mind. This has no possible influence
in first raising the virtuous principle in the mind, but only in giving it a
chief direction and tendency to God, after it does exist. This is the same
absurdity in moral philosophy, as it would be in natural, to affirm that a
loadstone cannot attract iron toward itself, till that is first endowed with a
peculiar attracting tendency to stones in general, simply considered as stone.

I should be glad to know how the general attraction or propensity of mind to
being, comes into existence. Nothing in its object, no influence from any
quantity of being, or virtuous attraction of any being upon the mind, is the
cause or ground of it; and it is confessed not to be natural to man, and that
no possible exertion of our minds can give it being. It must then be a
preternatural, blind instict, which the possessor can give no account of, and
assign no reason for. If you ask him why he is so graciously benevolent to
being simply considered, he can only answer, I love it because I do love it,
but don't know what I love it for. And yet all true virtue consists primarily
and most essentially in it, and all particular virtues arise out of it, as
their root. -- This is much such a foundation to virtue as the Indian's
tortoise was to the earth; which, he said bore it upon its back. When he was
asked what the tortoise stood upon, he cried out with surprise, 'me don't know.'

This doctrine of Mr. Edwards seems to be the foundation on which several
doctrines, in the new scheme of divinity, are built, and serves as a key to
explain them, (Mr. Hopkins, in his late animadversions, refers to Mr. Edwards's
dissertation on virtue, as containing their fundamental principles) These, in
particular, viz That 'the moral perfections and character of God, as reveeled
by the gospel, and seen by natural men, under the teachings of the word and
spirit of Jesus Christ, so far as they are capable of seeing them, can have no
possible influence in producing a moral change in their hearts -- Regeneration
consists in giving or planting in the heart a new spiritual taste or relish,
(i. e. as I understand them, a spirit of benevolence or preparation of heart to
be benevolent to being simply considered) -- this change is not wro't by the
instrumentality of light, or by any means whatever; the word of God is not a
means in the hand of the Spirit in working this change; but it is effected by
mere, absolute, and properly creating power; in which an entirely new taste is
given for moral beauty (Mr. Edwards's primary beauty) which never was or could
be seen or tasted before, in the least degree -- Nothing that simple intellect
is capable of, can give the idea of any thing properly moral, etc. etc. By
moral, moral excellence, and such like phrases, understand what Mr. Edwards
calls the primary beauty and the true moral excellence, and true virtuousness,
and all this kind of mysterious, and apparently absurd language will be
unsolded at once: But it will not be the less absurd for being understood. If
by the moral change, or new, supernatural, virtuous taste gentlemen speak of,
they mean benevolence to being simply considered, they very justly represent
this change as wro't in the dark, and without means. If this be the thing
intended, as I think it is, it would be kind in them to speak out plainly, as
Mr. Edwards does, that the people might clearly understand the nature of their
doctrine. They would then know what to say to it.




This great man would have done well to have reflected here, that the moral and
virtuous attraction, or benevolent propensity of minds to minds, is first and
chiefly in God, the father of spirits, (and is, in him a paternal affection)
and is communicated to his offspring, created spirits, in consequence of, and
by the means of his giving them to feel in themselves his attracting love and
virtue, and paternal benevolence and propensity of heart toward them; by a
realizing belief of which, their hearts are put in motion toward him, and
attract, or tend to him, first and chiefly, as their center and end: and
secondarily, draw their brother minds, by benevolent wishes that they would
unite with them in their love and tendency to God, their common father and
center. All true virtue, and virtuous love begins thus. That infinite
proportion of spiritual excellence and love which is in God, as perceived and
realized by created minds, and felt, as extended to them, is the true cause,
ground, and source of the first existence of such a thing in them as a truly
virtuous tendency or propensity of heart; which first and chiefly directs
itself to him, and in subordination to him, to brother minds.

To represent benevolence to being simply considered, uncharactered, and
unrelated, as the essence and root of all true virtue, out of which love to God
and our neighbor arises, and as pre-existing there, in the order of nature, is
not metaphysical, but imaginary and arbitrary, unworthy of a moral philosopher,
and wholly contrary to that true divinity which is taught us from heaven. Mr.
Edwards is esteemed a great master of metaphisical reasoning; and his followers
seem to value themselves for their skill in it, and to imagine they demonstrate
their doctrines to be true. Many others, clearly seeing their notions are false
and absurd, cry out against metaphisical reasoning as uncertain, and rather
adapted to obscure and perplex things, than to discover and vindicate truth.
Both sides, I think, are mistaken. Well connected reasonings, built on the
known natures of things, are sure, and their result true. But the common fault
is, that men substitute false metaphisicks for true. They imagine things
different in their nature from what they really are; and reasoning on this
false ground, though the intermediate links in their chain are well connected,
yet their reasonings conclude wrong, and land them in glaring falsehood and
absurdity. If the first principles are false and imaginary, and the reasoning
upon them is just, the conclusion will necessarily be wrong: And thus by
misrepresenting the true nature of the things on which the reasonings are
founded, systems of error are established, and seemingly just reasonings end in
the greatest absurdities. -- Thus Dr. Clark, with many other great men,
imagining the presence and extension of spirits analogous to that of bodies,
and reasoning on this ground, concerning the immensity of the divine Being,
involves himself in inextricable perplexities. Thus also Mr. Edwards first
gives virtue an imaginary nature and essence or root; and then reasoning justly
on this salfe foundation involves himself in many grand absurdities, and
confounds the nature of virtue and vice, and changes God's moral government
into an absurd tyranny. This is not true, metaphisical, but imaginary and
arbitrary reasoning. -- This great man's scheme and reasonings concerning the
freedom of the will, have a like imaginary foundation, and end in evident
falsehoods, and most destructive errors. This worthy Gentleman has been very
unhappy in sundry other matters, in mistaking the nature of things, and
substituting imaginations for realities, and building upon them, and admitting
their consequences, as though they were a sure foundation. And too many of his
admirers are unhappily caught in the same snare. They seem to reason with
clearness and strength, and look down with a sort of contemptuous pity on those
who are not convinced by them, as weak or blind; but their foundation
principles are false; they mistake the nature of things, feign it to be another
thing than it really is. When the root of our reasonings is as rottenness, the
blossom will go up as dust. The only way in which those who are thus entangled
in the labyrinth of false metaphisicks, can disingage themselves, is by
carefully examining their foundation principles, and learning to take their
ideas of the nature of things from the things themselves as they really are,
and not suffer their minds to be impesed on by an imaginary and arbitrary
misrepresentation of their nature. If this was done, the doctrinal errors of
the day, which make so great a noise, would soon vanish away, and become like
an untimely birth.


The reader will be well pleased to see this confirmed by the author of the
dissertation on the nature of true virtue; observe then the following passage.
It may be asserted in general, that nothing is of the nature of true virtue, in
which God is not the first and the last; or which, with regard to their
exercises in general, have not their first foundation and source, in
apprehensions of God's supreme dignity and glory, and in answerable esteem and
love of him, and have not respect to God as the supreme end. (p. 134.)
Consequently, pure benevolence to being simply considered, is so far from being
the root and essence of all true virtue, that it has ' nothing of the nature of
true virtue in it.

CHAP. IV. Of Mr. Edwards's notions concerning natural conscience, and the
moral sense.
I Pass over Mr. Edwards's fourth chapter, in which he treats of self-love, as
little to my purpose: But in the fifth, wherein he treats of natural
conscience, and the moral sense, there are some things that draw attention. He
says, Natural conscience consists in these two things, viz.

1.In -- that disposition to approve or disapprove the moral treatment which
passes between us and others, from a determination of the mind, to be easy or
uneasy, in a consciousness of our being consistent or inconsistent with
ourselves. p. 162.
This gives no idea at all of the nature and true character of conscience. That
determines us to be easy or uneasy in reflecting on our own moral conduct, as
we judge it to be consistent or inconsistent with the law of God, and so to
deserve approbation or blame from him. If our tho'ts look no further than to
selfconsistence as the ground of self-satisfaction, conscience has no more
concern in the matter, than it has in the easiness, or uneasiness a man feels
in himself, in reflecting on a scheme of business as a self-consistent, or
inconsistent scheme.

2.The other thing which belongs to the approbation or disapprobation of
natural conscience, is the sense of desert; consisting in a natural agreement,
proportion and harmony between malevolence or injury, and resentment and
punishment; or between loving and being loved, between showing kindness and
being rewarded, etc. -- Approbation and disapprobation of conscience, in the
sense now explained, will extend to all virtue and vice, to every thing
whatsoever, that is morally good or evil, in a mind -- that will take things in
general into its consideration, and is free from speculative error. -- And thus
we may see in what respects this natural conscience extends to true virtue,
consisting in union of heart to being in general, and supreme love to God. For
although it sees not, or rather, does not taste its primary and essential beauty,
i. e. it tastes no sweetness in benevolence to being in general, simply
considered, or loves it not for being in general's sake, (for nothing but
general benevolence itself can do that) yet this natural conscience, common to
mankind, may approve of it (of virtue) from that uniformity, equality and
justice there is in it, and the demerit there is seen in the contrary. -- Men
by natural conscience may see the justice (or natural agreement) there is in
yielding all to God, as we receive all from God; and the justice there is in
being his that made us, and being willingly so; -- and also the justice there
is in our supreme love to God for his goodness, -- the natural agreement there
is between our having supreme respect to him, who exercises infinite goodness
to us, and from whom we receive all well-being. -- Thus natural conscience, if
well informed, will approve of true virtue, and will disapprove and condemn the
want of it; and yet without seeing the true beauty of it. p. 162 -- 164.
(That is, without being able to see or taste that in which its essence and
distinguishing nature wholly consists.) And yet he presently adds, I think,
very inconsistently, If men's consciences were fully enlightened -- as they
will be at the day of judgment, they would approve nothing but true virtue;
nothing but general benevolence, and those affections and actions that are
consistent with it, and subordinate to it. p. 165.
And yet this same natural conscience does not see, and cannot taste this true
virtue, consisting in general benevolence, 'nothing but benevolence itself can
do that.' He also says, natural conscience approves true virtue, and indeed
approves nothing that falls short of it. p. 179.
But the secondary beauty falls short of it. Thus natural conscience does, and
does not, can, and cannot taste or approve the true beauty of virtue; which
general benevolence, or a truly virtuous heart alone can do: and at the day of
judgment natural conscience will be so improved as to see the true beauty of
virtue, consisting in general benevolence, and wholly approve it; which nothing
but virtuous benevolence can do. Will not the wicked then become virtuous
according to this doctrine? Error is fated to run crooked. The greatest men
cannot govern and keep it strait. It is our wisdom to have nothing to do with
it. Since so great a man as Mr. Edwards could not alter its crooked nature, but
was drawn, by its wiley turnings, into numberless inconsistencies, it is in vain
for others to attempt to manage so involved a creature.

But let us attend our author. He says, That moral sense, which is natural to
mankind -- is the same with this natural conscience -- The sense of moral good
and evil, and the disposition to approve virtue, and disapprove vice, which men
have by natural conscience, is that moral sense so much insisted on in the
writings of many of late. -- Some of the arguments made use of by these writers
do indeed prove that there is a moral sense or taste universal among men,
distinct from what arises from self-love. Or, as it is expressed a few lines
lower, There is a moral taste or sense of moral good and evil natural to all,
which don't properly arise from selflove. Yet I conceive there are no instances
of this kind which may not be referred to that which I have observed to be
primary in the approbation of natural conscience, viz. A sense of desert, and
approbation of that natural agreement there is in manner and measure, in
justice. -- This moral sense of equality and natural agreement (in moral
things) extends to all moral good and evil. -- Thus natural conscience, if the
understanding be properly enlightened, and errors and blinding, stupifying
prejudices are removed, concurs with the law of God, and is of equal extent
with it, and joins its voice with it in every article. [p. 163.] This moral
sense, if the understanding be well informed, and be exercised at liberty, and
in an extensive manner, without being restrained to a private sphere, approves
the very same things which a spiritual and divine sense approves; though not on
the same grounds, nor with the same kind of approbation. (p. 188.)

Let us now make a few observations on these things, and some proper
reflections on the whole.

1. Mr. Edwards acknowledges, as we have seen, that there is, in natural
conscience, a moral taste or sense of moral good and evil, or of virtue and
vice determining the mind to approve the one and condemn the other; that this
sense concurs with the law of God, and is of equal extent with it; supposing
the understanding duly informed, etc. This is true in itself, and as much as
any moral philosopher can in reason demand; but is not true, on his scheme, but
is utterly inconsistent with his notions of the essence of virtue and moral
beauty or excellence: Which, according to him, essentially consists in pure
benevolence to being, simply considered; which natural conscience don't, and
cannot see, and the moral taste cannot relish: that the inferior beauty of moral
things, in which their virtuousness does not at all consist, and 'which is of
the 'same sort' with the beauty of inanimate things is the only object of this
faculty called conscience and moral sense. If so, this natural sense or taste
is not at all of the moral kind any more than a natural taste for music or
painting. Mr. Edwards says, 'natural conscience -- will approve of true virtue
without seeing the true beauty of it.' Approve of that which you have no idea
of, no relish for. Is not this a contradiction? It Is the same thing, upon his
scheme, as to say that a man who sees and approves the beautiful countenance
and dress of an angel, in so doing approves of his virtue, when at the same
time he has no conception or relish of it.

2. Mr. Edwards says, 'Benevolence alone can taste the sweetness, or discern
the beauty of true virtue, consisting in benevolence to being simply
considered. The natural conscience and moral sense cannot discern and relish
this true moral beauty. How should it? This moral faculty was given us, and is
fitted in its nature for the purpose of discerning and approving the moral
fitness, proportion and equity there is in the relative duties we owe to God
and our neighbor. -- But we have no such relation to being simply considered,
and that has no such characters as to infer a natural or moral fitness or
equity in our performing any duty to it. Natural conscience is wholly ignorant
of it, and as uninterested in it, as in a dream, or in the phantoms in Milton's
limbo of vanity. Our author implicitly owns that there is no natural justice
and proportion in this kind of benevolence. His distinction between the primary
and secondary beauty is grounded on this supposition. -- If we suppose there is
a natural justice, proportion, or harmonious agreement between this simple
benevolence and its object, or any suitableness therein to the characters and
relations of being simply considered, and that the benevolent mind, has a
regard hereto, in exercising this benevolence, we reduce this primary and
essential moral beauty into a secondary, and so the very essence of virtue will
vanish and be lost.

3. Mr. Edwards acknowledges, as we have seen, that there is, in natural
conscience a sense of desert, and that it is connected with the moral taste and
approbation of the proportion and justice there is in all those relative duties
we owe to God and our neighbor; and he allows that this connection which
natural conscience makes, is just, and agreeable to the true nature of things.
And yet he lays that the true virtuousness of these actions or duties does not
consist in any such natural proportion, fitness or justice, but in something of
a higher and very different nature, even in this that they flow from, and are
the expressions of benevolence to being simply considered. -- This worthy
gentleman is totally inconsistent with himself in these things. --

Moral desert is necessarily connected with, and has a natural and direct
relation to, that quality in moral actions wherein their virtuousness or
viciousness consists, and to nothing else. To suppose the contrary is the
highest possible absurdity.

If then natural conscience points out the moral ground of desert, of
approbation or blame truly, Mr. Edwards's notions of the nature and essence of
virtue are essentially wrong. But if his notions are right, natural conscience
has no perception or sense of that quality in moral actions wherein their
virtuousness essentially consists, but, as a wrong headed thing, places it in
that wherein it does not at all consist, and so connects the sense of desert
wrong, and contrary to the true nature of things. He who formed the natural
conscience or moral sense, such as it is, is then the author of this false
connection of desert, and has given us a guide to virtue, which, from the very
constitution of its nature, unavoidably deceives us. Indeed it leads us, as our
author says, to judge all those moral actions virtuous which are really so, and
none but such; supposing it is duly enlightened. But then it leads us to place
their virtuousness in their secondary beauty, and does not perceive and cannot
relish that quality in which their virtuousness does most essentially and
wholly consist; (as Mr. Edwards conceeds.) And herein it naturally and
necessarily deceives us, and leads us to approve our actions as virtuous and
acceptable, while there is no more true virtuousness in them than in singing a
harmonious tune. Has God given to mankind such a blundering, blind leader, as
the natural guide of life, think you?

4. Let us observe wherein Mr. Edwards places the essential difference between
the moral sense or taste, and a truly spiritual sense, or virtuous taste. He
allows, as we have seen, that they both approve and condemn the same things, i.
e. all morally good and evil actions; but says they do this upon different
grounds, and with different kinds of approbation. The moral taste relishes
virtuous actions, only on account of their secondary beauty; the truly virtuous
sense approves them, chiefly on account of their primary beauty, consisting in
benevolence to being simply considered. I must desire the readers attention to
two short quotations more; which complete the evidence that this is Mr.
Edwards's notion of the difference between the moral, and virtuous taste. He
says, Approbation of conscience is the more readily mistaken for a truly
virtuous approbation, because, -- when the conscience is well informed, and
thoroughly awakened, it agrees with the latter fully and actually as to the
object approved, though not as to the ground and reason of approving. p. 174.
Are the primary and secondary beauty the same object? God has established --
that this principle of natural conscience, which, though it implies no such thing
as benevolence to being in general, nor any delight in such a principle, simply
considered, and so implys no truly spiritual sense, or virtuous taste, yet
should approve and condemn the same things that are approved and condemned by a
spiritual sense or virtuous taste. p. 16^.
-- There is doubtless a real and essential difference between that moral taste
or sense, which is natural to man, and universal, in some degree of it, and a
truly virtuous taste or holy sense, which is peculiar to virtuous men. But it
cannot consist in what this great man here places it in.

This is a subject of so great, practical importance, that we may properly
employ a few tho'ts upon it. -- Mr. Edwards's reasoning supposes that if the
true virtuousness of morally good actions consisted in those qualities, of
moral proportion, harmony and justice, on account of which natural conscience,
or the moral sense approves and relishes them, this approbation would be
virtuous; and so natural or vicious men would be virtuous men. But in this he
is greatly mistaken.

By the moral discernment and taste, natural to man, we are constituted moral
agents. By the exercise of this moral faculty the things that are morally good
or virtuous are seen to be so, as such are approved, the obligation we are
under to choose and practice them, in preference to every thing that stands in
opposition to them, is felt, in some degree. If we do so, we are self-approved;
but if we suffer vicious lusts, and worldly interests to prevail, in opposition
to this sense of the mind, we are condemned by ourselves. All this shows that
man is designed for virtue in his creation, and that his happiness is connected
with his being virtuous, but does not render him so. To render a man truly
virtuous or holy, his heart must agree with his enlightened conscience, or moral
sense; or in other words his will must choose, with prefering love, and a
determined resolution to practice, what is approved and recommended by the
moral sense; and this, not in some particular branches of virtue only, but in
its whole extent, giving up every contrary lust to be mortified, and all
inconsistent interests, as loss for its sake, or which is the same thing, for
God's sake and his kingdom's. This sense, choice and attachment of the heart to
God, or to virtue and its interests, is that wherein a truly virtuous taste or
spiritual sense consists, as distinguished from the natural, moral sense of the
mind. They are really two distinct things, though in perfect harmony. In virtuous
minds they both agree in one; but in vicious minds the prevailing relish of the
heart, or tendency and choice of the will, is in opposition to the moral sense,
in partial favor to particular lusts, and their interests. In this case the
heart is perverse, the man is froward and willful, condemned of himself in that
which he allows. Herein confists the exceeding sinfulness of sin. Romans 7.13. 14.


There is no cure for this evil disease of the heart, but by the grace and
truths of the gospel, as strongly impressed upon the mind by the spirit of
Jesus Christ. If the perverseness and obstinacy of wicked minds prevails to
that degree, under the enlightening influences and strivings of the spirit of
truth and grace, as to provoke the Lord to withdraw his gracious influences,
and give them wholly up to their own hearts lusts, their perverseness becomes
absolutely incureable, and they go into perdition. It Is in vain to expect a
miraculous exertion of properly creating power, to form their hearts anew, or
regenerate them, without light or the word of gospel truth, after the moral
power of the gospel, and spirit of Jesus Christ, has failed of doing it, through
their perverse resistance of the Holy Ghost, and unconquerable enmity to the
truth he teaches. Yet this is what some gentlemen do; who teach it for doctrine
that men are always regenerated in this manner, and can be in no other; that
their enmity and preverse resistance to the holy Spirit universally increases
in proportion as he enlightens their minds, and strives with them by the gospel
truth. This doctrine is directly contrary to the doctrine of the gospel, and to
experience, and of very hurtful tendency and influence.

5. From Mr. Edwards's doctrines it does necessarily follow that men are under
no natural obligation to be virtuous at all according to his notion of virtue,
and cannot equitably be required to be so. They may indeed be required to
practice all relative duties to particular beings, from a regard to their
secondary beauty, or relative fitness; for God has made them capable of
discerning and tasting this, by endowing them with moral sense. But there is
nothing virtuous in all this, considered simply, and by itself. Benevolence to
being, simply considered, and for being in general's sake, and delight in this
principle simply considered, is that in which all true virtue primarily
consists, out of which all truly virtuous exercises of mind to particular
beings arise. But natural conscience and the moral sense, cannot taste and
approve this kind of virtue any more than the white of an egg; and natural
reason, and common sense say there is no worth in it, nor any use or occasion
for it in the moral world. Nothing but this preternatural principle itself can
taste the sweetness of this primary beauty, or perceive any moral excellence in
this sort of virtue. Doubtless this is true; for it lies far beyond the sphere
of natural conscience, and the moral taste. It is no object to them,
consequently man is, by the constitution of his nature, as incapable of seeing,
or tasting this primary beauty of moral things, as beasts are of relishing
their secondary beauty. He is no more made for the one, than they are for the
other, and is no more obliged to relish the one than they are to relish the
other; and cannot equitably be required to do so, til a new faculty, or taste is
given him, adapted to this object, by a new creating act of power; (which is
what Mr. Edwards's disciples, at the bottom, intend by what they call
regeneration, if I understand their writings.) Yet Mr. Edwards's scheme,
inconsistently enough with itself, says, he is so obliged, at the same time
that it confesses he has, in his nature, no faculty, sense or taste, in the
exercise of which it is possible for him ever to reach this beauty, however
perfectly the understanding is enlightened, and freed from blinding, stupifying
prejudices. Mr. Hopkins says, nothing that simple intellect is capable of, can
give the idea of any thing properly moral. Sermon of John 1.13. p. 43.
By moral, I presume he intends what Mr. Edwards calls the primary and only
true moral beauty. And yet the intellect is the leading faculty, which
constitutes us moral and accountable agents.

The teachers of these doctrines endeavor to defend them against the above
objection, by saying, men's inability to relish the true beauty of virtue, or
what they call, after Mr. Edwards, the true moral excellency, is of the moral
kind, the fault of the will, and so does not excuse: that if they had a will, a
right disposition and heart to this, it would then be no more impossible than
any thing else. -- This is no more than saying, if they had this new kind of
relish, which is falsely called a truly spiritual sense, or virtuous taste,
they would have it, and if they had it, they might easily exercise it. But what
is this to the purpose, when at the same time they confess there is no natural
faculty in human nature, by any possible application of truth to which, this
taste can be raised up in the heart? On these principles, we might, with as
much reason, and as good a grace say, the inability a blind man is under to see
and relish the beauty of light, is of the moral kind, and solemnly impute it to
him as sin. That kind of moral inability which does not excuse from blame, but
rather aggravates it, is that which our Savior, and the prophets and apostles,
charge upon the preverse Jews, when they say, they have eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, hearts capable of understanding, and yet understand not, that
they have closed their own eyes, stopped their ears, and made their hearts
gross, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and be converted. It confists in an indisposition
and perverse refusal to exert those moral powers which men have; through partial
attachment to the lusts and interests of sin. But upon the principles of Mr.
Edwards's scheme the inability of natural men to see, or rather taste the
sweetness of what he calls virtue, consists in the want of a natural faculty or
taste suited to the object: and according to his new notion of virtue, it truly
does so. And to supply this defect in nature, a new faculty, or relish, quite
of a new and supernatural kind is added in regeneration, by a new, creating
act. This then is no more a moral inability than the want of a relish for the
pleasant sweetness of honey, in a man who has no taste for it, and never had.
See Hopkins's sermon on John 1.13. p. 41, 42.
The are is as truly a natural or physical inability as the other, and is as
much inconsistent with moral obligation.

Some will say, this loss of the primitive taste for the true moral beaty, is
the fruit and punishment of the first apostasy. -- Suppose it to be so; what is
the consequence? -- Suppose, instead of taking away the original relish for the
primary beauty, so entirely, that it cannot be recovered but by a new act of
creating power. 'altogether equivalent to first creation,' God had punished the
first sin by smiting Adam with blindness, and bringing all his children into
the world naturally blind. Would the present incapacity of man to relish the
beauty of light, be a moral incapacity? Would a law from heaven, requiring him
to see and rejoice in the light of the sun, on the penalty of damnation, at the
same time refusing to restore his eyes, be though it just? A Nero could not be
brought to make such a law. -- The truth is, through the fall, all our original
moral powers are weakened, but none of them destroyed; but the chief mischief
is, that a vicious indisposition or aversion to improve the moral abilities or
feculties we have, for the purposes of virtue and personal religion, has gotten
hold of our hearts. This can be effectually subdued only by that grace and
truth which came by Jesus Christ; and was sent down from heaven for this very
end,




You might as reasonably preach to your horse, as St. Francis did to the
fishes, and exhort him to see and admire the secondary beauty of moral things,
as, on these principles, exhort natural men to see and relish their primary
beauty. Suppose you should, and because he is so blind and stupid that your
exhortation makes no impression, and after all your endeavors he has no idea
of this beauty, any more than his saddle, your wrath rises against the poor
beast, and you smite him with your staff. Now suppose upon this, his mouth is
opened, as the mouth of Balaam's ass was, rebuking the madness of the prophet,
and he should in like manner rebuke yours, saying, 'The thing you require of me
is wholly above me, my Maker has given me no moral taste at all.' Would you
answer him that his impotence is only of the moral kind; if he had such a
taste, and would will to do it, he might easily taste the sweetness of this
beauty? If you should, supposing his inspiration to continue, he would reply,
this is the very thing I am naturally incapable of. You seem, sir, not to know
what you say. You must now be reduced to silence. The application is easy, and
just. The horse wants but one thing to enable him to taste the secondary
beauty, viz. Moral sense: and man wants one to enable him to discern the
primary beauty, viz. A spiritual sense: And this is conceeded to be as
unattainable by him, as the other is by the horse, unless it is given by a
miraculous, creating power.

This scheme of doctrines, tends to destroy true virtue and real religion. It
represents virtue as an unnatural thing, places it on a false and indefensible
foundation, and pours contempt upon it, by representing its true beaty, and
moral excellencies as of the 'very same sort with the beauty of material
things.' If it is once believed that these are doctrines of the bible,
christianity will be rejected with great scorn; but they are not to be found
there. Yet, somehow, this scheme has obtained too much credit in the country.
While christian divines propagate these notions, infidels triumph. -- The great
veneration for Mr. Edwards, will doubtless, in part, account for the great
spread of his unhappy mistakes. As the sear of man brings a snare, so does too
great veneration. This has been the sin and snare of these late times. It began
to work powerfully about thirty years ago, in the almost idolatrous esteem and
veneration for a young clergyman from abroad. But let us venerate the one true
Master in heaven, and receive his words as oracles. They are truly so.

Many persons, no doubt, will be surprised to find so great and worthy a man as
Mr. Edwards was, forming so wrong a scheme of thoughts. -- They may be told,
and have seen, he was inconsistent with himself, and sometimes acknowledges the
truth. In some passages he speaks excellently. But his great unhappiness was,
he endeavored to blend a set of imaginary notions with the truth; but he could
not make them mix and cleave together. Hence the reigning inconsistency. It Is
only the false part that has been exposed and censured. This ought to be so,
for truth and virtue's sake. -- Although Being simply considered, is set up as an
idol of the imagination, yet we firmly believe, his heart never honored it with
chief, nor with any love, but statedly worshipped the living God only, as the
first and supreme object of virtuous love and regard. -- But an unhappy scheme
of imaginations, partly prevailed over his judgment, and the truer taste of his
heart, when he was writing his dissertation upon virtue.

I am not obliged to account for this. -- However, I suppose this arose partly
from some distress his reasoning powers were thrown into by some reasonings and
objections he had met with. Perhaps he did not see any other way to reconcile
the admission of a moral sense or taste, in natural men, in such a latitude as
he see himself obliged to admit it, with their being wholly destitute of, and
dead to all true virtue, and enemies to it, in heart, but by removing virtue
away, quite out of the view of the moral faculty, and placing its essence in
what the moral taste has no sense of, or relish for; and reducing those moral
qualities, which it confessedly has an approving and pleased taste of, into the
low rank and order of material beauties. Some things which he has droped, here
and there, I think, render it probable that this was the case. He says,' (p.
179.) Approbation of conscience is the more readily mistaken for a truly
virtuous approbation, because -- it agrees with the latter as the object
approved. -- But he need not to have changed the nature of virtue, to have
secured this tree of life from the rude approach of the wicked. The law of sin
in their members, which wars against the law of the mind, does too effectually
restrain them from being truly virtuous, without the necessity of removing
virtue out of the view of the law of the mind, and setting up being simply
considered, as virtue's first and grand object.

It was manifestly such a kind of distress, arising from another quarter, that
induced this great man, in the latter part of his answer to Dr. Tailor, after
he had overthrown his scheme, to admit, by way of answer to some of the
Doctor's objections against the Calvinistic doctrine, the extravagantly absurd
notions of Adam and all his seed being one complex, moral person, or moral
whole, and of personal identity being a purely arbitrary thing, not at all
founded in a phisical oneness, or sameness of being; whereby he has really
given up the orthodox doctrine of a proper imputation of Adam's sin to his
posterity, as a public or family sin, as being the sin of their family head;
and exposed the doctrine of original sin, instead of defending it; and has
betrayed the very foundation of God's moral government, and changed it into the
absurdest thing that can be imagined; so far as a doctrinal misrepresentation
of things can do it.

Perhaps from some such cause Mr. Edwards was determined to adopt that scheme
of tho'ts concerning moral liberty and necessity, as distinguished from
natural, which is opened in his treatise concerning the will. But be the cause
what it will, he has certainly erred greatly in all these things, and very
dangerously for his followers, as is evident from the nature and tendency of
his notions, and from the destructive scheme of doctrines they are building
upon them; which cannot be reduced to practice without confounding the churches,
and true religion with them. -- The grand view manifestly was to give a new
support to Calvinism, and overthrow Arminianism. These new notions concerning
virtue, original sin, and moral liberty and necessity, do indeed overthrow
Arminianism, and genuine Calvinism too, and together with them, the moral
government of God, and confound and change the nature of virtue and vice; so
far as any speculative doctrines can produce such effects. This worthy good man
did not see this fatal tendency of these speculations: If he had, he would have
renounced them with abhorrence.

Great men, when they err in any great matters, err like themselves. They are
great in their falls; how much greater when they stand firm, and erect, on
sacred ground.

This great, good mind, now sees the whole truth in a perfect, and most
consistent light, and, no doubt, rejoices in it, with all the children of
light, and has obtained plenary pardon of all the unhappy mistakes which he was
subject to, in the state of mortality, where the vail is not wholly taken away;
and a most gracious acceptance with the Father of lights, through the kind
mediation of our great High Priest. And we have, all of us, more and greater
errors, in this imperfect state, than we are aware of, or can ever hope to have
pardoned to us, but through our Lord's merciful intercession for us. -- Let us
not be high-minded, but fear, and look well to our goings: Be honest, unbiased,
and impartial as possible, in our reasonings and religious inquiries; bear with
each others weaknesses, speak the truth in love, honor the great and good, but
be careful that our veneration of them prove not a snare to us, but always keep
our ears open to our true Master, and sure guide: and the rest he will set in
order, when he comes. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the essential nature of true virtue.
MOral virtue (or holiness) in the most comprehensive sense of the words,
includes all that is morally good and right in moral beings, and, as such,
worthy of approbation, praise and reward.

Virtue is a complex thing: It does not primarily confist in one single
disposition, tendency, or affection of the mind, all other virtuous affections
arising our of that as their root; but includes various affections equally
original and essential to virtue, and others that are secondary. These are all
perfectly harmonious. Their resule is honor and happiness.

Virtue has its seat in the mind: not in the understanding only, nor in the
will only. Both must conqur in the exercises that are truly virtuous. The mind,
as intelligent, sees the things that are virtuous, and approves them as morally
right and worthy to be chosen, in preference to every thing inconsistent
therewith. But although the mind sees and approves the things that are virtuous
and excellent, yet if this mental approbation is not followed and crowned by a
free and determined choice of them, by the heart, but any inconsistent
affections prevail, and determine the mind to act contrary to its own moral
sense of what is right, the mind is not virtuous but vicious. This is the
character of all willful sinners, or wicked men. -- On the other hand, the
virtuous tendency or propensity of the heart does not consist in any blind
instinct, either natural or supernatural; but the mind in all its virtuous
propensities and exercises acts with understanding, under the sweet influence
of light. But let us observe more particularly.

1st. As God is the first and greatest Being, from whom all others derive their
being and their all, virtue or holiness, is in him as its source and original.
He is essentially, absolutely and independently virtuous and holy. He has in
himself all possible mental powers and perseetions; his understanding and power
are infinite. All his works are known to him from the beginning. He forefees
all future beings and things with equal clearness, as if they stood in present
existence before his eye. He thus lees all his creatures, in all their various
ranks and orders, and infinitely various capacities and characters, natural and
moral, and views them in all their relations to himself, and in their relations
to, and connections with each other; and sees what dispositions, actions and
conduct, in himself to them all, and in them severally toward him, and to one
another, are answerable and equitably adapted to his character and to theirs,
and to all the various relations between him and them, and among themselves,
and the happy tendency and result of such a universally equitable and right
conduct, and the wrongness and evil nature and miserable consequences of the
contrary. -- And as God sees all these things in a perfect light, so he fully
and absolutely approves the equitable, and good, and abhors the contrary; and
ever determines his own actions and treatment of his creatures, agreably to
this moral sense of his own mind; and he wills and commands that his rational
creatures should govern themselves by a regard to what is equitable, and
morally fit and right, in their whole moral conduct. Those that do so, he
approves; those that act in a contrary manner, he blames; and will bless the
one and punish the other, unless they repent and amend. -- As his moral
discernment and taste, or mental approbation of moral good, cannot be corrupted
or imposed on, so it is impossible that his heart or will should be perverted
and drawn into the least inconsistence with his sense of what is fit and right;
for he can have no motive to be thus inconsistent with himself, and do what his
own mind, as intelligent and moral, does necessarily, absolutely and uniformly
disapprove and condemn as evil and hateful, in its nature, tendency and
consequences. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, a God of truth,
without iniquity, just and right is he. -- God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man.

If God is thus perfectly wise and holy, and equitable, or virtuous, it hence
follows, that it is the 'good pleasure of his will' to give his family of
rational creatures as great a measure of happiness as can be communicated by
the exercise of a paternal government over them, perfectly wise, and perfectly
virtuous or holy, and no more. -- Indeed more cannot be communicated. An attempt
to give more, would defeat its own design, and, in the issue, destroy the
happiness of his children, instead of increasing it. -- Goodness in God is the
goodness of a mind absolutely virtuous and perfectly intelligent. It is then a
most virtuous propensity to do what becomes the holy Father of Spirits to do,
in forming his offspring to an established virtuousness of character, in
conformity to himself; and it further implies a will to render such happy, and
a pleasure in making, and seeing them so: But it cannot will to make the vicious
happy: This is abhorrent to virtuous goodness or love. -- If any are fallen
from virtue, virtuous goodness will dispose the Father of Spirits to use proper
methods to recover them to virtue, and so, in consequence, to happiness, if the
circumstances of their case are such, as to render it wise and fit to extend
such kind care to them. But if not, their case is desperate, and they are cast
away, as no longer objects of virtuous goodness and care. This is the condition
of apostate angels; the former, that of mankind as fallen in Adam.

2. Let us next consider the nature of true virtue as it is in subordinate
intelligent beings, the offspring of God. In general, it consists in right and
equitable dispositions and actions toward God and our fellow servants. And
those are right and equitable which are answerable to, and harmoniously agree
with their respective characters, actions, and relations to us, and to one
another.

Our Lord sums up the whole under two general heads, viz. Supreme love to God,
and equitable love to our neighbor. As virtue in all orders of intelligent
creatures is essentially the same, this is a just summary of it, in regard to
them all. Let us then consider virtue, both as it respects God and our
neighbor.

1st. As it respects God, it summarily consists in our loving him with all our
heart, i. e. with supreme, ruling, pious affection and regard. In this true
virtue primarily, radically, and most essentially consists. This supreme love
to God is doubtless to be understood in a comprehensive sense, as including
that complex affection and pious regard to him which is answerable to his whole
revealed character, and several relations to us. God, considered in himself,
and in his relations to us, is most worthy of our highest fear and love, trust
and confidence, of our whole service and indire obedience, and to be regarded,
sought, and delighted in as the chief good and last end of all things. These
are essential parts of godliness, or virtuousness of heart toward God, and are
to be understood as comprehended in this first and great command, 'Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,' etc:

These right and pious dispositions and exercises of the mind toward God, are
the result of a true knowledge, and realizing sense of God in the mind, as
clothed with his true characters and relations to us; which is given by God
himself, by the ministry of Jesus Christ, and through the influence of the Holy
Ghost. Some writers indeed assert, that there must first be wro't, by the
miraculous creating power of the spirit, a moral change; (as they describe it,
it is a phisical change) or that a new heart, or virtuous taste, and spiritual
sense must be created, before any possible inlightening of the mind in the
knowledge of God can have any influence in exciting and Brawing forth any right
affections and exercises of the heart toward him. This they seem to consider
as a sort of substratum and support to all the acts and exercises of virtue*
But they ought to have reflected, that God himself, is the source and support
of virtue in us; which is the re-action of our minds toward him, answering to
his action and influence on them, by the light and moral power of his glory and
love; or their attraction and active tendency toward him, in consequence of
their being brought under the attractive influence of his blessed character and
gracious love to us in Jesus Christ. Our Lord uses a similar manner of
expression when he speaks of his Father's drawing men, and their coming to him
in consequence thereof; which drawing he makes to confist in God's so teaching
them as that they hear and learn of him. Again he says, If I be lifted up from
the earth, I will draw all men unto me. It Is by the doctrine of his cross that
the attracting glory and love of God and Jesus Christ are most clearly
manifested: And all who behold and realize this glory of the Lord, are drawn by
its influence and come to him, and are changed.

To talk of a moral change in the mind, forming the heart in a virtuous temper,
as preceding this attraction of God upon the mind, and as necessary to render
that effectual, is the same absurdity in divinity or moral philosophy as it
would be in natural, to assert that a body naturally cold, must first change
its nature, and become of a hot nature, like the sun, before it can be warmed
by the action of the sun's rays upon it, however near the sun may approach
toward it.

Moreover, let it be observed that God, considered by the mind in his relative
characters, and absolute perfections, or as exercising his perfections in all
his relations and works to his creatures, is the complete object of pious
regard; which regard is answerable to the characters and various relations in
which he is seen by the believing mind: And in this answerableness, and
harmonious agreement of the affections and actions of the mind to his
characters, relations and works, their virtuousness, or moral excellence and
acceptableness essentially consists. This is the view which is given us of this
matter throughout the inspired writings. -- It is very surprising to hear great
and good men represent all relative duties which we owe to God, and Jesus
Christ, considered as performed from a regard to their relative characters and
works, and to the equitableness and suitableness of such returns, as beauties
of an inferior kind, and as having nothing of true virtuousness and moral
excellence in them, 'consisidered simply, and by themselves' but only as they
arise out of, and are the various exercises of pure benevolence to Being in
general, simply considered, as intelligent. -- Such misrepresentations and the
doctrines built upon them, extremely disgust enlightened and virtuous men, and
perplex the simple, and confound their understanding, and involve practical
religion (the plainest thing in the world, adapted to the capacities of the
vulgar) in a cloud, and give it so mysterious an appearance, that they are
tempted to suspect there is nothing real in it, or if there is, that it is so
far removed out of their view, that it is in vain to trouble themselves about
it. How sorely is virtue wounded in the house of its friends!

2dly. Virtue, as it respects our neighbor, summarily consists in loving him
as ourselves. Which implies that there is a love of ourselves, which is
virtuous, and approved by God: otherwise our loving our neighbor as ourselves
could not be a virtuous love. -- This virtuous love of our neighbor is
explained by our Lord as implying such an equitable affection or disposition of
mind toward him, as engages us to do to him all things whatsoever we would,
that he should do to us, or could in reason and equity expect him to do, if we
were in his circumstances and he in ours.

This virtuous and equitable regard to ourselves and to our neighbor, is the
result of a true knowledge or faith of God, as graciously revealed to us, and a
truly pious and filial regard to him, viewed in his true character, and
relations to ourselves and to our neighbor. Or in other words, this equitable
love is the offspring of piety to God. -- Without a true knowledge of God, and
our relations to him, we cannot truly know ourselves, or our neighbor; and in
consequence cannot know what manner and measure of love and regard to him, and
to ourselves is equitable, and agreeable to the righteous will of God: And
without a true, pious, governing love and regard to God, our love and respect
to ourselves and our neighbor, will necessarily be ungoverned, and in a great
measure irregular, and in many of its exercises, in many respects, inequitable,
or unrighteous; and therefore vicious and blameworthy, so far as inequitable.

The truly virtuous mind views himself, and his neighbor, as God's creatures,
subjects of his government, and objects of his good will, and paternal care;
who seeks their true good, virtue and happiness; and reflects that it is the
good pleasure of his will that he, and every one do so too, in humble
dependence on him, the great Father of Love, and fountain of good. -- In this
view, conformably to God's will, he bears a true, friendly, equitable regard to
himself, and his neighbor, and endeavors, according to his ability, to
promote his own, and his neighbor's good, subordinate to God, and to advance
himself, and his fellow servants in virtue, preparative to true happiness; with
humble prayer to the Great Father of the whole family in heaven and earth, to
bless both them and himself, for his own goodness sake, in Jesus Christ. --
This spirit of equitable, friendly regard, will dispose the virtuous mind to
behave to every one in a manner suitable to their various characters, offices,
and relations, agreably, and in obedience to God's righteous law; which is
written in the heart of the truly virtuous.

The love of our neighbor, yea, of any individual, as springing out of these
principles of faith and pious regard to God, is, in effect, universal love. For
these principles will extend this spirit of equitable, friendly regard to the
whole family of God, to all his creatures, who are objects of his kind care and
paternal good will, when the mind is so opened and enlarged, as to take into
its view, his whole family as being such, and objects of his benevolent regard.
-- In this way it is that virtuous love or benevolence becomes general, and
extends to all: not from its beginning in pure benevolence to being simply
considered, and so from this root, branching out in benevolent regard to
particular beings, to God and his intelligent creatures, as sharers in being,
the first beloved; Which is an unnatural and unchristian notion, and has no
countenance from scripture, reason or experience, but is condemned by them all.
How far the idea of virtue given in this chapter is approved and suggested by
inspired teachers, the reader must judge for himself.

CHAP. VI. Of that defective sort of virtue which is observable in many men,
who are not truly religious, but, upon the whole, are of a vicious character.
IT IS undeniably true in fact, that natural conscience and the moral sense,
have a very considerable influence in many men, who are not truly religious, in
restraining them from many sins, and engaging them to practice many duties:
Their hearts, in many instances, concur, in some degree, with the moral sense
of their minds. A sense of equity, of moral honor, of gratitude, a spirit of
benevolence, compassion, etc. and some, kind of regard to God, influence them
to do many worthy deeds, worthy in some respects, and in many lesser instances
to deny and control particular evil dispositions, for their sakes, when yet
they will deny and counteract all these for some other lusts, and under greater
temptations, and have no effectually governing regard to God, and to virtue,
its interests and reward.

Writers are divided in their sentiments concerning actions of this kind. Some
are disposed to allow them to be virtuous in some degree. Others say there is
nothing in them that does at all partake of the nature of true virtue. This is
Mr. Edwards's sentiment. Some others go farther, and say, they are perfect
sins, and, as some express themselves, abominable good works. Mr. Hopkins says,
' all the exercises of the hearts of the unregenerate; (even the best of them,
under the highest influences of common grace, and strivings of the Holy Spirit)
'are in direct opposition to God, his spirit and law.' Sermon on John 1.13. p.
39.
I believe this subject, which is often handled in a very confused manner, may
be set in a just and clear light. Whether it is so represented here, the reader
will judge, when he has run through this chapter.

A distinction ought to be made between the denominating character of the
agent, and that of particular actions which he does. These do not always agree.
Both virtuous and vicious men are generally imperfect in their respective
characters in this life; and some are so in a very great degree, especially in
the morning of their moral life, and are in a great degree inconsistent with
themselves, in their dispositions and conduct. Some particular actions, in
both, are governed by, and denominated from the weaker principles and springs
of action, in them, and are inconsistent with, and belie their true,
prevailing, denominating characters: If we judge of their respective characters
by them, we shall judge wrong. Truly virtuous or good men, sometimes (alas!
too frequently) do particular actions which are morally evil, wholly evil: the
virtuous principles and tempers which habitually rule in them, have no degree
of influence in producing them, but are quiescent, or overruled by contrary
principles or passions. In these things they act wholly out of character,
considered as virtuous; and yet they act from an inward spring in themselves.
Thus, for example, Peter was a believing and good man, but his denying his Lord
was a very evil thing, had not the least tincture of faith or virtue in it, but
sprang wholly out of sinful fear and criminal cowardice, which at that time
suppressed the actings of his faith, and virtuous love to his Master. If this
had been his habitually ruling principle, he would not have been a good or
virtuous man, any more than those jewish rulers who believed that Jesus was the
Christ, but did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue,
because they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God. So, on the
other hand, men of a vicious character do some particular actions which do not
spring from any vicious principles or affections in their hearts, and have no
positive viciousness in them.

I do not mean to insinuate that they spring from any truly virtuous principles
of heart. They have no such principles of action in their hearts. -- But there
are certain middle principles or springs of action wro't into the mind of man,
by our gracious Creator, which, though they are not virtuous, and do not
necessarily imply a principle of virtue in the heart, yet are friendly to
virtue, and espouse its cause within us, suppose the mind duly instructed:
Such are reason, natural conscience, the moral sense or taste, etc. These have
some degree of influence, in many natural men. In some single actions they
rule. Thus, for instance, men, whose hearts are far from being in an habitual,
and universally equitable disposition toward God and their neighbor, are many
times determined to do particular equitable actions to others from a regard to
the equity of the case, as their truespring; and, for equity's sake, deny
themselves in little things. -- What is positive in such actions is not sinful
or vicious; it is contrary to no law of God, but required in the law. But there
is an essential defect in the agent, which renders him not well accepted: Yet
he is not blamed, stricly speaking, for what he does, but for what is wanting
to render his work perfect, or truly virtuous. What I intend will, perhaps, be
best illustrated in this manner. God commands his people to deal equitably,
every man with his neighbor, from a regard to what is just, and out of a
supreme respect and duty to him, their righteous Father and Judge, who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity. Now A. in dealing with B. his neighbor,
sees what is right between them, and, from a regard to the equity of the case,
deals justly with him, when at the same time he sees how he might make an
unrighteous gain by him, undiscovered: But in all this he has no true and
obedient regard to God as his righteous Governor and Judge. (There are many
such cases in real life.) The action he does is a right action, in respect to
what is positive in it, commanded by God, and the motive on which he acts is a
right motive, one of the motives God wills him to be influenced by. There is
therefore nothing evil in the action, positively considered, nor in the motive
upon which it is done: but the man is blameworthy in that he is not influenced
by a religious regard to God, as well as by a regard to the equity of the case,
in respect to his neighbor. In this regard his action is essentially
deficient, and weighed in a true balance is found light, and cannot be accepted
as an instance of true, divine virtue.

To render actions truly virtuous, they must be sanctified by a spirit of
religious regard to God, mingling it self in with them. This is the true salt
which seasons, and fits them to be offered to God as an acceptable sacrifice,
by Jesus Christ. -- If actions of the kind above specified, unseasoned with
salt, are at all considered as virtues, it must be in an improper sense. If any
are disposed to consider them as branches of virtue, they should represent them
as dead branches which have no vital union with the true root of the tree, viz.
a spirit of religious regard to God. As such they will soon wither away, if not
grafted upon the true stock; like the faith of the stony ground hearers, who
have no root in themselves. -- Yet, on the other hand, men act very unadvisedly
in reviling this kind of deficient actions, as having nothing in their nature
but what is sin, and an abomination to God. There is something in them which is
right, as we have seen, and required by God. This is approved, not abhorred and
thrown back as dung in the faces of the doers of them: God, speaking to his
people concerning their late covenant, to release their servants, and actually
sending them out free, for a short time, though they soon repented of this good
deed, and brought them into bondage again, says, 'Ye were now turned, and had
done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor.'
Jerm. 34.15.
Yet the agent is faulted for that which is wanting in his work to render it
truly holy, and accepted, as having all the essential characters of truly good
fruit. -- This kind of actions which are not positively vicious, nor yet truly
virtuous, may fitly be resembled to what is called historical faith; which
implies assent to the truth of the gospel facts, founded on the proper evidence
(which saving faith also has) but the heart does not embrace the truths
believed with governing love; and therefore the faith is not saving. For ' with
the heart man believes unto righteousness.' Yet the assent of the mind is not
sinful. 'Thou believe there is one God. Thou do well' says the apostle
James. But lest men should rest here, he adds, 'Devils also believe and
tremble.'

Actions materially good, may be distinguished into three kinds; the first are
formally good, and truly virtuous and holy, acceptable and rewardable, upon the
gospel plan of grace. -- The second kind are such as have been mentioned above.
Of this sort the commendable behavior of the young man in the gospel was, whom
our gracious Lord looked upon with love; but added, one thing thou lackest yet.
May all his ministers learn of him. -- The third sort are such materially good
actions as spring from vicious motives and lusts of the heart. Such were the
public prayers, fastings and alms of the Pharisees. These are positively
vicious: the outward work is rendered unclean, profane and abominable by the
vicious principle of the heart from which it proceeds.

When all the reformations and best moral actions of natural men, under the
influence of an awakened and enlightened conscience, and the highest
improvements of common grace, are represented as altogether vicious, and in
direct opposition to the spirit and law of God, and abominable to him, like the
Pharisees prayers and alms, they are set in a very false light, and a stumbling
block is cast before the lame and the blind. A thing which their appointed
guides ought not to do.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Mr. Edwards's notion of the essence or root of true virtue. P. 3.
CHAP. II. How supreme love to God results from absolute benevolence to being
simply considered, and is in effect the same thing. P. 6. CHAP. III. Concerning
Mr. Edwards's notions of the primary and secondary beauty of moral things. P.
12. CHAP. IV. Of Mr. Edwards's notions concerning natural conscience, and the
moral sense. P. 25. CHAP. V. Concerning the real nature and essence of true
virtue, or real holiness. P. 40. CHAP. VI. Of that defective sort of virtue
which is found in some unregenerate men. P. 48.

