(...) of our (...) Jesus Christ, the (...), recommended and enforced, in A
SERMON PUBLICLY DELIVERED At a MEETING of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, held in
Leeds, the 26th of the Sixth Month, commonly called June, 1769.

CAREFULLY TAKEN DOWN IN CHARACTERS AT THE SAME TIME, BY JAMES BLAKES, JUN.

LONDON: Printed, PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted, And SOLD by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in
Third-street, opposite the Workhouse. M DCC LXXI.

A SERMON.
IT is not in the "Oldness of the Letter Romans vii. 6.
," or in unfeeling Formality, but from the animating warmth of Gospel Love,
that I salute this assembly in these expressions; The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all
always. Amen. 2 Cor. xiii. 14.
It is the constant language of that evangelical spirit, from which arises this
tribute of Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good will to men Luke
ii. 14.
, and which I am thankful to feel not restrained within less compass than the
Bulk of Mankind; but zealously and ardently pointing toward all such as
profess faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and a hope of salvation by him.

THERE is something further couched in this affectionate salutation than the
language of Love; the language of Wisdom. -- (...) Wisdom which is "profitable
to direct Eccl. x. 10.
," seems to me very evidently and very eminently displayed by the father of
mercy and kindness in these expressions; which, by divine assistance, I would
endeavor a little to open, and to urge as words of some signification, unto
all such whose minds are at times turned to contemplate, and not only
contemplate, but also to pursue, "the things which make for peace Romans xiv. 19.
."

I. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THERE is no language, or form of words, sufficiently copious and expressive,
though raised to the utmost extent or height of description, for representing
the adorable manifestations of heavenly kindness, goodness, condescension and
mercy, or for exhibiting the things which proceed from the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ: but it is allowable to speak whereof we know, according to the
Measure of knowledge, and to utter, according to the proportion of Strength
given, what we now see in part, and what from experience we feel, of the
merciful kindness of God; and which, as we faithfully follow his will, we shall
hereafter more fully and comprehensively behold. -- This I apprehend is
necessary for all, to whom a revelation of the Christian Religion has been made
by means of Holy Writ; and in an especial manner, where He that is the
discoverer of states, has opened their understandings to believe the Doctrines
of the Christian Religion, and the sacred records of that miraculous Favor and
Grace that came by Jesus Christ.

BUT for my own part, I must freely acknowledge there was a time of my life, in
which I would gladly have relieved myself from following the arduous paths of
religion, by turning aside into the paths of Skepticism and Infidelity. My mind
was ready to allege, as some at this time of day may be, How can we believe
without Evidence? There is not a sufficient Evidence of Truth to convince my
judgment, or to induce me to believe. I know this has been the allegation of
some: But I have found there is no Deficiency of evidence, but an unwillingness
to admit the Force of that evidence, which would properly influence the mind;
and I have reason to apprehend this has been the case with others: for if there
was a thorough submission, and disposition of mind to receive the Truth in the
Love of it; to endeavor after it in its genuine simplicity; to look at it with
a single eye; and, if I may be allowed the expression, to suppress or banish
all the "buts and iss;" we should soon find the Evidence of the Christian
Religion to be lively and incontestible, and effectually to operate to make us
wise and good; Wise with the Wisdom that is to Salvation; and Good, with the
Goodness that is of God, the Source of Goodness.

BUT whilst people "take counsel, and not of God," and suffer themselves to be
covered with a covering and not of his Spirit Isaiah xxx. 1.
, they are unwilling to admit the force of those truths which would separate
the precious from the vile," and purify us according to his word. -- While this
is the case that many deviate in point of Faith, they may complain of the want
of Evidence, respecting the Certainty and Truth of the Christian Religion; and
complain with as much justice, as a man who wilfully hides himself in Darkness,
complains of his Incapacity of Seeing. For we have such an evidence and
understanding imparted by the Light and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
doubtless abundantly displays the immediate Regard and Love of God, as recorded
in Holy Writ; and from which I freely acknowledge an internal illumination
necessary, for all that would have valid claim to the Christian Religion;
whereby we obtain a firm assurance of, and a well-grounded belief in, those
glorious truths.

WE have sometimes been accused of allegorizing away the important truths of
the Christian Religion as recorded in Holy Writ: It is far, very far from our
intention or inclination! We want to enforce them, upon ourselves, upon our
brethren, with all that requisite weight which commands their belief; calling
to a belief of Heart, not a mere assent with the Tongue; but "a belief of Heart
unto righteousness Romans x. 10.
."

WE have been distinguished, and are not ashamed of the distinction, for
preaching, "Christ within;" but we never preach a Christ within, opposed to, or
derogating from, a Christ without. -- We fully believe not only in his glorious
and gracious appearance amongst the sons of men, "as in the volume of the book
it is written Heb. x. 7.
;" but we also believe in his inward and spiritual appearance, the second time
without sin unto salvation Ibid. ix. 28.
; in which we are supported by a cloud of witnesses Ibid. xii. 1.
, and by the doctrine of the holy Author of the Christian Religion, enforcing
his inward and spiritual manifestation (the manifestation of his Grace) in as
clear and indubitable a manner, as from the testimonies delivered concerning
his external appearance.

BUT the mystery of ungodliness has powerfully wrought with some who profess
the Christian name, in opposition to the force of those testimonies with regard
to his internal appearance, or manifestation of himself in the hearts of
mankind; and to render inadmissible the doctrine of an inward and spiritual
communion, the revelation of Light, Life, and Good to the souls of men,
immediately imparted for our redemption and sanctification. -- This would lead
people home from the flowery paths of Ease and Speculation, into the arduous
one of Practice: It would transfer religion from the Head to the Heart; and, in
its progress, would remove every obstacle to the admission of the doctrine of
an inward and spiritual manifestation of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

BUT there has been a lamentable defection from the Life and Spirit of true
christianity, wherein the Old Man, under all the pomp of Opinion, and assenting
to indubitable Truths, still remains in full possession of every inordinate
love, and his goods are at ease. A mind disguised with JACOB'S Voice, and
ESAU'S Hands, found orthodox Principles, with a schismatic Heart, ingross the
Formalist of all names and distinctions to religion; the old man being at ease
with his goods, in a state of self-sufficiency, either rejoicing under a Form,
and the false shade of Opinion and regularity of conduct, or in the pomp of a
specious external appearance; wherein some continue possessed of an unhappy
tranquillity or ease of mind, and are endeavoring to build up a tabernacle
quiet and safe, content with a Form, or depending upon a bare Belief in the
doctrines of the christian religion. -- But there is a work whereby the Old
Earth, and the Old Heavens are made to shake, and must be removed; which is of
the adorable mercy and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he thus may reveal
himself; --

YET once more will I shake not the Earth only, but also HEAVEN Heb. xii. 27.
! -- Not only the Earth, not only against the inhabitants of the earth; but the
Work of God is made conspicuous in the Awakening of the ungodly, for their
conversion from sin and death, unto righteousness and life. -- "Yet once more
will I shake HEAVEN!" -- The glorious specious Appearances of Truth, and
Doctrines recorded and assented to, but yet not reduced to Experience; truths
received and confessed by the Tongue, but the Heart revolting from their
efficacious influence.

Yet once more will I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. And this word,
yet once more, signifies the REMOVING of those things which are shaken. And
undoubtedly the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in its manifestation, procedure
and effects, would shake every false rest in which any deluded soul may have
fixed its repose: He would shake every false rest among those under all names
and distinctions to religion, who are trusting in Name and in Form, without the
POWER, or an experience of its virtual effects upon the soul; these all
appertain to one family: -- and not only so, but he would shake every false
rest, yea and the FOUNDATION, of those who are building upon a Profession, and
upon the Apostles Testimony of Jesus Christ; because they are only building
upon the Credibility of those truths, yet cannot experimentally say, Through
the Grace of our Lord Jesus, We acknowledge the Truth, according to Godliness
Titus i. 1.
.

THEY that are of the World, come here also to a house fortified with Opinion,
and are supporting themselves in having obtained a clear, full, and concise
knowledge of the Truth of the Christian Religion. But there is a Power that
will search every false foundation, and overturn every superficial dependence
on Human Production, that is inconsistent with the uniform tendency of his
sacred Law, fashioned upon the plan of unchangeable, everlasting Wisdom. -- It
is not of Man, or by Man, but proceeds from the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby those truths are brought home to the Hearts of mankind. The gracious
effects of his powerful working, are manifested to bring us home from a state
of false dependence, that we may humbly and experientially acknowledge, In God
is my Salvation, and my Glory, the Rock of my Strength Psalm. lxii. 7.
: in God alone is my Trust.

BUT "the Strong Man," armed with OPINION and BELIEF, has nevertheless been
pursuing vitiated Affections; which people have endeavored to retain, and
glossed over with a specious lofty Proffession; fully assenting to the truths
handed forth from the experience of others, but unreduced to practice in
themselves.

While the strong man armed keeps the palace, the things that he possesses are
in peace Luke xi. 21.
; until a stronger than he overcome, and cast him out with all his goods. --
All those things that are inconsistent with the holiness and purity of the
Divine Nature, which are pointed clearly out, and may be understood, by the
declaration of our Lord concerning the Church, wherein every plant that is not
of my heavenly Father's right hand planting shall be rooted out Mat. xv. 13.
. -- What would then become or all those things, which a mistaken judgment
calls "but little things?" Of the Pleasures and Amusements of the present age,
invented by the sons of dissipation, who add wings to their moments, and are
carried forward with rapidity through time, unprepared, to a final judgment?
What a multiplicity of those things which are not of the Father, but of the
World that lies in wickedness 1 John v. 19.
: things of which I shall not now particularly speak; but they are such as have
no Life in the LIFE of the Lord Jesus Christ in Man, but are ever Enemies to
it, while the Affections are earthly, and confined to this world, however the
partiality of deluded minds may think to seek a resource, and attempt to
obviate the seeming Rigours of the Gospel, or find for themselves an easier and
more flexible way, by resting upon a mere Belief of Systems (the goods
belonging to the strong man armed) wherein they endeavor to support
themselves, and are high in Profession, but weak respecting Practice? A species
of Deviation from the Power of Truth proceeding from the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which would search the secrets of every Heart! It would open to
the view of the attentive mind their nature, and the situation they are in;
what is of God, and what is not of God; what is pure, and what is impure: It
would ever prove a more decisive test in all our actions, a more certain
criterion in our conduct through life, than it is to be feared the generality
of Christian professors have attained, and which it is absolutely impossible
for the Strong Man armed to produce, with all his seeming Sanctity of the
Flesh, or strenuous Support of Belief, and a multitude of external
performances; notwithstanding he may endeavor to plead for the "Law and the
Commandment," and think thereby to attain the mark of Christ's followers, who
"walk therein all the days of their lives."

BUT although they are thus lifted up in their minds, there is an Omniscient
and Omnipresent BEING, who cannot be deceived or imposed upon; and it is
impossible to invalidate that invariable obligation to live under the Power of
the Cross of Christ however they may endeavor to find means, by professing his
Name without taking up a Cross to the inordinate pleasures and pursuits of this
world, or attribute to themselves the merits of his death, without a death unto
sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, wherein alone we are made partakers of
an everlasting glory.

I beseech you by the most powerful motive of the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that every one may endeavor to cultivate in your minds a living Sense
of Religion; and that we may all experience the purity and sanctity of its
nature to operate in our hearts; and as members of one Family, though
distinguished by various Names, we may continue as Brethren and
Fellow-pilgrims, in our passage through the wilderness of this world, to an
endless Glory; that we may run with patience the arduous race, although through
distress of temptation and probation, to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away.

I BESEECH you by the Mercies of God, by every powerful motive, in the language
of Love, the Love of God, which lives in my heart, lay hold of the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ; by which alone our hearts and minds can experimentally
acknowledge, that it is by the virtue of it we are cleansed, purified, and
redeemed from the pollutions and defilements of the world; and whereby we
become fashioned in the image of righteousness and true holiness.

LET us next consider the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ as offered for our
REDEMPTION. -- And I have no doubt of its being acknowledged, by all who have
any understanding of the nature of True Christianity, or care about their
immortal souls, that the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ manifestly leads to the
doctrine of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God; to a
redemption of the soul from death, hell, and the grave; consequently, from that
state of punishment due to sinners, where the ungodly receive the reward of
their disobedience: -- Neither have I any doubt of our being accompanied herein
by a cloud of witnesses, who feel the Truth of the Christian Religion, and know
the force and authority of those testimonies concerning it. -- And let us take
along with us the knowledge which the apostles and primitive believers had of
the Christian Redemption and Doctrine in their times, that the Grace of God,
that brings salvation, has appeared to ALL men; teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly,
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and glorious appearance,
of the Grace of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works Titus ii. 11, 12, 13, 14.
. This is the Redemption proposed by the Gospel, which commands our assent, and
will remain obligatory throughout all ages of the Christian dispensation.

BUT there has been a claim to Redemption, introduced in the Apostasy from the
LIFE of Religion, maintained amongst professors under various names, who plead
the Impossibility of being redeemed from the Power of Sin; -- a Redemption from
the Penalty, but not from the Commission; -- a Redemption from the Punishment
without a Victory over the transgressing nature: -- And herein the mystery of
unrighteousness has powerfully wrought, and still works, thus to substitute
Names for Things, Sounds instead of Substance; and a Profession instead of a
lively Possession of its powerful and virtual effects upon the mind. -- But it
is a Redemption from "all iniquity," whereby alone he will purify unto himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

THOU shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their Sins
Matt. i. 21.
. -- From the Worldly Nature, and from the Corruptions and Defilements in the
world. -- A Redemption from the Power of Sin; -- wherein we are sanctified, and
justified, in the sight of God, and are prepared for an admission into the
kingdom of heaven, as we are possessed of this efficacious redemption: -- "It
is like unto a little Leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of
meal Matt. xiii. 33.
. -- It was operative; -- and being dissused through the three measures of
meal, there was a real, inherent Change, or partaking of its own Nature; -- a
change effected by the powerful diffusion of that leavening Virtue.

THIS is the Redemption of Jesus Christ; -- a Redemption effected by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- It consists not in the Strength, or Change, of
Opinions, or a formal Conception; -- but as we experience a gradual progression
from glory to glory, and from one degree of similitude, or resemblance, of the
Divine Image to another, until we attain a victory here, and the consummation
of happiness in a future state.

I APPREHEND this is the genuine nature of Christian Redemption, as proposed by
the Gospel, which will stand the test, and bring forth the glorious fruits of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, PEACE, and JOY in the HOLY GHOST; and wherein he will refine,
and purify unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

WE are not to ascribe or attribute to ourselves any Merit of Works, as
performed in the strength of a natural Understanding, or from any religious
Seize; but ever to retain a consciousness of our inability; as knowing
nothing belongs to us as Creatures, but "Blushing and Confussion of Face Dan.
ix. 7.
;" and that our growth toward perfection proceeds from the assistance
dispensed of his unbounded mercy and grace; as says the apostle, It is by the
Grace of God I am what I am; and his Grace which is in me, was not in vain; but
I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the Grace of God which
is IN me 1 Cor. xv. 10.
.

I HAVE no doubt that many of your minds, under various names and distinctions
to religion, have been at times touched with a feeling sense of the nature and
excellency of true christianity; with a blessed sense of it, proceeding from
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- May you so follow on, as to experience a
further progress in its efficacious operation upon your minds, and witness its
Leavening Virtue into its own Nature, drawing you from the temper and
defilements of the world, by a transformation of your minds from dead works, to
serve the living God! -- wherein you would truly experience an increase in
strength, derived from him to whom "all Power is given Mat. xxviii. 18.
." power to effect every excellent purpose, and fill up to you all those
relative attributes which are inseparable from the Divine Nature; and wherein
he is mercifully communicating an holy evidence of Faith in the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ; a faith in things not seen, the substance of things hoped
for Heb. xi. 1.
.

MAY we be engaged in an humble dependence, and aweful worship, before the God
of heaven and earth! continually contemplate him in his adorable perfections,
as the Father and Fountain of all our mercies; and faithfully regard every part
of our duty in bringing "Glory to God," proposed as the Mark of Redemption and
Reconciliation, through the Merits and Mediation of a crucified Savior; "who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. -- In this manner we become
members of his sacred Militant Church on Earth; and are entering upon the path
to the Triumphant Church in Heaven.

WE were made a little lower than the angels, and intended to partake in the
fruition of happiness with the spirits of just men made perfect, in the general
assembly of the firstborn sons of God. And I have no doubt but he will still
beautify his footstool by the gift of his Grace, the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, proceeding from himself, the Author and Fountain of good, and of every
perfect work, whereunto we are called by his Spirit, and become united in
membership with his sanctified church and family: -- So that having filled up
the measure of our days in the world, we may finally receive the beatific
reward of an endless life with the just of all generations.

I HAVE no doubt of the possibility of Access to the Father while clothed with
mortality, through the mediation and intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. -- But it is as we admit his Spirit to operate in our minds to prepare
us for access, and duly attend to the assistance afforded us.

May the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, always! -- May you be
built up in his Grace, and continue engaged in the contemplation of his
adorable perfections! the infinite Kindness and Goodness of God! the excellency
and purity of the Christian Nature! and, by a separation from the world, obtain
a well-grounded hope that he may be with you all, always. Amen.

YET notwithstanding an happy advancement may be known, a state of humble
Watchfulness is our duty, and our safety. -- I cannot join with the opinion of
those, who maintain the doctrine of once in Grace, ever in Grace. -- I believe
that it is possible for those who have been visited with a measure and
manifestation of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that have tasted the good
word of life, and of the powers of the world to come Heb. vi. 5.
, to fall away. -- It is necessary to continue in a state of Daily Dependence
on Divine Strength, for our faithful perseverance in the uniform progressive
labor of a christian life, and a daily walking with the God of our lives, to
preserve us from evil. -- The apostle, who seemed to entertain a requisite
diffidence with regard to himself, perceived the necessity of a Continuance in
the Communion of Grace, in order to a happy conclusion; and was cautious, while
he was preaching to others, lest himself should become a castaway 1 Cor. ix.
27.
. -- Let us, therefore, not content ourselves that we begin and run well for a
Season; but retain upon our minds a living SENSE of religion, clothed with
native simplicity and purity, proceeding from the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

II. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Love of God.
HE has so loved us, and manifested his inconceivable favor toward us, that
he has not dealt with us according to our Merits, but of his free and
unmerited GRACE, that we might become heirs of an endless inheritance in glory!
God so loved the world, that he sent his own Son into the world to be a LIGHT
to the world; a Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the
ends of the earth Acts xiii. 47.
. -- It is this heavenly Love, the Love of God, that is the grand and solemn
cement of his family, both here and hereafter: wherein we are united to him,
and in fellowship one with another. It binds all into an uniform consistency,
both in heaven and earth. -- Many other objects of our love are local and
temporary, limited to Time and Place, or confined to this world, and to the
things that are in it: but the Love of GOD is an endless commandment. -- It is
CHARITY; that divine Charity, that will remain when testimonies shall cease,
and declarations come to an end; -- in a participation whereof we shall still
continue to join in holy worship and adoration unto God, the Author of our
being.

IT is in the enjoyment of this divine and ardent Charity, that the celestial
inhabitants in the realms of light receive the sacred Emanations of LOVE, and
enjoy the Favor of God in a participation of those ineffable pleasures which
it yields to the glorified assembly of saints in bliss. -- And, indeed, it
seems to me to be the grand Source of all happiness and duty; happiness in
heaven, as well as perfection of wisdom to the sons of men, derived from those
gracious relative attributes of the Divinity wherein he is mercifully
communicating the essential part of his own Nature, being, in Himself,
"altogether lovely Canticles v. 16.
," consummate in the perfection of holiness, and unparallelled in wisdom! --
wherein we are sometimes favored with the fruition of his Love, measurably
imparted, to our comfort and unspeakable joy, infinitely superior to all that
this world can afford, and which will remain, when the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up
2 Peter iii. 10.
-- The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, will then open
unto the soul that glorious prospect of unutterable, inconceivable happiness,
which is the provision of God for the righteous, and those who faithfully
persevere to a peaceful and happy conclusion.

IT is by virtue of the Grace and Love of God, that we are enabled to advance
in a proper progression through the various steps of a religious life; and
which would kindle an ardour of affection in the mind with desires for a
continued supply of that heavenly virtue, which nourishes the soul up unto
eternal life. -- A Want of this, makes us bow to the god of this world, and to
things that are in it. -- The love of Money, Riches, and the Praise of Men;
which with various powers of seduction are presented to our view, and our
prospects are bounded by the narrow conceptions of an Earthly Mind. -- It is a
love of those things, which obstructs the progress of religion. -- A secret
deviation from the Love of God to a Love of this World, has prevailed in many.
-- But how can it be otherwise, since like will ever assimilate with its like?
And while the BODY is terrestrial, the GLORY is terrestrial, and the body will
continue engaged in the pursuit of earthly things. -- For every mind will
attend to its Similitude. -- And while the Body is terrestrial, the Glory will
remain terrestrial, however it may assume a resemblance to matters of a higher
nature, and superior importance. -- Yet while the Glory is earthly, our Views
earthly, and confined to the pleasures and pursuits of this world, our
Affections are earthly, and we are rendered incapable of that Love, which is of
a divine and heavenly nature.

A terrestrial love presides and is prevalent in the minds of many; which has
obstructed the power of truth, and been the cause of feeble purposes and feeble
efforts, enfeebled minds with irresolute intentions, and proved the occasion of
a defection amongst Christian professors, who have been desirous to form
something more amiable and agreeable, or better adapted to their natural
inclinations. -- But there is a deficiency in their Love, a wavering in
Affection, a division of Love, which is the cause of weakness and incapacity to
make a proper advancement in a Christian life, or improvement in the
progressive work of religion upon the soul. For, as I have hinted, while the
BODY is terrestrial, the GLORY is terrestrial, until we are created anew in
Christ Jesus, unto righteousness; wherein our minds will become clothed with a
celestial glory, and by the power of Divine Grace, be set above every earthly
love. And then the Love of GOD will prevail in our minds, and we shall attain
an experience of additional strength, steadily to persevere in the arduous
warfare of a Christian Life. And the Glory being celestial, our views are
circumscribed within the limits of an heavenly love, wherein we are lifted up
to God, being renewed in the spirit of our minds, and enabled to travel on
toward the glorious city of the saints solemnity.

BUT it is a deficiency of Love, it is a cleaving to other things, inconsistent
with the purity of the Divine Nature, that has slain ten thousands! -- A secret
defection of Heart, which no human eye has been privy to, has slain more than
open Prophanity! -- A degeneracy of Heart, a secret sliding from the Covenant
of Life, in those who are turning aside into the path of irreligion, and a
mental deviation from the purity of nature, and holiness; the necessary
requisite to an union and divine participation in the Love of God.

I THINK it is said with very great propriety, that The love of money is the
root of all evil: which while some have lusted after, they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows 1 Timothy vi. 10.
. -- But though it may seem to many not needful to tell of these things,
methinks it is applicable to some in these days who would be deemed "Men of
God;" and for whom I wish, as for myself, that when the heavens shall roll back
as a scroll, and eternity shall open upon us, when our views of these lower
objects shall vanish and disappear, when the Arch-angel's trump shall sound to
judgment, and a righteous retribution is made, we may be found men of God! --
"But, O Man of God," that have these things in view, think on the unutterable
prospect of infinite happiness, the reward of obedience, and "flee these
things." Flee the glory and splendour of this transient world; continue to
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love patience, meekness; fight
the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art called,
and have professed a good profession before many witnesses.

THIS is the language of the Love of God to this assembly, that we may be found
"Men of God," when all the glory of this would, with its splendour and
dependencies, shall come to a conclusion; that when every human aid shall
vanish, and no worldly assistance is near, the Love of God may cover our
spirits in all our trials; that when every human help is totally suspended, we
may continue to feel the effects of his mercy and goodness happily to spread in
our minds, to their edification and unspeakable joy. -- Herein we receive a
divine evidence of love, communicated from that boundless Source of unutterable
Grace wherewith he has visited us, in order to dwell in our hearts, or that He
may "dwell in us richly." -- And thus we are brought to discern the beauty of
holiness, the uniformity of love, to open the mind beyond the contracted view
of human powers, into the glorious fruition of divine essential Love, the Love
of God, that would thus dwell in our hearts and minds; and then we may witness
him to be with us all, always. Amen. He will be a light to our paths, and an
aid at hand, while we are traveling through the various difficulties and
probations in life. -- May the Shepherd of Israel, who sleeps not by day, nor
slumbers by night, attend you! and may we place our whole dependence upon him,
as our support and all-sufficient strength in every needful time!

AND dearly-beloved youth! you that are entering upon the stage of active life,
be ever vigilantly concerned to improve the present moments, and that you may
build beyond the habitation of sorrow; that all the high places may be removed,
and your minds become replenished with true consolation. -- And as you are not
always to expect one uniform joyous scene, but clouds of darkness sometimes
interrupt the prospects of pleasure, in your pilgrimage through life, prepare
your minds, by zealously endeavoring after the Love of God; and wait to know
in yourselves, the unspeakable advantage of his heavenly aid and assistance,
offered to conduct you through the various scenes of mortality, to the
righteous and awful presence of the Judge of heaven and earth; which will
continue to sustain you, when no human consolation can afford relief; even when
your offenses appear as a flood, surrounded with temptation and distress, and
you are ready to cry out, who shall deliver me from the wrath of an offended
Creator! In this state of anxious solicitude, your heavenly Father is
mercifully pleased to arise, and administer relief to such, who are thus
"hungering and thirsting after righteousness;" and the cup of life and
salvation is handed to their comfort, from the glorious Helper, that in his
strength you may be enabled to stand unshaken in the troublous time! -- And it
is to these he waits to be gracious; a helper at hand, from whom proceeds every
power to assist, and every attribute of mercy, kindness, goodness, and adorable
condescension, are graciously dispensed to the sons of men, wherein they are
established in righteousness and true holiness.

"HE touches the mountains, and they melt:" every obstruction that would hinder
the progress or advancement of this divine, essential, efficacious work of
redemption upon the soul, must be removed; every unavailing connection must give
place to the ties of an ardent and sanctified Love.

HE touches the mountains, and they melt; the everlasting hills, they bow at
his presence. In his mercy we experience the removing of those things, that
oppose or prevent an increase in the knowledge of God, or of the things
appertaining to our everlasting peace; in order that the exercised pilgrim in
his progress may receive additional strength, to run with alacrity the race of
a christian life, and finally attain an happy union with the sons of the
morning, who sing together for joy.

IT is the glorious benefits proceeding from the Love of God, which I earnestly
entreat that the youth, of all names and distinctions to religion, may
carefully seek, and avail yourselves of, that HE may be with you through the
various steps of a probationary life. And though you may sometimes have to
travel in the exercised path of temptation and anxious distress, continue in
hope, and you will feel his LIGHT to arise in your hearts, and witness an
inward resurrection unto LIFE; that Life that will never fade, but will remain,
when every tender and lawful connection can no longer comfort, but must soon be
dissolved, and the sympathy one for another shall be ineffectual to deliver.
All the tender connexions in life are but of uncertain duration, and upon them
all this inscription is wrote, "They shall shortly perish;" but the LOVE of GOD
never fades: -- It is continued from generation to generation, and will remain
when Time shall be swallowed up in Eternity: -- It is this wherein we taste of
the Goodness of God, and are made to drink the cup of life and salvation, and
have to rejoice in the unspeakable fruition of happiness it affords to the
sanctified in heart, who in future time, as well as the present, will have to
say, Spring up, O well, and we will sing unto thee; -- it will remain an
enduring portion to the Ransomed in Jacob, and to the Redeemed in Israel; and
will be an excellent comforter in the time of probation and exercise, through
the silent steps of anxiety and secret distress, known to none but GOD and thy
own Soul.

HE knows ALL things, by whose merciful aid we are sustained through "the
Regions of the shadow of Death," when every unavailing relation or human
dependency shall disappear and come to an end. What then, can sustain us, but
the Love of God? -- It is that which covers the head in the day of battle; and
which I would recommend, with a fervent affection, to you who are the hopes of
the present age, that you ardently endeavor after the Love of God, that will
never decrease with age; it enlarges upon the mind, and is increased with an
increase of Love: It proceeds from the THRONE of God, and spreads from the
Threshold of his House: It is continued through the Courts of his Sanctuary,
and reaches to the Uttermost Part of the Earth; and is as a RIVER, the Streams
whereof make glad the whole Heritage of God.

ALL the beauty and splendour of the world will fade; and the excellency of
temporal enjoyments, which are the portion of uncertainty, shall shortly know
their time and place no more: But the Love of God, flowing from Himself,
returns upon the sanctified soul as a River that never passes by, proceeding
from the inexhaustible SOURCE of Love: it spreads through the various states of
mankind, and is diffused throughout the spiritual creation of his Son,
unlimited as Eternity! A degree of which I feel upon my mind for this assembly,
with an ardency that cannot be expressed, "that He may be with you All, always.
Amen!" -- For the Love of God imparted to the sanctified Soul, and a portion of
the Holy Ghost, and Divine Approbation in Communion, has been such, as Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive the good things that God has in store for them that love him.

III. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost.
THIS is the bond that binds, and wherein we are united to God, and know it, to
be a well springing up unto Eternal Life. -- It is not in external Helps, nor
in the Agreement of Words, neither is it in the Consent of Doctrine, or in
fine-spun regular Systems, to constitute a "Communion of the Holy Ghost." But
it is as we are admitted to a sacred repast in the divine "Banqueting House,"
(wherein we offer the oblation of Worship, a Cloud of Incense, arising from
hearts prepared by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Love of God,)
that we are advanced to a divine Communion of the Holy Ghost. A communion not
restrained to any Distinction or Profession of People, but extended to all such
as experience an union and fellowship in Spirit, wherein they are sometimes
lifted up to the Father of spirits, and enabled to approach him "in Spirit and
in Truth;" which has often been sealed with the Love and Approbation of God, in
a divine manifestation of his kindness and goodness to men, who eat that which
is good, and delight themselves in fatness, being renewed in the spirit of
their minds, and enabled to lay hold on eternal life.

IN this Communion, this unutterable, this inconceivable Communion, many have
found their Strength to be renewed, and their Hearts engaged in the solemn
Worship of God, the Author of their being: A communion inexpressible in its
nature! -- May those minds, who have attained this happy experience, continue
therein in all humility and purity!

IT is a Communion in Spirit, wherein the sanctified soul approaches the Author
of spirits with a Sacrifice in spirit, when the sacrifice of Words shall fail.
-- For there is a Communion which Language cannot express! A Worship that wants
not the aid of Words, nor is to be defined by an Harmony of Sounds, in which we
approach the sacred Author of unutterable Love!

WHEN there was Silence in Heaven for about the Space of Half an Hour; when the
Vocal Tribute of "Holy, Holy, Holy," and the Hallelujahs of sanctified Spirits
in endless felicity were suspended, their Worship continued in awful, holy,
solemn, inconceivable SILENCE! It was a Rapturous Adoration, too copious for
Language to express! A Cloud of Incense, before the Throne of immaculate Purity
and Love! -- May our minds be gathered to it, let our Name or profession to
Religion be what it may! and may we experience this Divine Communion of Saints,
and deeply ponder God's unbounded Love, in solemn Silence! For there is no
Power of Eloquence can sufficiently acknowledge the Obligation and Reverence we
owe HIS Infinite MAJESTY, who fills heaven and earth with his glory and
goodness! -- But let us look up unto him, and wait to be prepared for it; --
for they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; -- wherein we may
experience a constant advancement from Grace to Grace, until we attain the
glorious end proposed by this lively animating salutation (which I wish for you
as for myself) The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, always. Amen.

FINIS.

