The Reverend Mr. ELLINGTON's SERMON, Preached the 25th MARCH, 1771, the
ANNIVERSARY of LAYING the FOUNDATION of the ORPHAN-HOUSE ACADEMY in GEORGIA.

Christ's Promise to be present where two or three meet together in his Name:
CONSIDERED IN A SERMON, Preached the 25th MARCH, 1771, the ANNIVERSARY of
LAYING the FOUNDATION of the ORPHAN-HOUSE ACADEMY in GEORGIA, Before his
Excellency JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire, Captain General and Governor in Chief, and a
great Number of the principal Inhabitants of the said Province, at the OPENING
of the NEW CHAPEL lately erected there,

By EDWARD ELLINGTON, late Chaplain at the said House.

With an APPENDIX, giving a short Account of the Proceedings on that Occasion.

BUT the Hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. John
iv. 23. SAVANNAH: Printed by JAMES JOHNSTON.

(...) friendship of the late Mr. Whitefield, and frequently experienced his
kindness toward me, and for that reason I think it my duty on every occasion
to testify my regard to the memory of that great and good man, -- and shall
esteem myself happy, if, at any time, I can contribute my mite toward carrying
on his benevolent intentions, which have always been favored with your
Excellency's ready assistance and advice; so that I have the greatest reason to
hope the liberty I have now taken will not be disagreeable. I am persuaded,
notwithstanding many persons, both of high and low character, through prejudice
and party-zeal, have attempted to eclipse the reputation of our deceased
friend, your Excellency, from your own personal acquaintance and knowledge,
could clearly discern in him, the honest man, the faithful friend, the polite
Gentleman, and the lover of mankind. -- Perhaps the present age cannot furnish
us with another character equal in every respect to his, -- if we take a view
of the many uncommon oppositions and difficulties he met with, the great number
of avocations that engaged his attention, the extent of his itinerations and
correspondence, together with the frequency of his preaching; add to these, his
trials in private life, which those who knew him can testify were not a few:
These, and many other things that might be mentioned, sufficiently indicate the
surprising activity of his disposition, and point him out to the admiration of
posterity as a very extraordinary man. As to the important doctrines he
preached, and so warmly inculcated, though they may not coincide with the
sentiments of many of our modern Divines, yet, it is evident, he had the
articles, homilies, and liturgy of the established church, and the concurrent
testimony of all foreign Protestant churches, on his side. -- When he died, the
poor lost a father -- tender of their relief, he, like his great master, went
about doing good. -- What numbers in this province has he not relieved and
assisted by the most useful charity, that of employing them in labor; a
charity the more agreeable to him, as it seemed to take off the force of an
obligation from those who were so employed. When the ear heard him it blessed
him, when the eye saw him it witnessed for him, because he relieved the orphan,
and caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. -- Your Excellency's well known
regard to the deceased when living, and the many evidences of your good will to
promote the prosperity of his institution here, cannot but be grateful to his
surviving friends, and to every well-wisher to this province: And I need not
observe, that, in promoting and forwarding the establishment of public
seminaries for the education of youth, your Excellency is serving your country
in its most essential interest; you are doing that which constitutes the glory
and happiness of every well ordered government.

That your Excellency may still continue to be an instrument of promoting all
that is great, good, and praiseworthy, be a blessing to the present and future
generations, is and shall be the earnest prayer of,

May it please your Excellency, Your Excellency's most obliged, And obedient
servant, EDWARD ELLINGTON.

THE PRAYER.
O THOU ever blessed and adorable Redeemer, who art God over all blessed for
evermore, glory be to thy free grace, who have promised that where two or three
are gathered together thou will be in the midst of them: Be in the midst of us,
gracious God, at this time; let thy power be known and felt among us; draw near
unto us at this, and at every opportunity; when we draw near unto thee, in thy
public service, may we find thee a God nigh unto us in all that we call upon
thee for. -- But will God, in very deed, dwell with men on the earth? Behold,
Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; how much less these
houses that are built for thy worship and service? Yet have respect to the
prayer of thy unworthy servant, and to his supplication. O Lord my God, hearken
unto the cry, and the prayer, which thy servant prays before thee. O that
thine eyes may be open upon this house, day and night, which we are now
assembled to dedicate and set apart to thy worship and service. Bless this
chapel in a peculiar manner with thy divine presence; bless all that shall at
any time administer thy holy word and sacraments in this place; may they be men
called and fitted by thee for their sacred offices: Endue them with a divine
power; make them successful in all their ministrations, that spiritual children
may here be born unto thee. Bless all thy people that shall at any time
assemble in this house to meet thee in thine ordinances; may they not depart
without a blessing, and enjoy communion and fellowship with thee, the Father of
their mercies, and the God of all their consolation. Clothe thy priests with
righteousness, and make thy saints shout aloud for joy. May sinners be
converted, and thy people edified, and built up in their most holy faith, by
all the labors of thy faithful ministers in this house, that thou, O God, in
all things, may be glorified through Jesus Christ. Hear and answer us,
according to the multitude of thy mercies, and bless us in our further
attendance upon thee, in hearing thy most holy word, with a rich supply of thy
divine spirit, for his sake who taught us thus to pray, Our Father, etc.

Matthew xviii. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there
am I in the Midst of them.
THESE words our dear Redeemer spoke to his Disciples, and in them to all
succeeding ages of the church, as an encouragement to believers in every
generation to assemble themselves together in his name, to offer their prayers
and praises unto him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light, to meet together for the due celebration of all divine ordinances, and
to pay every act of divine worship to him who has translated them from the
power of Satan into the kingdom of God.

IN the former part of the chapter he had been teaching them a lesson of
humility, by setting a little child before them, as an answer to their
question, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of Heaven? and told them, except
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter therein.

AND, having taught them how to behave toward offending brethren, he proceeds
in the verse before our text: Again I say unto you, if two of you shall agree
on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father, who is in Heaven; for -- where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the midst of them. If two of you, who are united to
me by faith, shall agree, shall be of one mind, as touching any thing you stand
in need of for the advancement of your temporal or eternal interest, and shall
be desirous of making known your request by prayer and supplication unto God,
and shall ask in faith, and in such a manner as is well-pleasing in his sight,
it shall be done for you, it shall be granted you of my Father, who is in
Heaven; for, whatsoever you ask the Father in my name he will give it you; for
the Father loves you, because you have loved me, and where two or three, so
small a number, so sincere a few, are gathered together in my name, trusting to
my merits and mediation, with a due and proper sense both of my majesty and my
mercy, and acknowledging me to be both God and man, and Christ the Messiah, and
build upon me the only foundation of all their hopes and happiness in time and
eternity, there am I spiritually present, ready to hear and answer their
requests, to succor and defend their persons, to fulfill their petitions, and
supply all their wants -- there am I in the midst of them.

BELOVED -- This day we are assembled in order to set apart this place for
worshipping the greatest and best of beings, the most high God, the possessor
of Heaven and earth, the God who rules over all, but who is the covenant God
of the real Christian, his great Creator, his all-merciful Redeemer and
ever-blessed Sanctifier; and this office has devolved upon unworthy me. Had it
been the will of him who does as he pleases among the armies of Heaven, and
among the inhabiters of the earth, on whom the lives of all men depend, that
the founder of this house had been continued to have seen the utmost of his
desires completed, in regard to this institution, and to have himself spoken
to us on this occasion, with what pleasure should I have attended, and, I
believe I may add, with what pleasure would most of you have attended to the
words in season, which no doubt he would have delivered with his usual energy
on this solemnity.

BUT the supreme disposer of all human events has seen fit to order it
otherwise, and in this providence speaks unto us as he did unto Peter on
another occasion: What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter, as though he said, if thou art waiting upon me in the ways of my
appointment, and depending upon my divine teaching, though thou see not the
reason of my actions, and know not NOW what I do, that is, the reason of my
so doing, thou shall know it hereafter, when thy faith is swallowed up in
enjoyment, thy hope turned into fruition, and thy love made perfect in the
kingdom of my glory; then, and not before, thou shall see that all my
proceedings with the children of men were ordered for the best, and so as to
secure my glory and their good.

IT is therefore our duty to submit and acquiesce in the will of God, and we
shall find less difficulty in so doing, if, with an eminent Divine, Vide Doctor
Pemberton's sermon, page 22.
in his funeral sermon for our deceased friend, we consider, that, though
separated from the society of his friends below, he is united to the nobler
society above of Angels and Archangels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect.

WE view him there, not as perishing in the dust of death, but as entered into
a world of glory. We behold him worshipping before the throne of God, not with
a company of frail imperfect mortals, but with the general assembly and church
of the firstborn, shining in the unspotted robes of holiness, uniting in
hosannahs and partaking of their respective triumphs. Our loss therefore is his
eternal gain, and, glory be to our good God, if we are of the number of his
faithful servants, there is the same eternal inheritance, the same glorious
crown before us; after these we are aspiring, and, if we are preserved faithful
a little longer, the day of death will come, (that happy day to the real
believer, that woeful, dreadful day to the men of this world) and put us in
full possession of them; then, with our deceased friend, we shall meet around
the throne, and join with Cherubims and Seraphims, and the whole Hierarchy of
Heaven, in ascribing salvation, OUR salvation, to God and the Lamb for evermore.

I HAVE chosen, on this occasion, the words I have read to you, and in some
measure explained, and hope they are not altogether unsuitable to our present
meeting, as they strongly imply the duty of assembling ourselves together for
the worship of God, and more strongly express the advantages we may expect and
derive therefrom. -- Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of them.

IN this order I intend to discourse upon them, and to draw some suitable
inferences, and may the spirit of God help both you and me to make a proper
improvement of the whole.

MAN, at first created, and still preserved by him, who is the maker of all
things, both in Heaven and earth, even by that God in whom we live, move, and
have our being, is under the strongest obligation to pay him homage and
adoration. It is a principle so deeply rooted in man's reason and conscience,
that, of all the nations of the earth, few, if any, but what have had some
method of testifying their belief of a supreme being, and have invented
something, which they have made their God; to which they have paid some kind of
honor and worship. But to us, who are under the Christian dispensation; God
has so clearly revealed his mind and will, that we shall be left entirely
without excuse, if we do not give him the glory due unto his name; a duty
incumbent on us to perform, not only in private, and in our families, in our
morning and evening sacrifices of devotion, but also publicly in those places
that are peculiarly set apart for his worship and service; there we are to
assemble and meet together to offer up our joint prayers and supplications, and
to hear his word read and preached by his servants, his ministers, for our
mutual edification and comfort.

AND this, if we are really and truly Christians, we shall esteem our highest
honor, our greatest privilege; for we shall then, if we are such, attend these
public ordinances for religious worship, not out of form and custom, as is the
case with too too many -- not merely for an example to others, but to meet our
God in them -- to enjoy in his house communion with him, whose presence is
better than life -- to hear what God the Lord will speak concerning us, who
speaks to his people, and to his saints, that they return not to folly.

FOR these reasons churches, chapels, and public edifices, are erected, that
we may decently and conveniently worship God in public congregation; but sorry
am I to see they are, in general, so little frequented. Though our duty to God,
and the laws of our country, enjoin our attendance, many never enter the inside
of a church, and with what reluctance do others formally attend now and then?
They seem as it were to drag their bodies only thither, and leave their souls
behind them. Others sleep away the time, while others, who can hardly keep
their eyes open, show, by their countenance, how agreeably they are
entertained; were you to judge others by their behavior, you would suppose
them at some public place of diversion by their lightness and indecent
carriage: Few, very few, seem to be actuated by proper motives, and behave like
those who understand the important business they are engaged in. And all the
while, they think themselves very good Christians, and would be greatly
offended to be thought otherwise. But is not such a conduct a shame to
Christianity? The name without the thing will be of no service to you; away
with such Christianity from the earth. Our Christianity, our religion, is not
worth any thing, if it does not influence the whole man, make us wiser and
better, and regulate our whole lives and conversations. Renounce your
profession, or live agreeably to it. -- For God's, for your soul's sake, live
as Christians, or else you disown Christianity. The name without the thing will
but aggravate your condemnation.

AS public worship is the duty of all who are called Christians, therefore let
us, if we are really as well as nominally so, not forsake the assembling
ourselves together for divine worship, as the manner of some is, who thereby
not only neglect their duty, but despise their privilege.

LET such as are real believers exhort one another to a due and constant
attendance upon public worship, and to wait upon God with a proper and
suitable frame and temper of mind, and so much the more, as we see the day, the
day of death approaching, which will put a final end to all our worship upon
earth, on the due improvement of which depends our worshipping with the church
triumphant in Heaven. Beside -- what great encouragement does the promise in
our text afford us to meet in the name of our adorable Redeemer, when he tells
us, where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. He is graciously present with his faithful worshippers to
quicken and enliven their devotion; then with joy they draw water out of the
wells of salvation, their language is, As the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? O how amiable are
thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my soul longs, yea even faints for the
courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God,
blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee,
they go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears before
God. A day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. O
Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee. -- This is the heart
and language of spiritual worshippers. -- Such as worship God in spirit and in
truth have a joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, a joy that a stranger to
these blessings intermeddleth not with. They have a peace which the world
cannot give, and, glory be to God, a peace which the world cannot take away. It
is their Heaven upon earth to enjoy communion and fellowship with the Father of
their spirits in his sanctuary. It is Heaven begun in their soul, when, with
the eye of faith, they see him, who is invisible, presiding in their
worshipping assemblies; when Jesus is present with them by his spirit, and the
spirit of God witnesses with their spirits that they are his children, they
then renew their strength by waiting upon the Lord, they mount up with wings as
eagles, they run and are not weary, they walk and are not faint. They
anticipate the joys of the blessed, and have a foretaste in earnest of that
happiness they will enjoy when they shall join the heavenly host and sing the
song of Moses and the Lamb forever and ever.

FROM what has been said I infer, that, as it is our duty to attend on public
worship, and God has been graciously pleased to condescend to encourage us
thereto, by promising to be with us to bless us, we ought to embrace every
opportunity afforded us for this sacred service, not in a formal and customary
manner, but with a due and becoming reverence, under a just sense of our
unworthiness, and of the goodness and mercy of God, in permitting us, who are
but vile earth and miserable sinners, to approach his presence. We should take
the advice of Solomon, Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and
be more ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools, for they consider
not that they do evil. Keep your feet when you go to the house of God, approach
his courts with a becoming awe and reverence, enter into his presence with due
veneration, with a prepared heart and attentive year, and be more ready to
hear, that you may receive benefit thereby, than to give the sacrifice of
fools, than to offer unto God the sacrifice of the wicked, (who are the
greatest of all fools) which is an abomination unto him, for they consider not
they rush into his presence, as the horse into the battle, without any thought
of the importance of the work they are to be employed about; they consider not,
that, when they pretend to be worshipping God, they are even then among the
number of the profaners of his name, whom he has positively declared he will
not hold guiltless; they consider not that they do evil in the very action, and
at the very time, when they are foolish enough to imagine they are doing good,
even then they are guilty of the most abominable hypocrisy. They draw near to
God with their mouths when their hearts are far from him. What can be a more
solemn mockery of the great God than to offer to him the labor of the lip,
when the thoughts are like the fool's eyes in the ends of the earth. My son,
says God, give me thy heart, the whole heart, or else thy sacrifice is nothing
worth. If the heart is not engaged in his service it is of no avail. Sincerity
in his worship is what God looks at and is well-pleasing in his sight, when we
desire acceptance only in Jesus the beloved. Sincerity is gospel perfection;
therefore see that you be sincere in all your addresses at the throne of grace;
be in earnest; let your whole heart and all your affections be seriously
engaged when you attend ordinances, and then you will be accepted. God will be
found of you, if you seek him aright, and your heart, and the hearts of all
shall rejoice that seek the Lord in sincerity.

AGAIN, as our Lord has promised to be mercifully present where two or three
are gathered together in his name, it is by no means improper to erect and
raise suitable and decent buildings to be set apart peculiarly for his service,
not that there is any intrinsic holiness in the buildings, they are only
relatively holy, so far as they are made use of for God's worship. It is not
the walls that constitute the church, however beautiful the structure, however
highly ornamented, and richly decorated. The church, according to our 19th
article, is defined to be a congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure
word of God is preached, and the sacraments duly administered according to
Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the
same, and in our communion service, the blessed company of all faithful people,
every member incorporate in the mystical body of Jesus Christ, heirs through
hope of God's everlasting kingdom, by the merits of the most precious death and
passion of his dear Son, are considered in holy fellowship.

LASTLY, as we are this day met, and solemnly to open, by the word of God and
prayer, this Chapel, for the worship and service of our great Creator, -- O
that he may make it such a place as he has chosen, may it be sanctified by his
divine presence, whenever two or three, or a larger number, are gathered
together here in his name, there may he be in the midst of them. O that it may
never want a company of faithful people to assemble therein, and a faithful
Minister to lead and assist in their devotions; that God's pure word may be
preached with abundant success; that sinners may be converted, the weak lambs
of Christ's flock strengthened and refreshed, and the strong edified and built
up in the word and doctrine, that they may adorn the gospel of God their
Savior in all things. May the holy sacraments be duly administered in this
place according to Christ's ordinance, that all who are partakers thereof may
receive, with the outward visible signs, the inward and spiritual grace, which
may be to them certain sure witnesses of effectual signs of God's good will
toward them, and may work invisibly in them, and not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm their faith in him, that they, persevering and enduring
to the end, may be saved with an eternal and everlasting salvation.

TO conclude, -- let us one and all work while it is day, while the day of life
lasts, for the night, the night of death comes, when no man can work.

O SIRS, make it your chief study, your constant care and only aim, to seek the
Lord while he is to be found, and call upon him while he is near; he is to be
found now, today, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; behold,
now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation. He is near to
you in his ordinances, and if you call in earnest upon him, he will hear you,
and give an answer of peace. Take heed that you do not despise his calls and
neglect his invitations, lest he should swear in his wrath concerning you, they
shall not enter into my rest. Remember, Sirs, time is short, death is certain,
the hour of your departure very uncertain; an eternity of happiness or misery
depends upon your improving or misimproving the few days allotted you. There is
no repentance in the grave, to which we are all hastening. As the tree falls,
so it must lie; as the day of death leaves you, the day of judgment will find
you, and if you live and die in a state of sin, without repentance, there will
be no escaping -- everlasting punishment will be your just doom; torments, the
most excruciating torments, will be your portion, without intermission, without
end. O that I could persuade you to repent, and forsake your sins, that so your
iniquities may not be your ruin, and return to the Lord Jesus, who is exalted
to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and forgiveness of sins. --
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, the chief of sinners; if they will but truly
repent them of their former sins, and steadfastly purpose, through the
assistance of divine grace, to lead a new life, and have a lively faith in
God's mercy through Christ, they shall be saved, saved from sin, from its guilt
and dominion, saved from death and hell, saved with an everlasting salvation.

O SIRS, be not faithless, but believing; may it be given you to believe on the
only begotten Son of God, and believing, may you have life through his name. --
As to you, who have obtained that precious gift of faith, through the
righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, and have received those
exceeding great and precious promises, whereby you have been made partakers of
the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through
lust, give all diligence, and add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity; -- for, if these things be in you and abound, they will make
you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Likewise, give diligence to make your calling and election sure;
for, if you do these things, you shall never fall; and so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. By thus acting, you will evidently demonstrate to the
world that there is more in real religion than they are apt to imagine, and
will clearly show, in particular, that that grand and leading doctrine of
justification by faith alone is not destructive of morality; but, that those
who are born again from above are also created anew in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God before ordained that men should walk in them, and though your
whole dependence for justification in the sight of God is by faith in the death
and sufferings, the life and obedience of Jesus Christ, yet you will be careful
to maintain and practice all good works, every return and labor of love both
to God and man, thereby justifying your faith, proving to the world, that it is
true and genuine -- hereby you will let your light shine before men, and they
will see your good works and glorify your Father which is in Heaven: And by
thus ordering your life and conversation aright, God will not only show you,
but make you happy partakers of his salvation.

THE PRAYER.
O ETERNAL and Almighty God, we desire to praise and glorify thy holy name for
this opportunity thou have given us of assembling ourselves together in this
place to dedicate and set it apart for thy worship and service, to hear thy
word, and to offer up our prayers and praises unto thee, through Jesus Christ
our great Mediator. O that they may be heard and answered, and thy word, which
I have now delivered, may be made effectual by thine almighty power of
accomplishing thy divine will. Bless thy servant, but our Sovereign the King,
and this his province: Bless all that bear rule and are in authority under him
in it: Bless the Governor, his Council, the Assembly, the Magistrates and
Ministers thereof, of every denomination; make them faithful instruments of
promoting thy glory and the public good: Bless this house and family; grant,
if it be thy will, that the pious intention of the Founder may be yet
completed, though thou have seen fit to remove him hence before he had brought
it to perfection: Bless all that are engaged in carrying it on, enable them to
persevere and to be successful in all their undertakings: Bless the children,
and all the instructions that from time to time are given them, impress them on
their tender minds, and grant, gracious God, that they may not only be made
useful members of the community, but may learn many profitable lessons of piety
and virtue; that they may remember thee their Creator in the days of their
youth, and that, being trained up in the way they should go, now while they are
young, when they are old they may not depart from it: Bless, we beseech thee,
all and each of us with what we stand in need of, either for this or a better
world; let not this our meeting this day be altogether in vain; grant that we
may not depart without thy heavenly benediction, and enable us to live the
residue of our lives in thy fear and to thy honor and glory, that, when we
depart hence, we may be translated into thy eternal and everlasting kingdom.

APPENDIX.
SAVANNAH, MARCH 27.
MONDAY last being the Anniversary of laying the foundation of the
Orphan-House, the new and very decent Chapel lately erected there was opened.
On this solemnity his Excellency the Governor, many of the Gentlemen of the
Council, and a very great number of the principal Inhabitants of the province,
were present. The company being seated in the Chapel, and the Orphan Children
having sung a short hymn, the following Address was, with great propriety, and
to the universal satisfaction of the audience, delivered by PETER EDWARDS, one
of the Orphans:

May it please your Excellency, Reverend Gentlemen, Gentlemen and Ladies,
IN obedience to the commands of my superiors, and relying also on the candor,
and benevolence of your Excellency and this polite and respectable company, I
beg leave, with all humility, to make this public address. -- It may not be
improper to mention, that on this day, 32 years ago, the foundation of this
house was laid by the Reverend Founder, whose death we Orphans in particular
cannot sufficiently lament; that also on this day, two years past, your
Excellency honored this place with your presence, and condescended to lay the
foundation of the two wings, superadded to the Orphan-House, for the
accommodation of young Gentlemen intended to be educated in Academical
Learning, to enable them to move in a superior sphere of life; and we are now
met to open and solemnly dedicate this new and convenient Chapel to the service
of our God and Savior Jesus Christ. -- The many and great advantages accruing
from the establishment of public schools in every government is obvious, and,
in a young province as this is, it must be of the highest importance to its
future prosperity and welfare, which is the professed design of this charitable
institution; an institution evidently calculated to promote the happiness of
society, by providing for, and instructing such poor children, as would
otherwise, in all appearance, be brought up in ignorance, and become of little
use and value to mankind. -- They are here early taught their duty to God,
their Country, and the respect they owe to those in authority over them. God
has various, and to us unthought of ways, which we poor short-sighted beings
cannot fathom, to effect his purposes; but I hope I may be allowed to say,
that, in all human probability, great might have been the blessing to this
noble undertaking, had it pleased divine providence to have prolonged the
valuable life of the deceased Founder -- but he is now no more. -- We have,
however, no doubt of the great Father of the fatherless supplying his loss; and
that your Excellency, and all well-disposed persons, especially the good people
of this province, will espouse our cause, and promote our welfare. -- Agreeable
to the plan of our deceased Benefactor, an Academy is now begun to be
superadded to the Orphan-House, and Gentlemen of this province will have an
opportunity of educating their sons under their immediate inspection, and will
not be under the necessity of sending them at a great distance for that
purpose, and be constantly laboring under the painful anxiety of knowing of
their health and welfare, besides being probably at a greater and more
uncertain expense.

THE utility of this, it is humbly presumed, wants no recommendation; it is
natural to love the place where we received our education, and passed our first
years. -- If parents would therefore have the pleasure of seeing the daily
progress their children make in knowledge; if they desire they should love and
revere them, and have a peculiar regard for the place of their nativity; if
they would preserve them from the improper liberties, they may take, when
removed from their authority; it surely must be most eligible to let them spend
their early years under the shadow of their wings, and within the reach of
their parental admonitions.

May it please your Excellency,
I HAVE now in charge to return your Excellency, with all deference and
humility, our most grateful acknowledgments for your kind patronage and
countenance, and to assure your Excellency, that we do, and will constantly
pray for your happiness, wherever providence may please to place you,
unfeignedly wishing, that your Excellency may continually experience that
heartfelt satisfaction which can only dwell in the breast of the humane and
benevolent, and we are persuaded, when you return to your native country, our
cause will not be forgot by your Excellency.

Honorable Sir,
WE should be highly wanting in gratitude, if, on this occasion, we omitted to
acknowledge your unwearied and unabating attention to serve this institution
from its first foundation, and we are happy that God has been pleased to
preserve your life to succeed our kind Founder, and carry into execution his
truly generous intentions. -- Your disinterested regard to promote our real
welfare is well known, and therefore I shall forbear to add, only that, for
your happiness, and long continuance amongst us, we daily pray.

Reverend Gentlemen, Gentlemen and Ladies,
PERMIT me to return you our best thanks for the very kind regard you have
shown us, and to assure you, that we will endeavor to deserve the continuance
of your friendship and favor.

Sir, and Gentlemen, (the Tutor and Managers.)
WE cannot, we must not, Sir, omit to give our public testimony of your
unwearied diligence and attention to cultivate and improve our minds in solid
learning and useful knowledge, and, Gentlemen, it would be unjust, if we did
not make the same acknowledgment for your constant care to make our situation
in regard to our bodies easy, comfortable, and every way convenient, and as we
have nothing to repay you, but our prayers for your welfare, both in time and
eternity, and our best thanks, we hope you will kindly accept this tribute of
our grateful hearts.

Young Gentlemen, (the Boarders.)
YOU are happy in having parents, who have both inclination and means to pay
for your education. -- I have none. -- But to you, Gentlemen, I must own my
obligation for having the opportunity of an education I could not, from my
situation, have expected, had not your parents enabled our worthy Executor to
employ so able a Tutor, as we now have, to instruct us, and I hope we shall
show, that his assiduity, care and pains, will have the desired effect.

My Fellow Orphans,
WHAT shall I say to excite your gratitude? -- I hope the memory of our late
Benefactor, who has labored incessantly for me, for you, and many others, who
have partook of the benefit of this institution, since its first foundation,
will be deeply engraven in our hearts, and remembered with the greatest
reverence and gratitude. -- This is all we have in our power, in return for
such unmerited favors, and if this, our small tribute, should be wanting, we
must, we shall be justly deemed the most ungrateful to our deceased Benefactor,
who encountered innumerable, uncommon, and unknown difficulties, in carrying on
this institution, notwithstanding he was maligned, traduced, and persecuted,
with unrelenting virulence, as a cheat, an impostor, a public robber, who,
under the specious pretense of promoting a charitable design, was amassing
great wealth to himself, all which he bore with an uncommon degree of patience.
-- Let me add, that God has been graciously pleased to provide for you, for me,
beyond many, very many in our circumstances. -- We are here daily taught the
great and fundamental truths of the gospel of the Son of God, have plenty of
the necessaries of life, and are carefully educated to qualify us to get a
comfortable subsistence, and make us useful members of society. -- Let us
therefore make a proper improvement of these mercies, and let us, my dear
fellow Orphans, be thankful to God, the Father of all, for them, not only with
our lips, but in our lives, by giving up ourselves to his service, and by
walking before him in holiness and righteousness all our days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

May it please your Excellency, Reverend Gentlemen, Gentlemen and Ladies,
I FEAR I have trespassed on your patience, and humbly entreat you to pardon
the poor attempt of a youth unaccustomed to speak before so respectable an
audience.

AFTER this the Rev. Mr. Edward Ellington, Minister of the parish of St.
Bartholomew in South Carolina, read prayers, and preached a sermon very
suitable to the occasion from Matt. xviii. 20. Divine service being ended, the
young Gentlemen of the Academy repeated several passages taken from some of the
most approved English authors in such a manner as appeared agreeably to engage
the attention and to meet with the entire approbation of the company. Then Mr.
Edward Langworthy, their Tutor, addressed the company as follows:

May it please your Excellency, Gentlemen and Ladies,
HAVING observed the attention of your Excellency to the exercises of this
morning, and the marks of pleasure and approbation so visible in all the
Gentlemen and Ladies now present, I think it my duty, with the warmest
gratitude, to acknowledge the honor your Excellency and this respectable
audience have conferred on this institution. -- The young Gentlemen that just
now spoke before your Excellency have not been long under my tuition; they are
indeed young -- and scarce initiated in the first principles of Literature;
however, I flatter myself that these feeble attempts will be favorably
received, and that hereafter they will be enabled to exhibit something more
worthy of your attention and approbation.

IT affords me the highest satisfaction, when I reflect, that divine providence
has honored me with the care and direction of them, and I cannot but make a
tender of my sincere and best respects to you, our worthy Executor, and to
their worthy parents and friends, for the great confidence reposed in me. --
Duly sensible of the important trust committed to every preceptor, I shall, in
the fear of God, do my utmost to form their tender minds, and to impress on
them such principles as may tend to advance their happiness in private, as well
as in public life: And I hope, from their proficiency, the Gentlemen of this
province will be induced to promote with all their influence the growth and
prosperity of our present undertaking.

THE strict and virtuous education of youth is a point of great consequence in
every country, and those that are employed therein do certainly merit the
attention and encouragement of the public in proportion to their faithfulness;
for my part, I do most cheerfully dedicate my whole time to this laborious
work, and am determined to pursue it with the greatest assiduity and diligence,
being convinced that I can in no other way do more good to the true interest of
my fellow beings, or do more service to the province.

IT is undoubtedly the indispensible obligation of every one entrusted with the
business of education to satisfy the public with respect to their abilities
and intentions, and therefore I hope to convince you that no pains will be
spared, no time lost, that whatever is useful in the sciences, or ornamental in
life, will here be inculcated both by precept and example. -- Authors in the
several branches of knowledge will be regularly read, and the sacred scriptures
constantly explained: -- These can bestow understanding upon all men; they are
the universal logic, since none can read them without either acquiring a
greater exactness of thought, or being invited to contract a greater rectitude
of manners.

OUR time being so far elapsed, permit me, in the behalf of these poor Orphans,
and in the name of every member concerned in this Seminary, most heartily to
thank your Excellency, and all the Gentlemen and Ladies now before me, for
their kind attendance on this solemnity. With sentiments of the most unfeigned
gratitude we would express our sense of it, and hope for the continuance of
their esteem and friendship.

AND I should be greatly wanting in respect and duty to you, Reverend Sir, and
indeed justly incur the displeasure of all concerned in the management of this
institution, if I did not now embrace the opportunity of returning you their
and my humblest thanks for your kind and friendly assistance.

MAY what you and others have done on this Anniversary terminate in the glory
of the great Head of the Church, who is God over all blessed for evermore.

BETWEEN the exercises of the day the Orphan Children sung several short hymns
adapted to the occasion, with one of which the solemnity was closed. The
company were afterward entertained with a plain and plentiful dinner in the
Great Hall, and unanimously expressed their satisfaction of the proceedings of
the day, and especially of the decency and order with which the whole was
conducted.

The Gentleman addressed Honorable Sir, in the 24th page, is the Honorable
James Habersham, Esquire, President of his Majesty's Council, and Mr.
Whitefield's only Executor in Georgia.

A COPY of the late Reverend Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD's WILL having been published
in London by the Executors there, with the following Introduction, and its
coming to Hand before the foregoing Sheets were fully completed, it is thought
not improper to add it, with a Copy of the Will, as a further APPENDIX.

AS we make no doubt the numerous friends of the late Reverend Mr. George
Whitefield will be glad to see a genuine Copy of his Last-Will and Testament,
his Executors have favored us with a Copy of the same, transmitted to them
from Georgia, and which they have proved in the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury. And as it was Mr. Whitefield' s constant declaration he never meant
to raise either a Purse or a Party, it is to be remarked, that almost the whole
money he died possessed of came to him within two or three years of his death
in the following manner, viz. Mrs. Thomson of Towerhill bequeathed him 500l. By
the death of his Wife, including a bond of 300l. he got 700l. Mr. Whitemore
bequeathed him 100l. and Mr. Winder 100l. And it is highly probable that, had
he lived to reach Georgia from his late Northern tour, he would have much
lessened the above sums, by disposing of them in the same noble and
disinterested manner that all the public or private sums he has been entrusted
with have been.

IN the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, but one God, I
George Whitefield, Clerk, at present residing at the Orphan-house Academy, in
the province of Georgia, in North America, being through infinite mercy in more
than ordinarily bodily health, and a perfectly sound and disposing mind,
knowing the certainty of death, and yet the uncertainty of the time I shall be
called by it to my long wished-for home, do make this my last-will and
testament, in manner and form following, viz. Imprimis, In sure and certain
hope of a resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, I commit
my body to the dust, to be buried in the most plain and decent manner; and
knowing in whom I have believed, and being persuaded that he will keep that
which I have committed unto him, in the fullest assurance of faith I commend my
soul into the hands of the ever-loving, altogether lovely, never-failing Jesus,
on whose complete and everlasting righteousness I entirely depend, for the
justification of my person and acceptance of my poor, worthless, though, I
trust, sincere performances, at that day when he shall come in the glory of his
Father, his own glory, and the glory of his holy Angels, to judge both the
quick and dead. In respect to my outward American concerns, which I have
engaged in simply and solely for his great name's sake, I leave that building,
commonly called the Orphan-house, at Bethesda, in the province of Georgia,
together with all the other buildings lately erected thereon, and likewise all
other buildings, lands, negroes, books, furniture, and every other thing
whatsoever which I now stand possessed of in the province of Georgia aforesaid,
to that elect Lady, that mother in Israel, that mirror of true and undefiled
religion, the Right Honorable Selina, Countess Dowager of Huntingdon,
desiring, that, as soon as may be after my decease, the plan of the intended
Orphan-house, Bethesda College, may be prosecuted, or, if not practicable, or
eligible, to pursue the present plan of the Orphan-house Academy, on its old
foundation and usual channel; but if her Ladyship should be called to enter
into her glorious rest before my decease, I bequeath all the buildings, lands,
negroes, and every thing beforementioned which I now stand possessed of in the
province of Georgia aforesaid, to my dear first fellow traveller, and faithful,
invariable friend, the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire. President of his
Majesty's Honorable Council; and, should he survive her Ladyship, I earnestly
recommend him, as the most proper person, to succeed her Ladyship, or to act
for her during her Ladyship's lifetime, in the affairs of the Orphan house
Academy. With regard to my outward affairs in England; whereas there is a
building, commonly called the Tabernacle, set apart many years ago for divine
worship, I give and bequeath the said Tabernacle, with the adjacent house in
which I usually reside, when in London, with the stable and coach-house in the
yard adjoining, together with all books, furniture, and every thing else
whatsoever that shall be found in the house and premises aforesaid, and also
the building commonly called Tottenham-court Chapel, together with all the
other buildings, houses, stables, coach-house, and every thing else whatsoever
which I stand possessed of in that part of the town, to my worthy, trusty,
tried friends, Daniel West, Esquire. in Church-street, Spitalfields, and Mr. Robert
Keen, Woollen-draper, in the Minories, or the longer survivor of the two. As to
the moneys, which a kind Providence, especially of late, in a most unexpected
way, and unthought of means, has vouchsafed to entrust me with, I give and
bequeath the sum of one hundred pounds Sterling to the Right Honorable
Countess Dowager of Huntingdon aforesaid, humbly beseeching her Ladyship's
acceptance of so small a mite, as a peppercorn of acknowledgment for the
undeserved, unsought-for honor her Ladyship conferred upon me, in appointing
me, less than the least of all, to be one of her Ladyship's domestic
Chaplains. Item, I give and bequeath to my dearly beloved friend, the
Honorable James Habersham aforesaid, my late wife's gold watch, and ten pounds
for mourning; to my dear old friend Gabriel Harris, Esquire. of the city of
Gloucester, who received and boarded me in his house, when I was helpless and
destitute, above thirty-five years ago, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty
pounds; to my humble faithful servant and friend, Mr. Ambrose Wright, if in my
service and employ, either in England or America, or elsewhere, at the time of
my decease, I give and bequeath the sum of five hundred pounds; to my brother
Mr. Richard Whitefield, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; to my
brother Mr. Thomas Whitefield, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds, to
be given him at the discretion of Mr. Robert Keen; to my brother-in-law, Mr.
James Smith, Hosier, in the city of Bristol, I give and bequeath the sum of
fifty pounds, and thirty pounds also for family mourning; to my niece, Mrs.
Frances Hartford, of Bath, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; and
twenty pounds for family mourning; to Mr. John Crane, now a faithful Steward at
the Orphan-house Academy, I give and bequeath the sum of forty pounds; to Mr.
Benjamin Stirk, as an acknowledgment of his past services at Bethesda, I give
and bequeath the sum of ten pounds for mourning; to Peter Edwards, now at the
Orphan-house Academy, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; to William
Trigg, at the same place, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; both the
sums aforesaid to be laid out, or laid up for them, at the discretion of Mr.
Ambrose Wright; to Mr. Thomas Adams, of Rodborough in Gloucestershire, my only
surviving first fellow laborer, and beloved much in the Lord, I give and
bequeath the sum of fifty-pounds; to the Reverend Mr. Howel Davis, of
Pembrokeshire, in South Wales, that good soldier of Jesus Christ; to Mr. Torial
Joss, Mr. Cornelius Winter, and all my other dearly beloved present stated
assistant Preachers, at Tabernacle and Tottenham-court Chapel, I give and
bequeath ten pounds each for mourning; to the three brothers of Mr. Ambrose
Wright, and the wife of his brother Mr. Robert Wright, now faithfully and
skilfully laboring, and serving at the Orphan-house Academy, I give and
bequeath the sum of ten pounds each for mourning; to Mr. Richard Smith, now a
diligent attendant on me, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds, and all
my wearing apparel which I shall have with me in my journeying through America,
or on my voyage to England, if it should please an all-wise God to shorten my
days in either of these situations. Finally, I give and bequeath the sum of one
hundred pounds, to be distributed at the discretion of my executors, hereafter
mentioned, for mourning among my old London servants, the poor widows at
Tottenham court Chapel, and the Tabernacle poor, especially my old trusty,
disinterested friend and servant, Mrs. Elizabeth Wood; all the other residue,
if there be any residue of moneys, goods and chattels, or whatever profits may
arise from the sale of my books, or any manuscripts that I may leave behind, I
give and bequeath to the Right Honorable the Countess Dowager of Huntingdon,
or, in case of her Ladyship's being deceased at the time of my departure, to
the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire. beforementioned, after my funeral
expenses and just debts are discharged, toward paying off my arrears that may
be due on the account of the Orphan-house Academy, or for annual prizes as a
reward for the best three orations that shall be made in English on the
subjects mentioned in a paper annexed to this will. And I do hereby appoint the
Honorable James Habersham, Esquire. aforesaid, to be my executor in respect to my
affairs in the province of Georgia, and my trusty, tried, dearly beloved
friends, Charles Hardy, Esquire. Daniel West, Esquire. and Mr. Robert Keen, to be
executors of this my last-will and testament, in respect to my affairs in
England, begging each to accept of a mourning ring. To all my other Christian
benefactors, and more intimate acquaintance, I leave my most hearty thanks and
blessing, assuring them that I am more and more convinced of the undoubted
reality, and infinite importance of the grand gospel truths which I have from
time to time delivered; and am so far from repenting my delivering them in an
itinerant way, that had I strength equal to my inclination, I would preach them
from pole to pole, not only because I have found them to be the power of God to
the salvation of my own soul, but because I am as much assured that the Great
Head of the Church has called me by his word, providence, and spirit, to act
in this way, as that the sun shines at noonday As for my enemies, and
misjudging, mistaken friends, I most freely and heartily forgive them, and can
only add, that the last tremendous day will soon discover what I have been,
what I am, and what I shall be, when time itself shall be no more; and
therefore, from my inmost soul, I close all, by crying, come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly; even so, Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
This was written with the testator's own hand, and at his desire, and in his
presence, sealed, signed, and delivered, at the Orphan-house Academy, in the
province of Georgia, before us witnesses, Anno Domini March the twenty-second,
one thousand seven hundred and seventy.

ROBERT BOLTON, THOMAS DIXON, CORNELIUS WINTER.



N. B. I also leave a mourning ring to my honored and dear friends and
disinterested fellow laborers, the Reverend Messrs. John and Charles Wesley,
in token of my indissoluble union with them, in heart and Christian affection,
notwithstanding our difference in judgment about some particular points of
doctrine. -- Grace be with all them, of whatever denomination, that love our
Lord Jesus, our common Lord, in sincerity.



GEORGIA. Before his Excellency JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire, Captain General,
Governor, and Commander in Chief, of his Majesty's said Province, Chancellor
and Ordinary of the same,
PERSONALLY appeared Robert Bolton and Cornelius Winter, both of Savannah, in
the parish of Christ-Church, and province aforesaid, Gentlemen, two of the
subscribing witnesses to the within written last will and testament (on seven
preceding pages) of the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, Clerk, who being
solemnly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, made oath, that they
were present, and did see the said testator sign, seal, publish, pronounce, and
declare the same to be and contain his last-will and testament, and that he was
of sound and disposing mind and memory, to the best of their knowledge and
belief, and that they, with Thomas Dixon, subscribed their names as witnesses
to the said will at the request and in the presence of the said testator, and
in each other's presence.

At the same time the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire, one of the executors
named in the said will, qualified as such.

GIVEN under my hand, this 10th day of December, 1770. JA. WRIGHT.
Georgia, Secretary's-Office. A true Copy taken from the Original in this
Office, examined and certified this 10th day of May, 1771.

Those. MOODIE, D. Secry.




