THE APPEAL FARTHER DEFENDED; IN ANSWER TO THE FARTHER MISREPRESENTATIONS OF
DR. CHAUNCY.

By THOMAS B. CHANDLER, D.D.

-- Not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness.

ST. PETER. If the Presbyterian Parity had any Place in the primitive Times as
some do imagine, it must needs have been an intolerable Kind of Government,
since all on the sudden it was universally abolished.

Maurice against Baxter. NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, at his Book Store and
Printing-Office, in HANOVER-SQUARE. M,DCC,LXXI.

"WE require you to find out but one Church upon the Face of the whole Earth,
that has been ordered by your Discipline, or has not been ordered by ours,
that is to say, by episcopal Regiment, since the Time that the blessed Apostles
were here conversant. Many Things out of Antiquity ye bring, as if the purest
Times of the Church had observed the self-same Orders which you require; and as
though your Desire were, that the Churches of old should be Patterns for us to
follow, and even Glasses wherein we might see the Practice of that, which by
you is gathered out of Scripture. But the Truth is, ye MEAN nothing less."

HOOKER.

CONTENTS.
THE Occasion and Design of this Defense, p. 1 The Author's Manner, in his
former Defense, vindicated, p. 5 Dr. Chauncy proved to have given up the great
Point in Dispute, p. 10 His confused Use of the Terms, spiritual Bishops, p. 13
-- and State-Establishment, p. 14 The Objection, that the Bishops proposed are
to be sent by the King, very unreasonable, p. 16 That the Arguments used to
enforce the Petitions of our Convention were never concealed, p. 18 Dr.
Chauncy's Evidence to the contrary examined, p. 20 True Copies of our Addresses
to the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury given, p. 21 The Disagreeableness
of such a Controversy, p. 27 That the Jus divinum of Episcopacy is a Doctrine
of the Church of England, p. 28 -- proved, from the Preface to the Ordinal, p.
30 The Difference between the old and new Ordinal considered, p. 34 That the
Doctor's Extract from Mr. Shaw is a gross Misrepresentation of the old Ordinal,
p. 39 -- and of the new, p. 47 That our English Reformers were truly episcopal,
p. 51 A false Date in the Irenicum corrected, p. 55 That Archbishop Cranmer was
episcopal, p. 60 That many of our most eminent Writers, before Archbishop Laud,
contended for the divine Right of Episcopacy, p. 65 That the Laws of Q.
Elizabeth were not favorable to any other than episcopal Ordination, p. 74 The
Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession established, p. 78. That Orders given
by popish Bishops are valid, p. 85 That Usher and Burnet were episcopal in
their Principles, p. 87 That the episcopal Office is misunderstood by Dr.
Chauncy, p. 89 The Cases of Aerius and Colluthus, p. 92 An Answer to the
Doctor's Challenge, exhibiting 'a Curiosity in the Regions of Controversy,' and
abundant Proof given, that all Ordinations were performed by Bishops in the Two
first Centuries, p. 94 That the Waldenses were Episcopalians, p. 105 That
without Bishops, the Church in America is without Ordination, p. 111 Why
Application for Bishops has not been made to the Moravians, or others, p. 112
Of the Expensiveness of going to England for Ordination, containing a Specimen
of Dr. Chauncy's controversial Dexterity, p. 116 That the American
Episcopalians enjoy not the same religious Liberty with others, p. 124 That the
Application of the Non-Episcopalians in Boston for a Charter, was not defeated
by episcopal Influence, p. 128 The Doctor's Calumnies, against the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel, refuted, p. 130 Whether any Episcopalians are
averse to American Bishops, on the Plan of the Appeal, p. 141 That this Plan
has been legally settled, p. 146 That it is no Violation of the 73d Canon, p.
150 An Answer to the Doctor's first standing Objection, p. 156 An Answer to his
second, p. 160 Another 'Curiosity in the Regions of Controversy,' Ibid. The
probable Consequences of an American Episcopate, both here and at home, p. 162
Dr. Chauncy's Indiscretion, and wrong Conceptions, p. 167 An Answer to his
third standing Objection, p. 172 An Answer to his fourth, p. 177 Whether the
Congregationalists in New England are averse to religious Establishments, p.
178 Of the Right of States to make such Establishments, p. 184 An Answer to the
fifth standing Objection, p. 186 Whether the Money given for the Use of an
Episcopate, can be justly applied to the Support of Missionaries, p. 188 The
Society's Conduct, relating to North Carolina, p. 191 -- to New England, p. 193
-- to South Carolina, p. 194 -- to Canada, p. 195 -- and to Nova Scotia, p. 198
Of the comparative Growth of the Church in New England, p. 199 Dr. Chauncy's
Misrepresentation of the Plea for an Episcopate, p. 203 Why Mr. Apthorp's
Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Objections has been so carefully neglected, p. 206 The
pretended Reasons for it considered, p. 208 Mr. Apthorp's Reply to Dr. Mayhew
vindicated, p. 209 Want of Prudence in the Antiepiscopalians discovered in
their Opposition to our Plan, p. 211 An indelible Character the Doctrine of the
Congregationalists, p. 212 An Argument urged against Bishops, which would be
stronger against episcopal Clergymen, in America, p. 215 The mild Principles of
the English Bishops, p. 217 That an Episcopate settled on the present Plan
would not probably be altered, p. 218 That the Dissenters at home are not in
suffering Circumstances, p. 221 The Elegance of Objections considered, p. 223
In what Sense the full Enjoyment of our ecclesiastical Constitution is
requested, p. 224 The Doctor's Proof that an Establishment is intended, another
'Curiosity,' p. 226 Why the Presbyterians in New York failed in their
Application for a Charter, p. 228 An Account of the Rise, Progress and present
State of this Controversy, p. 231
ERRATA.
Page. 6. Line. 3, before that, add and. Page. 9. Line. 4. for dishovoured, r.
dishonored. Page. 11. Line. 16. for Bishop, r. Bishops. Page. 12. Line. 16. for
those, r. there, Page. 18. Line. 8. for am now disposed, r. am disposed. Page.
23. Line. 7. for the, r. other. Page. 37. Line. 3. for representing, r.
resenting. Page. 62. Line. 16. for it, r. is. Page. 83 Line. 6. for Aposties,
r. Apostles. Page. 94. Line. 24. after Notice, add that. Page. 103. Line. 13.
for as Novelty, r. as a Novelty. Page. 104. Line. 9. for own our, r. our own.
Page. 114, Line. 23. for extreme, r. extremely. Page. 118. Line. 5. for as, r.
for. Page. 127. Line. 30. for slight Basis, r. slight a Basis. Line. 34. for of
Non-bestowment, r. of the Non-bestowment. Page. 128. Line. 6. for all their, r.
their. Page. 139. Line. 22. after Side, add of. Page. 154. Line. 16. for dle,
r. idle. Page. 172. Line. 21. for it, r. is. Page. 178. Line. 17. for so, r.
to. Page. 183. Line. 10. for visiblely, r. visibly. Page. 192. Line. 20. after
all, add the. Page. 197. Line. 35. for was, r. have been. Page. 198. Line. 30.
after have, add now. Page. 199. Line. 22. for Congregationalist, r.
Congregationalists. Page. 207. Line. 25. for had, r. has. Page. 212. Line. 28.
after on, add of. Line. 29. for Presbyter's, r. Presbyters', Page. 226. Line.
21. for affected, r. effected. Line. 35. after them, r. in.
THE APPEAL FARTHER DEFENDED.
WHEN the Author of an Appeal to the Public, in Behalf of the Church of England
in America, published his general Defense of it, he was in Hopes of having no
farther Occasion to appear in the Controversy about AMERICAN BISHOPS. Not that
he looked upon what he had written as unanswerable; for he knew that there is a
Sort of People that can answer any Thing; but he believed that enough had been
said on the Subject, on both Sides, to enable the Public to judge of the Matter
in Dispute. The Case of the American Episcopalians had been fairly stated, in
Order to show the Reasonableness and Necessity of their having resident
Bishops; on the other Hand, Objections in sufficient Quantity, had been offered
against such an Appointment; and a particular Reply had been made to every
Objection that had been urged or suggested: And when a Controversy is carried
on thus far, the Bystanders, in his Opinion, are commonly as able to form a
proper Judgment of the Merits of the Cause, as after the Disputants have
proceeded to Rejoinders, Sur-rejoinders and Rebutters.

WHETHER Dr. Chauncy is of a different Opinion or not, is best known to
himself. As he has not thought proper to tell what Motives excited him to
resume his Pen in this Controversy, the Reader is left to discover them for
himself, as well as he can; and if he should happen to mistake, in a Matter of
such high Curiosity, it may not be his own Fault. Surely it could not be the
Pleasure attending such an Employment! For my Part, I am unable to conceive
that any Man can be fond of the rough and disagreeable Work of public
Controversy, more especially at the Doctor's Time of Life: -- Unless he should
be in the Condition of old Henry Valesius, of whom his Biographer informs us,
in Words which I shall leave for the Doctor to translate, that natus Annis
septuaginta, nec sibi ipse videbatur Senex, nec aliis videri volebat; and that
he heartily confessed, that ante acceptas quasdem a Gronovio Literas, Se de
Senectute sua nunquam cogitavisse. And therefore I rather suspect that Dr.
Chauncy was sensible of the Insufficiency of his former Exertions against an
American Episcopate, and found it necessary to make another Effort to support
the Cause he had undertaken to maintain. And if he had a farther View of
retrieving his own literary Character, he is not to be blamed; for, in the
Opinion of many sensible People, that, as well as his Cause, had considerably
suffered, by the Appearance and Operation of a certain noxious Pamphlet, known
by the Title of -- THE APPEAL DEFENDED.

BUT I will not spend Time in trying to account for what, after all, may be
unaccountable; nor indeed can the Doctor expect me to take the Trouble of
settling his Affairs with his Readers. It is more properly my Business, at this
Time, to assign the Reasons why I request again to be heard before the Tribunal
of the Public, after having offered my Plea in Behalf of the American
Episcopalians, and made my DEFENSE.

AND here I might plead the natural Right every Man has to defend himself as
often as he is attacked; and that it is the proper Business of a Respondent to
reply to every Thing objected by his Opponent: But I shall not avail myself of
these Considerations, because I must confess that I have not been governed by
them myself. In the Doctor's last Piece, now coming under Examination, the
Attack never appeared to me to be so formidable as to make a regular Defense
necessary; nor the Objections against an American Episcopate to be of such
Consequence as to deserve a formal Reply. I could very freely, without Anxiety
or Reluctance, have submitted the Matter in Dispute to the Judgment of the
impartial, without offering another Sentence on the Subject.

BUT the Misfortune is, that, while many undertake to be Judges, in this Case,
without any Desire or Inclination to examine what is said on the other Side,
there are but few Persons, in those Colonies wherein Dr. Chauncy's Pamphlets
have chiefly abounded, (and for which I have an Affection as well as he) who
have an Opportunity of reading what has been offered in Favor of the
Episcopate proposed. With Regard to those Colonies therefore, which are the
chief Objects of the Doctor's Concern, he and his Adherents, one would think,
might have been very quiet and contented with so considerable an Advantage. But
no: They were alarmed, it seems, for what he calls, p. 141, the great Cause of
their Ancestors; and it was feared that even the Report, or oral Tradition, of
what had been urged in Behalf of American Bishops, might render the People of
New England favorable to the Plan for introducing them into the Colonies. It
was therefore thought proper, by Way of Prevention or Antidote, and perhaps at
the same Time as a Cordial for the Doctor after so great a Fatigue as he had
lately undergone in answering the Appeal; that the Thanks of his associated
Brethren should be formally voted him for the Exploit; and that this Vote
should be circulated through the Country in the public Papers: By which
Contrivance much greater Force was given to his Pamphlet than it originally
possessed. For the Body of the People in New England, who had heard so little
in Behalf of the Bishops proposed, and so much against them; upon seeing this
Decree of a public Triumph or Ovation made in Favor of the Doctor; had it
hardly in their Power to conceive otherwise, than that the Author of the Appeal
had been fairly vanquished, and that the episcopal Clergy and their Friends,
under the Cover of plausible Pretenses, had formed a Plot to deprive them of
their religious Liberties, to establish over them an ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of a tyrannical Nature, and to raise high Contributions upon them,
for the Support of -- it as had been originally objected.

IN Order therefore to undeceive them, and any others who have been imposed
upon by these or the like Arts; and to show that, notwithstanding the Pretense,
none of these Objections have been tolerably supported, and indeed that no
Objection of any Consequence can be reasonably made against an Episcopate on
the Plan that has been offered; the Author has been urged by many of his
Friends, to make this farther Defense of it; which they think to be necessary
under such Circumstances. As his own Opinion differed not greatly from theirs,
he soon consented to submit to the Task What is now presented to the Reader,
would have appeared much sooner, had not the Author waited to see what
Productions worthy of Notice, the Publication of the Appeal and Appeal defended
in LONDON, might occasion in that Quarter.
; and in performing it he will endeavor to show, among other Things, that
there is a fairer and better Way of judging of the Matters in Dispute, than
either from the public Vote of Thanks beforementioned, or from the Doctor's
confidently saying, in his Title Page, that in his Reply to the Appeal
defended, the Author's Mistakes are rectified, his false arguing refuted, and
the Objections against the planned American Episcopate shown to remain in full
Force, notwithstanding all that he has offered to render them invalid.

THE Doctor's Pamphlet is entitled, A Reply to the Appeal defended; but the
Reader must not conclude from hence, that it is, in any Sense, a Reply to the
whole of it. The larger Part, containing many Things that are very material in
this Controversy, is passed over without the least Notice. I shall not follow
the Doctor's Example in this; intending, since I have undertaken a Review of
his Performance, not to pass by any Thing that can be thought to be either
pertinent or plausible.

IN taking my Leave of him, I proposed, in Case the Dispute about an American
Episcopate should be farther continued, that the Debate should be reduced
within a narrower Compass; that nothing which does not immediately relate to
the Merits of the Cause, should be offered on either Side Appeal defended, p.
266.
. But he will not allow that I had any Right to propose such a Limitation;
since in the Appeal and the Appeal defended, I had not strictly adhered to the
Point of an American Episcopate myself. But I know of nothing in the Appeal
that does not immediately relate to this Point, except the two first Sections,
wherein a 'Sketch' of the general Arguments in Favor of Episcopacy was given,
and the Nature of the episcopal Office was explained. These were introductory
to the Business in Hand, and were thought to have a Tendency to put the Plea
for the Episcopate requested in a proper Light, by showing that the late
Application of our Convention for American Bishops proceeded from their real
Principles; which was certainly the Case. But seeing the ill Use made of these
introductory Sections by my Adversaries, in my Defense, I passed over all that
had been said on the general Subject of Episcopacy, so far as relates to the
Evidence of Scripture and the primitive Church; being desirous of reducing the
Controversy to one Point; namely, the Reasonableness and Propriety of an
American Episcopate.

DR. Chauncy, in his first Pamphlet, had not only enlarged on the introductory
Sections, but had rambled beyond the Bounds of the Appeal, in a long Episode
about the Sentiments of our first Reformers, (to say nothing of other
Instances) in Order invidiously to represent the episcopal Clergy in the
Colonies as having departed from the original Principles of the Church of
England: And I found it necessary to spend no inconsiderable Part of my Reply
in setting this Matter in its proper Light. -- After what had thus passed
between us, I think I had a Right to propose a new Plan of Operations, in Case
Hostilities should continue; which I did -- not intending, as he misrepresents
the Matter, to put it out of the Power of others to remark upon the greatest
Part of what I had been pleased to offer, -- but only desiring that a due
Regard to the Patience of our Readers, upon which we had trespassed, might, for
the future, be more carefully maintained. The Doctor is of Opinion indeed, that
if I had taken the whole of the abovementioned Misconduct upon myself, no one
would have thought it an ASPERSION. I am of the same Opinion too; because no
one before him ever did think of calling That an Aspersion, which a Man takes
upon himself. It is possible he intended to say a Self-Aspersion.

I HAD farther proposed, should the Controversy be continued, that no Invective
or Abuse, -- nothing that savors of Bigotry or Barbarity, should be suffered to
mingle in the Debate; but that ingenuous, sober Reasoning should decide it. The
Doctor thinks I could have made the Proposal with a better Grace, if I had more
fully exemplified it myself. Indeed he immediately confesses, p. 6, (I request
the Reader to take particular Notice of the Passage, because it is the only one
in which he seems to be in a tolerably good Humor, while he speaks of me) that
my Air in writing sometimes carries the Appearance of Mildness and Moderation;
nor is it generally misbecoming the Gentleman, or the Christian. I will give
him all due Credit for this Concession; and I think it concerns me to make the
most of it.

BUT in the next Words he cries out concerning me: Will any pretend that his
Manner is not too often very like their's who are actuated by a Spirit of
Bigotry? Perhaps in some Instances this may have been the Case, although I am
not conscious of it myself, and am unable to point out in what particular
Passages. I know the extreme Difficulty of carrying on a Controversy with
peevish and captious Adversaries, without sometimes dropping Expressions that
may appear, to an indifferent Person, to savor of Bigotry, or a blind
Confidence. But I can truly declare, that I have endeavored to guard against
this Kind of Failings. -- He goes on: Has he no where treated his Opponents
with Invective and Abuse? With some little Invective on certain Occasions, I
confess; but not with Abuse, as the Word implies unkind or severe Treatment
that is undeserved. Are there no Instances in which he has had Recourse to
evasive Art, rather than solid Argument? Not a single one, I affirm, to the
best of my Knowledge. Again: Has he never substituted popular EXCLAMATION in
the Room of good Reasoning? -- The Doctor most probably meant here popular
Declamation; as in p. 85, he complains of my having made a declamatory
Application to the Passions. Popular Declamation is too often the Fault of
controversial Writers; but as to popular Exclamation, it is novum Crimen, et
ante hunc Diem inauditum. How far the Appeal defended was a Composition of a
declamatary Nature, is freely submitted to the Judgment of the Impartial.

BUT farther: Do we never find him disingenuously endeavoring to make others
think he has answered POWERFULLY, when he himself knew he had said nothing to
the Purpose? Nay, has he never so dishovoured his own Character as only to
laugh loud when so pressed as to be unable to make a just or sober Reply? As
the Doctor has not attempted to point out particular Instances of this Conduct,
I can only say, in general, that in answering him I never thought myself so
pressed as to be unable to make a just or sober Reply; and consequently that I
was under no Temptation to put off upon the Reader what was nothing to the
Purpose, for a powerful Answer. Even laughing loudly on some Occasions is no
Crime nor Dishonor; and in the Appeal defended, I am not conscious of having
laughed at all, but in such Cases as would dispose every attentive Reader to
laugh with me. In a Word, I meant nothing in any Part of it, but to treat both
the Doctor and the Public fairly; and if I failed in any Instances, it was
contrary to my Desire and Intention, and it is more than hitherto I have been
able to discover. What the Sentiments of my Friends are, upon this Head, I
shall leave for them to express as they think proper. I know not that they have
made any Complaints, either as to the Matter or Manner of my former Defense;
and I trust they are not disposed to complain of any Thing, like the Doctor's
Friends, on Account of its being candid. For he tells us, that some of his
Friends have complained of his Manner in answering the Appeal, as over-mild and
CANDID. p. 10, 11.

WITHOUT enlarging farther on what is merely personal, between the Doctor and
me, I shall now proceed to consider such Passages of what he calls his Reply,
as are most worthy of Notice. And the first that occurs is in p. 11. In an
introductory Observation I had requested of every Reader to take Notice, that
Dr. Chauncy, as well as my other Opponents, had given up the great Point in
Dispute. To support this Observation, I quoted several Passages which were
supposed to be a full Proof of it. The Doctor now denies that they contain that
in them which LOOKS LIKE his giving up the main Point in Debate. p. 12. As this
is a Matter of great Importance in this Controversy, and what he calls p. 13,
the most essential Part of the Dispute, I beg Leave to review it with
particular Care, believing that it deserves the Reader's Attention, as much as
any Thing contained in the following Sheets.

THE particular Passages alleged in Proof of the Doctor's having given up the
great Point in Dispute, by consenting to the Episcopate in Question, are the
following. We desire no other Liberty, than to be left unmolested in the
Exercise of our religious Principles, in so far as we are good Members of
Society. And we are perfectly willing Episcopalians should enjoy this Liberty
to the full. If they think Bishops, in their appropriated Sense, were
constituted by Christ, or his Apostles, we object not a Word against their
having as many of them as they please, if they will be content to have them
with Authority altogether derived from Christ Answer to the Appeal, p. 180.
. Again: It is not simply the Exercise of any of their religious Principles
that would give the least Uneasiness, nor yet the Exercise of them under as
many PURELY SPIRITUAL Bishops as they would wish to have; but their having
Bishops under a STATE ESTABLISHMENT Answer to the Appeal, p. 189.
.

THE Doctor allows the Quotations to have been fairly made; and the Question
here is, whether in these Passages, he does, or does not, consent to our having
the Episcopate proposed in the Appeal. In order fairly to determine this Point,
Recourse must be first had to the Appeal, that it may be seen what Sort of an
Episcopate it proposes, and whether it be the same that the Doctor consents to.
Now this is clearly and fully described in the following Words. It has been
long settled by our Friends and Superiors at home, and the Clergy of this
Country have often signified their Approbation thereof, and Acquiescence
therein -- that the Bishop to be sent to America, shall have no Authority, but
purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical Nature, such as is derived altogether
from the Church, and not from the State -- that this Authority shall operate
only upon the Clergy of the Church, and not upon the Laity nor Dissenters of
any Denomination -- that the Bishops shall not interfere with the Property or
Privileges, whether civil or religious, of Churchmen or Dissenters -- that, in
particular, they shall have no Concern with the Probate of Wills, Letters of
Guardianship and Administration, or Marriage-Licences, nor be Judges of any
Cases relating thereto -- but, that they shall ONLY exercise the original
Duties of their Office as before stated, i. e. ordain and govern the Clergy,
and administer Confirmation to those who shall desire it. This, without any
Reservation or Equivocation, is the exact Plan of an American Episcopate which
has been settled at home; and it is the only one, on which Bishops have been
requested here, either in our general or more particular Addresses See the
Appeal, p. 79.
. Nor is there any Thing, in any Part of the Appeal, from which it can be
infered, that a different Episcopate from this was intended or desired.

NOW the Doctor, in the Passages quoted, declares for himself, as well as in
Behalf of others, that he is willing we should have as many Bishops as we want,
provided only, that we are content to have them with AUTHORITY ALTOGETHER
DERIVED FROM CHRIST -- that they are PURELY SPIRITUAL -- and not upon the
Footing of a STATE ESTABLISHMENT. But these are specifically and exactly the
very Bishops proposed in the Appeal. The Bishops requested are those expressly
said to have no Authority, but such as is derived altogether from the Church,
and consequently ALTOGETHER FROM CHRIST. Their Authority and Powers are to be
entirely 'of an ecclesiastical Nature,' they being intended only to ordain and
govern the Clergy, and to administer Confirmation; and consequently they are to
be PURELY SPIRITUAL.

THE Government is not expected or desired to give them any Support or peculiar
Protection; and consequently they are not to be on the Footing of a STATE
ESTABLISHMENT. From these Premises every Reader can, and every unbiassed Reader
will, draw the Consequence for himself, that THEREFORE Dr. Chauncy allows of
the Episcopate proposed in the Appeal, and has given up the great Point in
Dispute.

HE asserts notwithstanding, that the Bishops in the abovementioned Plan, and
those he spoke of in the above recited Passages, are ESSENTIALLY DIFFERENT --
as widely different, as this World is from another. But what Assurance is this!
A Man that can affirm at this Rate, is fit to undertake, what a common Genius
will not attempt, to prove that 'Darkness is Light, and Light Darkness.' I
would willingly put the most favorable Construction upon this Conduct; and
therefore I impute it to the Perplexity he was under, which did not permit him
to see what is so evident to others.

AND indeed he seems to have puzzled and confused himself not a little, with
the Term spiritual Bishops. For sometimes he uses it in the Sense wherein all
Mankind have ever understood it, as signifying Bishops that have no Authority
but of a spiritual and ecclesiastical Nature, such as is derived altogether
from the Church and not from the State, which are the Bishops of the Appeal.
Thus he allows, p. 92, that we might have purely spiritual Bishops, by applying
to the Bishop of Canada or the Moravians. But why then may we not have Bishops
as spiritual, if we receive them from England? Ordination to the same Office,
by any one Bishop in Christendom, conveys exactly the same Authority, to the
same Degree, as Ordination by any other Bishop, according to the Opinion of the
Church in all Ages; and the Powers thus conveyed are not temporal, but
spiritual. The temporal Powers which Bishops possess in any Country, are not
derived from their Ordination, but confered upon them by some Law or Act of the
State. Where Bishops receive such Powers, they are in Part temporal Bishops;
but where they receive none, they are purely spiritual. Before the Time of
Constantine all Bishops were such; and since his Time, Bishops, without any
temporal Authority, are as purely spiritual as they were before it, every Power
which belongs to them as Bishops being of a spiritual Nature. The original and
peculiar Powers of Bishops, are those of Ordination, Government and
Confirmation. Now the Doctor himself, p. 103, calls ordaining and governing
Power spiritual; and for the same Reasons, confirming Power must be spiritual
likewise. And when Bishops possess these Powers, without any Mixture of
temporal Authority, they are purely spiritual. But in other Places, and
particularly wherever he denies that spiritual Bishops are the same with those
of the Appeal, he uses the Words in a Sense that is exclusively his own; and by
purely spiritual Bishops, he evidently means Bishops that are pure SPIRITS,
without any bodily Qualities; which last, it seems, are the only Bishops he is
now willing to allow us.

HE appears to have been equally embarrassed with the word Establishment. The
Establishment of a Religion, or of any particular Order of Men always implies,
at least, some peculiar Countenance and Protection from the State, but all that
is desired for the Bishops of the Appeal, is a Consent to their Existence, or,
at most, the Approbation of the Legislature, and that common Protection which
is freely granted to the various religious Denominations throughout the British
Dominions. Nothing but wilful or natural Blindness can avoid seeing, that there
is a wide Difference between such a Toleration, and a State-Establishment. The
Doctor sometimes uses the Word Establishment in the Sense wherein others use
it; and it was not suspected that he departed from its common Acceptance in
his Answer to the Appeal. And therefore when he signified his Consent to our
having Bishops that should not be under a State-Establishment, I made no
Scruple to affirm, that he consented to the Episcopate of the Appeal, which was
not to be under a State-Establishment, and consequently that he had given up
the main Point in Debate -- which had he used common Language in its common
Acceptance, was certainly the Case. In order to extricate himself, he now
declares in his Reply, that he signified no such Consent; and to my Question --
Does this Plan propose an Establishment of the Church? -- He roundly answers,
it undoubtedly does. p. 142. So that by Establishment now, he means no more
than what is proposed in the Appeal for an American Episcopate, which is
exactly neither more nor less than what all consistent Writers mean by the word
Toleration. And such are the Fervors of his anti-episcopal Zeal, that he is
unwilling American Bishops should be established in his Sense, i. e. tolerated,
or suffered to exist in any Form, excepting perhaps that of pure Spirits.

I HAVE proceeded on the favorable Supposition, that the Doctor was perplexed
himself in the Use of these Terms. If this was not the Case, it was still
worse; for he must have intended to perplex his Readers. 'Phenomena' of this
Kind sometimes do appear 'in the Regions of Controversy.' When a Writer is
dextrous in playing Tricks with Words, he can, at any Time, raise a Mist, and
make his Escape; and when we think that we have secured him in Cords of his own
twisting, we are surprised to find, that -- Effugiet tamen haec sceleratus
Vincula Proteus.

THE Doctor complains that my Representation of the Matter makes him to have
wrote [written] many Scores of Pages in Opposition to that, against which he
had not a Word to object. p. 12 -- and to have acted a weak, ridiculous and
inconsistent Part. p. 13. The Fact is truly represented, whatever it may imply;
and I am not answerable for the Consequences. I am disposed to think as
favorably of him as possible, and I could wish for no Occasions of treating
him otherwise than respectfully. And as to the Inconsistency before us, I am
willing, as I have said, to ascribe it, not to any Malice prepense, but to the
Embarrassment he was under from the Badness of his Cause, and the urgent
Necessity of his still defending it. The same Kind of Inconsistency, proceeding
from the like Embarrassment, has appeared in all our Opposers; particularly in
the American Whig, the Remonstrant, and another great Stickler against American
Bishops, in the London Chronicle, who signs himself Atlanticus. They oppose
that against which they have no Objections; they give their Consent, and
afterward deny that they ever thought of consenting at all.

THE last-mentioned Writer, in Order to do Justice to the Americans, says, that
they only object to Lords Bishops being sent over by Authority from the
Legislature of Great Britain, with Power and Titles of worldly Pre-eminence.
And the Doctor in p. 104, seems chiefly to fear, that the Bishops described in
our Plan, should come from the King or State; for he is there very willing that
we should have them from the Bohemians, or Waldenses, or Moravians, or even
from Canada. But it can be a Matter of no Consequence to those, over whom they
are to exercise no Jurisdiction, whether our Bishops, under the Limitations
proposed, are of Bohemian, Moravian, or English Extraction. Bishops may be sent
by "the Legislature of Great Britain" without any temporal Power; and such only
have been desired for America. As to their Titles, which may give Pain to the
envious and malicious, they will imply no Pre-eminence but what arises from the
Nature of their Office, considered as purely ecclesiastical or spiritual, and
will undoubtedly not exceed what were given to Bishops in the primitive Ages of
the Church. "The Legislature of Great Britain" has never been requested to send
Bishops to America; nor is the Parliament desired to interfere any farther,
than, if it should be found that the national Establishment will naturally give
American Bishops, when appointed, more Authority than is proposed, to
circumscribe it according to our Plan.

AS to the KING indeed, it is the Duty both of the Clergy here, and of the
Bishops at home, to apply to him for his Consent and Warrant, before they
proceed to carry such a Scheme into Execution. This Duty arises from that
Supremacy of the Crown, to which the Bishops and Clergy have sworn Submission,
in all such Cases, agreeably to the Laws of the Realm; and although we find the
Minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended at it, it is no more, to use the
Words of the ARTICLE, than that only Prerogative which we see to have been
given always to all godly Princes by GOD himself.

AMONG the original Articles of the Doctor's Complaint, it was represented,
that the Arguments in Support of the PETITIONS for an American Episcopate had
been kept secret; and that an authentic Knowledge of them, though applied for,
was rejected. It was replied in the Appeal defended, 'I know nothing of such an
Application, or Rejection.' He now rejoins, p. 14, I am now disposed to think
he here wrote as he thought. But, if he had taken Time for Recollection, it is
probable he would have called to Mind what he might not then have had in actual
Remembrance. Did he never hear of a formal Application made by Dr. Styles in a
Letter to the Clerk of the New York Convention, desiring a Copy of their
Petitions, especially their Petition to the King, and of the formal Negative
put upon this reasonable Request? Did he never hear of any Controversy between
the American Whig, and this Clerk of the Convention, relative to the Petition
to the King, wherein he was called upon to put an End to the Dispute, by
producing the Words of the Petition, which he refused to do? To all this I
answer in the Negative. I neither heard of Dr. Stiles's Application, nor of the
Dispute between the American Whig and the Secretary of our Convention, till
considerably after the Time of the Doctor's making his Complaint; and therefore
I naturally supposed that what is here mentioned could not have occasioned it,
it being not common for Effects to go before their Causes. The Complaint was
published by the Middle of March 1768, and must have been printed in February,
and written before it was printed -- Mr. Seabury's Advertisement, as Secretary
of the Convention, which brought on his Dispute with the American Whig, did not
make its Appearance in New York before March 28 -- And Dr. Stiles's Application
for Copies of the Petitions, was not made till several Weeks afterward. So
that the Reader sees it was not owing to my Want of Recollection, but to my
Ignorance of the Doctor's Abilities in Prognostication, that I made such a
Reply. But if this Gentleman was above making Distinctions between past and
future, he ought in Justice to have told us so, upon his engaging in the
Controversy.

IT was farther said in Answer to him: 'The Complaint is altogether groundless;
for the Plan upon which it was proposed that Bishops should be sent to America,
and the Arguments afterward made Use of in Support of the Petitions, actually
were published, a considerable Time before the Petitions were sent.' The Doctor
replies, What is all this to the Purpose? p. 15. I must confess it appears to
me to be greatly to the Purpose, to show that particular Matters were
published, in answering a Complaint that they were not published. It is true,
says he, such Arguments, in Support of the Plan for American Bishops as were
thought fit to be publicly used, we have been (he might have said had been)
made acquainted with. But the Question is, are these the ONLY ONES that
enforced the Petitions that were sent home? Will the Doctor venture to say, NO
OTHERS were used? I assure him, that such Arguments as had been publicly used
in Support of our Plan, included the ONLY ONES that were used to enforce the
Petitions; and therefore I need not add, that NO OTHERS were made Use of for
that Purpose. All this has been publicly asserted over and over. If so, says
the Doctor, What possible Harm can there be in giving Copies of them? -- It is
generally supposed that some Things are said in Support of these Petitions,
which the Clergy who sent them are not willing should be publicly known. No
great Harm, I imagine, could have been expected from the Publication of our
Petitions; and if the Clergy had been treated with Decency on the Occasion, it
is not improbable that Copies of all of them would, long since, have been laid
before the Public. But after having been openly bullied and abused, upon no
other Evidence against them than that of uncharitable Suspicions, and after the
Petitions had been magisterially demanded by anonymous Scriblers, they thought
proper to refuse them. In these Circumstances the Request of Dr. Styles,
however reasonable in itself, or however decently made, could not prudently be
granted, as his Connections with a certain Party were known.

THE Doctor proceeds: If any Credit is due to the Word of a Gentleman, of well
established Reputation, who was favored with a Sight, though not with a Copy
of one of these Petitions, it contained that in it which has never been made
public. I would not say any Thing to lessen the well established Reputation of
any Gentleman; but such an imperfect Testimony can, by no Means, be admitted in
the present Case. If the Gentleman, here meant, had the Sight of a true Copy,
it is possible that he may have misapprehended some particular Passages, or his
Memory may have deceived him. But perhaps he saw only the first Draft of a
Petition, before it had undergone the Corrections of the Convention; and from
this he could form no Judgment of the Petition that was afterward actually
sent. Perhaps he saw a spurious Copy (and why may there not be fictitious
Petitions, as well as fictitious Letters from Members of the Society?) written
with a View, either of making Mischief among the Dissenters, or of raising an
Odium against the episcopal Clergy. To this must be added, that the Gentleman
himself is not known, and consequently but little Regard can be paid to his
Testimony, at any Rate. Now, to borrow a little of the Doctor's Phraseology
from p. 168, this poor, lame, lank Evidence is all that he has to oppose to the
positive and peremptory Declarations of our Convention to the contrary, and
particularly by the Pen of their very worthy Secretary; the Members of which
Convention must be supposed to know what they themselves did in the Affair, and
can, whenever they please, have Recourse to the original Papers.

BUT as what could not prudently be done, at that Season of epidemic
Presbyterian Vehemence against the Clergy and the Church of England in the
Colonies, may not be altogether improper now -- when the Passions of Men have
greatly subsided, and their Prejudices have abated, in Proportion as their Eyes
have been opened; in order to gratify the Curiosity of the Reader (not
forgetting Dr. Chauncy) I will lay before him true Copies of our Petitions to
the King, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, without any Comment or Explanation:
And if our late Adversaries should continue to preserve their present apparent
good Temper, (here I do not forget, but must except, the Doctor) the other
Petitions may possibly see the Light on some future Occasions.

The ADDRESS to the KING.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WE, your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects, the Clergy of the Church
of England in your Provinces of New York and New Jersey, now met together in
one of those voluntary Conventions, which the Necessities of the Church in
these Parts frequently oblige us to hold, having long waited in Hopes of seeing
the Church of England in America enjoy the Benefits of its own Institutions,
and of being thereby raised to an Equality with other religious Denominations
in your Majesty's Colonies, think it our Duty, at length, to prostrate
ourselves as Supplicants before the Throne, and to implore your Majesty's
gracious Protection and Relief, which we now most earnestly do, with all
Submission and Humility.

AS we esteem Episcopacy to have been the Institution of Christ, and
consequently to be of absolute Necessity in the Christian Church; so, without
Bishops we can have neither Ordination nor a regular Discipline administered,
which Things are necessary to the Being of every religious Society; to say
nothing of Confirmation, a Rite which the Church of England has ever held
sacred, and the Benefits of which we take to be very great. These are
Hardships, which no tolerated Sect in any Part of your Majesty's Dominions is
reduced to, and under which, every Denomination of Dissenters would complain
bitterly; and if the Church of England in America must still continue to suffer
under them, we fear, that notwithstanding our utmost Efforts to prevent it, She
must finally sink, and with her the firmest Security for the Loyalty of your
Majesty's American Subjects must undoubtedly fail.

WITH these Prospects and Fears, your Majesty's known Goodness of Heart and
Affection for the Church are our only Refuge, (under the Almighty) to which we
now fly, most humbly imploring that one or more Bishops may be speedily sent
us, not to exercise Jurisdiction over the People, nor to interfere with any in
their civil Rights, but to administer to, and to govern in ecclesiastical
Matters, the Professors of the Church.

THAT your Majesty may long continue, in Health and Happiness, a nursing Father
to the Church and a Glory to the Nation, and at last exchange your temporal for
an eternal Crown, is the daily and devout Prayer of, May it please your
Majesty, Your Majesty's most dutiful And faithful Subjects, The Clergy of
New York and New Jersey.

Signed by Order, Miles Cooper, President of the Convention, Robert M'Kean,
Secretary.

Perth-Amboy, in New Jersey, Oct. 2, 1765.
The ADDRESS to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
May it please your Grace,
THE Clergy of New York and New Jersey, after mature Consideration, have
thought proper to address the Throne, in Behalf of the Church of England in
America, which, while destitute of Bishops and an orderly Discipline, must be
in a ruinous Condition, have taken the Liberty to enclose their Address, to
your Grace, humbly requesting, that, to the innumerable kind Offices which you
have been doing to the American Church and Clergy for a long Course of Years,
You will be pleased to add that of presenting it to his Majesty, and of
supporting the Prayer of it with those Arguments and Representations, which
none can use so properly or to so great Advantage, as your Grace. It is
impossible that this Cause can be better pleaded than it was by your Grace many
Years ago in a public Manner, and no one has ever yet done it so well; and if
any Relief is to be obtained, we have Reason to expect it from such a Prince as
now adorns the Throne, by the Mediation of such an Advocate.

IT is needless to be particular with your Grace, who are so thoroughly
acquainted with our Case and Condition; and it would be injurious to offer
Entreaties to so warm and avowed a Patron. The Request, we apprehend, is so
reasonable and equitable, that none can oppose it with any Appearance of
Justice or Humanity; and the Plan of an American Episcopate, as it has been
often explained by your Grace, is so universally harmless and unexceptionable,
that no tolerable Objections can be offered against it.

However we are sensible that a powerful Confederacy has been formed to oppose
it, which will probably continue; in which Case the great Question is, in our
humble Opinion, Whether the Church here shall be sacrificed to the Perverseness
and malicious Obstinacy of its Enemies, or, whether its Friends shall run the
Hazard of disobliging them? We do not pretend to see far into Futurity, but we
are sadly apprehensive, that if our Enemies have now Power to prevent our
having Bishops in America, the Time is not far distant, when, having gathered
Strength by Concessions, they will be also able to exterminate Episcopacy even
in England.

AMONGST other Arts that have been used to disappoint us, it has been publicly
and boldly asserted IN many of the English and American Newspapers.
, that the sending us Bishops is utterly disagreeable to nineteen Twentieths of
all the People in America, and would occasion a more dangerous Discontent and
Clamor than the Stamp-Duty, etc. This, we beg Leave to assure your Grace, is a
Slander, vile and malicious in all its Parts. We do not believe any Persons in
these Colonies have ever pretended so much Uneasiness at the Prospect of
Bishops, as has been generally expressed on Occasion of the Stamp Act. Indeed
we have heard of no Clamor at all, and our Ears have been open. We have made
it our Business for some Time past to mention the Affair to the most
considerable Dissenters among us, as Opportunity has fairly offered, but we
have found none that pretend to dispute the Reasonableness of it. On the other
Hand, several have declared that they have no Objections to Bishops in America,
provided the Dissenters are not to come under their Jurisdiction. There is no
Doubt but those who are the Enemies of the Church would be sorry to see it in a
flourishing State, but none are so hardy as to tell us so.

AND as to the Proportion of dissatisfied People, who are represented to be
Nineteen in Twenty, it is too glaringly false to deserve an Answer. If we take
into the Account all the North-American Colonies, and it is not fair to do
otherwise, we believe that of the Professors of the Church of England the
Number is as great, (some say superior) as that of the Dissenters. There are
also many Thousands of Lutherans in the Colonies, whose good Wishes in this
Case we may safely rely on. And of the Dissenters, a considerable Proportion
are Quakers, who are well known to have generally a much better Opinion of the
Church, than of the Presbyterians. Nay, they now begin to dread the increasing
Power of the latter in this Country, and declare their Resolution to support
the Church; and of late there have been several Instances of their contributing
largely to the building of Churches, on the same Principle.

AFTER all, supposing the Discontent were really considerable, yet the World
must pronounce that it is very unreasonable. And we trust that our Superiors,
who believe Episcopacy to be the Appointment of Christ, will always think it
more reasonable, and, upon the whole, more prudent and better Policy, to obey
God and to oblige the Friends of the Church, than to please a comparatively
small and unreasonable Party. But if we are to have no Bishops until the
Dissenters are willing, we know what to expect: We shall only say, that the
Case appears to us to be unparalleled in this, as well as other Respects.

YOUR Grace will excuse the Warmth of this Address, as it proceeds from no
interested Views, but from a Sense we are under of the Necessities of the
Church. We shall offer no farther Apology, but relying on your great Goodness,
beg Leave to subscribe ourselves, as we are with the utmost Veneration and
Gratitude, etc.

Perth-Amboy, Octo. 2, 1765.
HAVING gone through the Doctor's preliminary Articles, I shall now proceed to
consider the Substance of his first Section, amounting to a third Part of his
Pamphlet; although there is but little in it that is immediately connected with
the Episcopate in Question. And here, upon a Prospect of the Work before me, I
am ready to shrink back, and to repent that I have undertaken it. Were the
Business only to debate Matters of some Consequence with a candid Opponent, I
should enter upon it with less Reluctance, and could promise the Reader more
Satisfaction. But where much Time and Labor must be spent in the unprofitable
Drudgery of comparing Pamphlet with Pamphlet, of balancing Sentence with
Sentence, of showing that I said so, or said not so -- that the Doctor said
this, or meant that, or mistook, or misrepresented the Matter, I fear it will
be a Trial indeed. And yet to more than a little of this Kind of Labor am I
unavoidably destined, in the present Undertaking.

IN the Appeal defended, I regreted that I had introduced the Plea for American
Bishops, with a Sketch of the general Arguments in Favor of Episcopacy; and
confessed that what was said on the general Subject, however just in itself, or
proper in Theory, had been better omited -- for Reasons that need not be
repeated. And yet, says the Doctor, he has wrote [written] not less than 98
Pages -- more than one third Part of the whole -- in Support of that,
concerning which he was convinced it had been better if he had said nothing. p.
17. But in the 98 Pages, to which he refers, I said but little upon what was
contained in the Sketch, and carefully avoided saying any Thing on the Evidence
of Scripture and the primitive Church, which is the most essential Part of the
general Controversy; because I was for hastening to the Subject of an American
Episcopate. And that I reached it no sooner, was owing to the Doctor's
needlessly obstructing my Passage with, what he pretended to be, the Sentiments
of our first Reformers, the Opinions of some eminent Moderns, the Case of the
Waldenses, of the foreign Churches, the King's Supremacy, etc. These were the
Subjects of those 98 Pages, and not the Jus divinum of Episcopacy, which was
that, concerning which I was convinced it had been better if I had said
nothing. And yet a Subject that had been better omited in the Appeal, might
very properly come under Consideration in the Appeal defended, as it was
professedly written in Answer to the Objections and Misrepresentations of Dr.
Chauncy and others. This I take to be a sufficient Reply to all that is said in
three prevaricating Pages, wherein the Doctor farther exercises his Talents,
and labors to prove me to have been guilty, not only of what he calls
injudicious Unfairness (he may possibly think his OWN Unfairness to have been
judicious) but also of Inconsistency.

IN the Appeal, the divine Right of Episcopacy was asserted. The Doctor denied
this to be a Doctrine of the Church of England. It was replied, in the first
Place, that were this really the Case, and if it be by Virtue only of the Jus
humanum of Episcopacy that Bishops are necessary, still the Ends for which they
are necessary cannot be obtained without them, so long as we are subject to the
Authority that requires them. He now rejoins: As the Authority requiring is by
Supposition merely human, no Complaints can reasonably be made by those who
could have none to make, if they acknowledged and honored no one but Jesus
Christ as supreme Head of the Christian Church. p. 20. But does not the Doctor
know that none admit of a supreme Head of the Christian Church upon Earth, but
Papists? I hope he did not mean to insinuate, that the episcopal Clergy in the
Colonies believe the Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy. The supreme Head of a
national Church is a very different Thing from the supreme Head of the
Christian Church; and, by the former, the Church of England means no more than
the Prerogative given to our Princes, of ruling all Estates and Degrees
committed to their Charge by God, whether they be ecclesiastical or temporal See
Article XXXVII.
, in Opposition to the Pope's Usurpation: And, whether this is inconsistent
with Christ's absolute Supremacy, let common Sense judge. An Authority to
govern the national Church in Subordination to Christ, is the most that the
Church of England ever ascribed to Christian Princes; and the Claim of
subordinate Authority is so far from denying, that it actually acknowledges and
establishes, the Supremacy of the Principal. But more will be said upon this
Subject in its proper Place. Supposing now, but not granting, that we esteemed
Bishops to be necessary by Virtue only of a Jus Humanum; it is evident, at
first View, that the Ends for which they are thus made necessary cannot be
obtained without them, so long as we are subject to the Authority that requires
them, and look upon ourselves to be bound in Duty and Conscience to obey it.
And the Case of Episcopalians in America, conscientiously obedient to the
national Authority, must be hard without an Episcopate, in Proportion to the
Necessity or Importance of those Ends, for which Bishops are necessary. To tell
us that we are wrong in our Notions of the King's Supremacy, if true, would be
nothing to the Purpose.

IT was farther said in Reply, that, with Regard to Episcopacy, the Doctor
mistook the Principles of the Church of England, which always acknowledged a
divine Right. And here he was referred, in particular, to the Preface to the
ORDINAL. Part of this Preface was recited, wherein, as was observed, the
DISTINCTION of the three Orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons is fully
asserted -- the ANTIQUITY of this Distinction is deduced from the Apostles
Times -- the EVIDENCE in Favor of it is said to be contained in holy Scripture
and ancient Authors -- and the CLEARNESS of this Evidence is such, that it must
appear to ALL MEN diligently reading holy Scripture, etc. The Appeal defended,
p. 19.
.

THE Doctor attempts not to show that these Observations are ill-grounded, nor
to point out the Inconclusiveness of this Reasoning, in his own Words, as he
was apprehensive it might expose him to be censured for Prejudice, Obstinacy
and perverse Blindness; but he chooses to answer in the Language of two famous
episcopal Writers. What then do these two famous Writers say? The first is
Bishop Hoadly, in his Reasonableness of Conformity, written with the laudable
View of reconciling the Nonconformists to the Church of England. In the Course
of his Work, he represented the Difference that divided them from the
Conformists to be, in Reality, much smaller, in many Instances, than had been
commonly pretended. Dr. Calamy had offered, as an Objection against ministerial
Conformity, that the Subscription required from the Clergy, implies an
Allowance and Approbation of that Assertion, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons
are three distinct Orders by divine Appointment. Mr. Hoadly answered, that this
Quotation from the Preface to the Ordinal was not fairly made. By divine
Appointment, says he, You add yourselves; which was certainly true, these Words
being not in the Preface. For, continues he, all that the Sentence, which you
quote, says, is that that these Orders have been in the Church from the
Apostles Times. He then proceeds in the Words cited by the Doctor, the Force of
which is contained in this one Assertion: There is some Difference between the
two Sentences, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are three distinct Orders in the
Church by DIVINE APPOINTMENT, and, -- From the Apostles Times, there have been
these Orders in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons: Which
Distinction is undoubtedly just, when the Dispute is about the Words of the
Ordinal. But he does not deny that the Preface asserts the Distinction of the
three Orders -- nor that it deduces the Antiquity of this Distinction from the
Time of the Apostles -- nor that it says the EVIDENCE of it is contained in
holy Scripture and ancient Authors -- nor that it maintains the Clearness of
this Evidence to all diligent Inquirers; which is all that I affirmed, or am
obliged to support. Nor does it appear in his Dispute with Dr. Calamy, that he
himself did not fully believe the apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. But on
the contrary, in this same Book, which the Doctor has the Assurance to quote,
he expressly declares: We think we can demonstrate that in the primitive Times
the Administration of ecclesiastical Affairs was in the Hands of Bishops, who
had Presbyters subject to them Second Edition, p. 4.
. And again: Imagining our Method (of Ordination by Bishops) to be the orderly
and settled Method from the primitive Ages; where we see it neglected, when
there is no Necessity, we think in Justice, we cannot acknowledge those who
depart from it approved of God, in setting apart themselves for the Ministry
Ibid. p. 8.
. This approaches nearly to the most high-flying Expressions used in the
Appeal; in which the Author went not much farther than this eminent Writer,
whose Moderation has been known and celebrated throughout the Christian World.
In his Defense of episcopal Ordination, he undertakes to prove, and does prove,
that it is of APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION. And he introduces Mr. Baxter himself, as
making this very important Concession: that there were fixed Bishops in some
Churches in the Days of one of the Apostles; that neither the Apostles, nor any
of their Disciples, nor any Christian, or Heretic in the World, spoke, or wrote
a Word against Episcopacy, till long after it was generally settled in the
Churches.

THE other famous episcopal Writer, in whose Words the Doctor chooses to
express himself, is Mr. Ollysse, in his Answer to the same Dr. Calamy. After
making the same Distinction with Mr. Hoadly about the Words of the Preface to
the Ordinal, he says, as quoted by the Doctor, that the Preface "does not prove
a divine Appointment." That Preface does not undertake to prove any Thing. It
was drawn up as an explicit Declaration of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, relating to the three ecclesiastical Orders which were established,
and it says the Evidence in Favor of this Form of Church Government is
contained in Scripture, as well as in ancient Authors. This looks somewhat like
an Acknowledgment of a divine Appointment. But not to insist upon this. No
farther Evidence is required to prove that Episcopacy is of divine Appointment,
than that it is of apostolical Appointment. The Apostles were inspired Men, and
peculiarly conducted by the Spirit of God in the public Execution of their
Office; and for the same Reasons that their Writings are of divine Authority,
the ecclesiastical Government they settled, as to all its essential Parts, must
be of divine Authority. But that Episcopacy was of apostolical Appointment,
Bishop Hoadly thought he could demonstrate, and Chillingworth did demonstrate,
even from the Concessions of its Enemies: And Episcopacy differs as essentially
from Presbyterianism or Congregationalism or Independency, as Monarchy does
from Aristocracy or Democracy.

BUT, says Mr. Ollysse, as the Doctor quotes him, there were other Things, in
the Apostles Days, which yet for all that are not allowed to be of divine
Appointment. This is not accurately expressed; but I take the Author's Meaning
to be, that the Apostles injoined and practiced some Things, that are generally
allowed not to have, at this Day, the Authority of a divine Appointment. This
may be true: But if we may judge of others by St. Paul, whenever they gave
Directions relating to the Church that were occasional or local, and not of
general and perpetual Obligation to prevent Mistakes, they were careful to
signify it. This, we know, in particular, was the Practice of the great
"Apostle of the Gentiles;" who founded more Churches, and issued out more
ecclesiastical Injunctions, than any other Apostle. And as to Authority to
govern the Church, and to ordain, it must, in the Nature of Things, have
continued in those Hands wherein it was originally placed, and in the Hands of
such Successors, from Time to Time, as it was regularly conveyed to. There is
not the least Intimation in Scripture that the original Form of it might be
changed; nor is there any Appearance that the primitive Church thought it could
be changed.

THE Doctor informs us (in a Note, p. 21) that, after long seeking, he was so
lucky as to obtain a Sight of the OLD Ordinal. The Year in which it was printed
is not mentioned, but he looks upon it to be one of the first printed Copies,
or a Reprint from one of these, in the Reign of EDWARD VI. The Reasons assigned
for his Belief of its Antiquity are, that it is printed in the Old English
Letter, and that he finds at the Bottom of the Title Page, London, printed by
R. Barker and J. Bill, Printers to the King's most excellent Majesty. This, I
believe, will not procure him an Election into the Society of Antiquarians: For
to say nothing of the Old English Letter, which on some Occasions is used to
this very Day, Barker and Bill were Printers to CHARLES I, almost 100 Years
after the old Ordinal was first printed. But this is a Matter of no
Consequence, if they did but give a faithful Reprint from a true Copy. Well:
Upon comparing the Preface as it there stands, with that which is now prefixed
to our Ordination-Offices, he finds that it underwent a very material
Alteration in the Time of CHARLES II. He points out the Variations; but they
appear to be of little Consequence, as nothing is expressed in the latter,
which is not strongly implied in the former, and which was not as clearly
expressed both in the English and Latin Articles of 1552, and of 1562.

BUT he urges, that although none under the present Ordinal may be looked upon
as a lawful Minister without episcopal Ordination, it does not appear that this
was the Case under the old -- and that the Reviewers afterward did not think
this an indisputable Point; otherwise they would not have made an Alteration,
the principal Design of which was to put this Matter beyond all Doubt. I am
glad to find that he allows it to be the Design of the Preface to the present
Ordinal, to put this Matter beyond all Doubt: For hereby he admits that the
Church of England ever since the Restoration has maintained the apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy, contrary to his frequent Assertions. Nor has he been
able to prove that before the Restoration she held otherwise. But why then was
such an Alteration made, if the Point was already secured? A famous episcopal
Writer, whose Words, the Doctor knows, it may sometimes be prudent to use,
instead of one's own, will help us to a proper Answer to this Question. It was
because of the unhappy Necessity some learned Men imagined themselves under, to
contradict and obscure it Hoadly's Reasonableness of Conformity, p. 109.
. This Author goes on to observe, that the Desire they had that it should not
appear of great Consequence, has helped mightily to the clearing it.
Archbishop Usher may very well appear at the Head of those who have added great
Evidence to this Proposition (viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons have been in
the Church from the Apostles Days). If he differed from other episcopal Men,
the Difference may well be thought verbal and not real; if we consider the
Service he has done to Episcopacy, in Opposition to the Presbyterians. Bishop
Pearson and others followed. Dr. Hammond's Dissertations against Blondel (says
Mr. Chillingworth who uses not to speak unreasonably) never were answered, and
never will. As to what the Doctor says farther in this Note, that under the old
Ordinal, those were admitted to officiate as Ministers in the Church of
England, who were not episcopally ordained; it will be sufficient here to refer
the Reader to the Appeal defended, p. 42, where this Point is properly stated
and explained; to which the Doctor, for a very good Reason, has thought proper
not to say a Word in Reply.

IN another Note, p. 24, (for I must pick up Matters in the Order wherein I
find them) he tells us, that the upper House of Convocation, no longer [ago]
than [in] 1702, appear to have been of Opinion, that Episcopacy, upon the
Footing of DIVINE APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION, was not the Doctrine of the Church
of England, notwithstanding all that is said in the Preface to the Ordinal. For
this he brings no other Proof, than what Dr. Calamy represents to have passed
in an Altercation between the two Houses of Convocation; wherein, the lower
House, representing that they had been SCANDALOUSLY represented, by the upper
House, as Favorers of Presbytery, in Opposition to Episcopacy, make a formal
Declaration, that they acknowledged the Order of Bishops, as superior to
Presbyters, to be of DIVINE APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION; and afterward complain,
that, on this Account, they were accused of ascribing TOO MUCH to Episcopacy.
But as I can obtain no particular Account of that Affair, upon which I can
depend, I must content myself with observing, in a general Way, that this
Representation is incredible in itself, both from what has been already said,
and from its being well known that the Majority of those, who must have been
Members of the upper House at that Time, fully believed the apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy -- as appears from their Writings. Yet were the Case
exactly as it is here represented, we know that Words, used in the Warmth of
Passion, are no Proof of the real Sentiments of those that utter them. I hope
every Expression that has escaped the Doctor, during the Heat of the present
Controversy is not to be considered as an Evidence of his real Opinion.

AS he advances in the Dispute, he waxes stouter and more vigorous in his
Opposition to Episcopacy. For, in p. 26, he has the Courage to affirm, that the
Book of Ordination, the Preface to which we have been considering, is formed
upon the Supposition, that Presbyters have the Power of Ordination in common
with Bishops; nor can it in any other View be made consistent with itself. To
this I will reply, in the Words of the celebrated Hooker: With us, even at this
Day, Presbyters are licensed to do as much as that Council (the 4th of
Carthage) speaks of, if any be present. Yet will not any Man thereby
conclude, that in this Church others than Bishops are allowed to ordain. The
Association of Presbyters is no sufficient Proof that the Power of Ordination
is in them; but rather, that it never was in them we may hereby understand; for
that no Man is able to show either Deacon or Presbyter ordained by Presbyters
only, and his Ordination accounted lawful in any ancient Part of the Church
Ecclesiastical Polity, Lib. vii. Cap. vi.
. This may serve, at present, as a general Answer to the Doctor's general
Assertion. But we shall soon come to Particulars. For he intends to dilate upon
the Matter, as it is a Thing that has not been commonly considered, by giving a
large Extract from Mr. Ferdinand Shaw's Judgment of the Church of England. He
chooses to exhibit this Extract the rather, because it is taken from a Pamphlet
he lately received from the other Side [of] the Atlantic, and [which] is,
perhaps the ONLY ONE in America; meaning the only Copy of that Pamphlet, for
surely he must know that there are other Pamphlets in America.

BUT previously to this Dilatation, in Answer to my desiring him to try the
Experiment, whether he could 'honestly and consistently' declare his own
Sentiments, concerning Episcopacy, in the Words of the Preface to the Ordinal,
he says that he has tried it, and finds that he can; i. e. as we are to
understand him, with the Allowance only of 'Explanations' more natural, and
'Interpretations' less softening than Ninety-Nine in a Hundred (meaning, of
those that do subscribe) are obliged to recur to, before they can, if they pay
any Regard to Conscience, subscribe to the 39 Articles, etc. The Justice and
Propriety, are equal to the Charity, of this Reflection. It is no Proof that he
can subscribe to the Words of the Preface 'honestly and consistently,' that he
can do so with less Prevarication than is practiced by many others, on certain
Occasions. Nor do Ninety-Nine in a Hundred prevaricate, in subscribing to the
Articles of the Church: So far from it, that none, whom he means to asperse,
have Occasion to prevaricate at all. The Church of England is not, nor was it
ever, founded upon Calvinistical Principles, as its Enemies take Pleasure in
asserting: -- Unless Calvinism admits, of a Possibility of falling from Grace,
as in Art. xvi -- of conditional Promises, as in Art. xvii -- and of universal
Redemption by Christ, as in Art. xxxi. It is not my Business now to undertake
the Proof of this Point; but those that desire to see it proved, in a full and
satisfactory Manner, may have Recourse to the proper Authors; particularly, to
Bishop Montague's Appello Caesarem -- Dr. Heylin's History of the
quinquarticular Controversy -- Bishop Bull's Apologia pro Harmonia -- Dr.
Waterland 's Supplement to the Case of Arian Subscriptions -- An Apology for
the Church of England, printed in 1732 -- Three Letters to the Author of the
Confessional -- and Dr. Nowel 's Answer to Pietas Oxoniensis.

I COME now to attend upon Mr. Ferdinand Shaw. He affirms that in the old
Ordinal, the Form of committing to Bishops and Presbyters their Office and
Work, made no Distinction at all in the Order, to which they were admitted. And
again: Whatever spiritual Powers the one had given them, to the other were
given the same. Had Bishops the Power of Ordination committed to them, so had
Presbyters too, who received the same Commission, by the same Solemnity, in
Words of the same Importance, and therefore must be invested with the same
divine Office. Such an Assertion must be amazing, to any one that has seen the
old Ordinal, or that has any Acquaintance with our ecclesiastical History. This
indeed was objected by the Papists, in the Reign of CHARLES II, which, together
with other false and groundless Assertions, occasioned Bishop Burnet, then a
private Clergyman, to write his Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of
England. The popish Writers, especially such of them as are singled out for
Disputants, have a Way of their own, and professedly make no Conscience of
saying any Thing that has a Tendency to advance their Cause. But Mr. Shaw, I
hope, is a Protestant; and Protestants have no Right, contrary to their
Profession and Principles, to practice this Art. However, a brief Examination
of what is here advanced, may be expected by the Reader.

IF by the Form of committing to Bishops and Presbyters their Office and Work,
this Writer means the Offices used at their respective Ordinations, he grossly
misrepresents them. For the Titles of the two Offices, the Offices themselves
in almost all their Parts, and the whole Face and Appearance of them, are
widely different; and they clearly point out and distinguish a Difference of
Order. In the Prayer to be used at the End of the Litany, at the Ordination of
Priests, God is said to have appointed diverse ( i. e. more than Two) Orders of
Ministers in the Church. How many, and what, these diverse Orders are, is
declared in the general Preface. When a Person presents himself for Ordination
according to the Form of the second Office, he knows that he can be made by it
no more than a Presbyter. He is asked: Will you reverently obey your Ordinary,
and other chief Ministers unto whom the Government and Charge is committed over
you, following with a glad Mind and Will their godly Admonitions, and
submitting yourself to their godly Judgments? And he answers: I will do so, the
Lord being my Helper. And although the Word Order, as it now stands in the new
Ordinal, is not always to be found in the corresponding Places of the old; yet
it is a Matter of no Consequence, as other Words, such as Ministry and Office,
are used in an equivalent Sense. Thus, when the Archdeacon says to the Bishop,
I present unto you these Persons present to be admitted to the Order of
Priesthood, the Bishop, immediately addressing the People, says: these be they
whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this Day into the holy Office of
Priesthood; and before the Sentence is concluded, he calls it the "holy
Ministry," and, in another Place, "the Ministry of the Priesthood."

IF it be the Meaning of this Writer, that those particular Words in the
Office, by which the Authority is more immediately conveyed, make no
Distinction in the Order, it is also a Misrepresentation. A Distinction
actually is made, and as much as is necessary, even on the Principles of the
strictest Episcopalians. The Words at the Ordination of Priests are; Receive
the holy Ghost: Whose Sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven: And be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the Word of God and his holy Sacraments; in the Name,
etc. The Bishop, then delivering a Bible, says: Take thou Authority to preach
the Word of God, and to administer the holy Sacraments in this Congregation,
where thou shall be appointed. But in the Ordination of a Bishop, the Words are
these: Take the Holy Ghost: And remember thou stir up the Grace of God which is
in thee, by Imposition of Hands; for God has not given us the Spirit of Fear,
but of Power, and Love and Soberness. Then delivering to him the Bible, the
Archbishop charges him Give Heed unto Reading, etc. Be to the Flock of Christ a
Shepherd, not a Wolf: Feed them, devour them not; hold up the weak, heal the
sick, bind together the broken, bring again the outcasts, seek the lost; be so
merciful that you be not too remiss: So minister Discipline, that you forget
not Mercy, that when the Shepherd shall come, you may receive the immarcessible
Crown of Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Who does not here see a very
wide and material Difference? The Words, receive, or take, the Holy Ghost, are
indeed the same in both Offices; they are general, and make no Distinction. But
in the Ordination of Presbyters, a Distinction, of their Office from that of
Bishops, immediately follows. They are declared to have, and the Declaration
implies that they only have, in Virtue of that Ordination, the Power of
absolving Penitents, and of dispensing the Word and Sacraments, and that in
such Congregations only as they should be appointed to. Here is not the least
Appearance of episcopal Powers, nor of any Authority which is not at this Day
given, by the Church of England, to Presbyters. But in the Ordination of
Bishops, there is none of this Restraint; the Words are left general, as they
were used by Christ in ordaining his Apostles; and all the ordinary Authority,
which they were originally intended to express, is conveyed by them without
Diminution. So that in one Case, there is only a limited Commission given; but
in the other, a Commission without any Restriction or Limitation, and
consequently extending to all ecclesiastical Offices, which, in Fact, is also
intended.

FOR it may be added, that were the Words exactly the same in both Cases,
provided they were general, as in the original Commission given to the
Apostles; it would not follow, that no farther Powers were given in the
Ordination of a Bishop, than in that of a Presbyter. For a new Ordination
necessarily supposes an Intention to convey some new Powers. Bishop Burnet
justly argues on the Subject, in the following Manner: It is to be considered,
that ecclesiastical Orders being from the Influence and Operation of the Holy
Ghost, which being one, yet has different Operations for the different
Administrations; therefore the concomitant Actions, Words and Circumstances
must show, for which Administration the Holy Ghost is grayed for, since that
general Prayer is made for all; but the Functions being different, the same
Holy Ghost works differently in them all. Therefore it is plain from the
Practice of our Savior, that there is no Need of expressing in the very Words
of Ordination, what Power is thereby given, since our Savior did not express
it, but what he said both before and after, did determine the Sense of those
general Words to the apostolical Function. The whole Office of consecrating
Bishops (for Instance) shows very formally and expressly, what Power is given
in these (general) Words. Now though the Writers of the Church of Rome, would
place the Form of Consecration in some imperative Words; yet we see no Reason
for that, but the Complex of the whole Office is that which is chiefly to be
considered, and must determine the Sense of those Words. So that a Priest being
presented to be made a Bishop, the King's Mandate being read for that Effect,
he swearing canonical Obedience as Bishop Elect, Prayers being put up for him
as such, together with other Circumstances which make it plain what they are
about; those general Words are by these qualified and restrained to that Sense
Burnet's Vindication of the Ordination, etc. p. 64.
.

HERE, in a Note, the Doctor steps in with his old Reprint, and endeavors to
prove from it that Bishops and Presbyters were esteemed one and the same Order,
by the Compilers of that Ordinal. For it is worthy of special Remark, says he,
that previous (meaning previously) to the Ordination of Priests, Acts xx. from
the 19 th to the 24 th Verse (he should have said, from the 17th to the 35th
inclusive) was appointed to be read for the Epistle; which must be esteemed
highly impertinent, if they were not, as EPISCOPOI to RULE (POIMANEIN) as well
as feed the Church of God. That Portion of Scripture contains an Account of St.
Paul's Interview with the Elders from Ephesus; at which he informs them in what
Manner he had conducted himself in the Execution of the apostolical Office,
gives them a solemn Charge to attend to the Duties of their Ministry, and
concludes with an affectionate Leave and Benediction. Such an Example, and such
an Exhortation, might, I conceive, very properly be recommended to the careful
Consideration of every Candidate for the Orders, either of a Bishop, or a
Priest, or even of a Deacon. St. Paul sometimes proposes his own Example as a
Pattern for Christians in common; and it may, with peculiar Propriety, be
proposed for the Imitation of Clergymen. This is hinted, on the Supposition
that the Elders from Ephesus were possessed of those Powers, which are
appropriated to Bishops. But there is no Certainty that they were more than
Presbyters. Many learned Men, and Hooker and Hoadly among others, are clear in
the Opinion, that the Elders abovementioned were nothing more: And this may
have been the Opinion of the Compilers of the Ordinal.

THE Door farther urges, that Matt. xxviii. 18, 19, 20. or else John xx. 19 --
24, is appointed for the Gospel; both which Passages of Scripture contain the
highest Commission of Gospel-Officers. But if the Commission for the
subordinate Degrees of ecclesiastical Officers is included in this general
Commission to the Apostles, and if they can produce no other original
Commission than is contained in this; then, these Passages of Scripture might,
with no Inconsistency, be appointed to be read at the Ordination of Presbyters.
And the Reviewers of the old Ordinal, after the Restoration, might have removed
them into the Office for the Ordination of Bishops, not because they believed
them to be not proper to be used at the Ordination of Priests, but, from an
Opinion that they were more proper at the Consecration of Bishops.

In another Note, p. 28, the Doctor farther argues to the same Purpose, from
the Additions in the new Ordinal. At the Ordination of Priests, after the
Words, "receive the Holy Ghost," these Words are added, FOR THE OFFICE AND WORK
OF A PRIEST; -- and, at the Consecration of Bishops, after the like Words,
these Words are added, FOR THE OFFICE AND WORK OF A BISHOP. By this he seems to
think, that, according to the old Ordinal, Bishops were not ordained for the
Office and Work of Bishops, nor Priests for that of Priests, because those
particular Words were not used on the Occasion. But with the same Force and
Propriety he might have argued, that the Apostles were not commissioned, by our
blessed Savior, for the Office and Work of Apostles, because these Words are
not found in the Commission. But it was sufficient, that the Compilers of the
old Ordinal declared, in the Front of it, their Acknowledgment and Belief of
three distinct Orders in the Church -- that they composed a particular and
distinct Office for the Ordination of each Order -- that there could be no
Dispute to which of these Orders, any particular Person, by his Ordination, was
admitted, nor what were the peculiar Duties of his Office -- and that all this
was approved of, and consented to, by the Bishops and Clergy, and established
by the King and Parliament. After all, it is not denied that the Alterations
and Amendments, introduced into the new Ordinal, were a real Improvement; and
particularly, as Words are therein used with greater Precision.

THE Doctor has another Note in the like Strain, in p. 29; but after what has
been said in Answer to the preceding, it would be a needless Expense of Time,
Paper and Patience, to make a particuar Reply to it.

I NOW return to Mr. Shaw. His Design in the remainder of this Extract,
extending from p. 29 to 35, is no less than to prove, that the Church of
England at this Day allows Presbyters to have the Power of Ordination, as
inherently and essentially as Bishops themselves. The Attempt is arduous and
romantic, and should it appear that he has miscarried in the Execution, still
it may be said of him, as was said of a notable Adventurer before him, --
magnis tamen excidit Ausis.

THAT the Church of England allows to Presbyters the Power of ordaining, he
endeavors to prove, in the first Place, from the Rubric in the Office for the
Ordination of Priests, which requires that the Bishop with the PRIESTS present
shall lay their Hands severally upon the Head of every one that receives the
Order of Priesthood. This Rubric, as well as every other Rule or Injunction,
ought to be interpreted according to the Sense in which it is established by
Authority, if that Sense can be certainly known. But could it be the Intention
of the Church in this Rubric, to contradict the whole Tenor of the Ordinal, and
every Declaration and Intimation that she had made and given, relating to the
Subject? Was there ever an episcopal Church, in any Age, that allowed the Power
of Ordination to be in any other Hands, than of Bishops? Was it the Opinion of
those who were commissioned to review the old Ordinal, and frame the new one,
or of any Individual in that Commission, that all the Presbyters in the
Kingdom, convened in one Body, could effectually ordain a single Presbyter? --
Or, that any Bishop in the Kingdom had not, as essential to his Office, the
full Power of Ordination in himself? If this was not the Opinion of those
Reviewers, nor of the Governors of the Church, nor of the civil Authority, at
that Time; we may be certain that the Rubric means no such Thing, and is an
Evidence of no such Thing, as it is alleged to prove. It requires indeed that
the Bishop shall admit the Priests, that are present, to join with him in the
Imposition of Hands; but it does not say, nor give the least Intimation, that
it is with a View of rendering the Ordination more valid and complete, than it
would have been by the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands only. Every Imposition
of Hands is not with a Design to ordain; and there is the highest Evidence,
that, in this Case, Ordination is not the Design of the Church in general, nor
of the Bishop that officiates, nor of the Presbyters themselves who practice
this Rite. If the Presbyter convey any spiritual Authority, it is without their
own Knowledge and Intention, and by a barely mechanical Operation.

THE Imposition of the Hands of Presbyters, in Conjunction with those of the
Bishop, has been practiced in every Age of the Church, in a greater or less
Degree; but it was never thought to be any Part, much less an essential Part,
of Ordination, as this Writer calls it. The Practice was common and almost
universal, in the fourth Century. A Canon of the 4th Council of Carthage, is
thus worded: Presbyter cum ordinatur, etc. i. e. when a Presbyter is ordained,
while the Bishop pronounces the Blessing, and lays his Hand upon his Head, all
the Presbyters that are present shall lay their Hands, by the Bishop's Hand,
upon his Head also. At that Time flourished St. Jerome, who was thoroughly
acquainted with the Customs of the Church, and knew that the Imposition of the
Hands of Presbyters, at the Ordination of a Fellow-Presbyter, was the daily
Practice. But did he believe that the Power of Ordination, or any Part of that
Power, was exercised by Presbyters? So far from it, that in his famous Epistle
to Evagrius, wherein he endeavors to exalt their Order as high as possible, he
confesses, that, from the Acts or Offices which they perform in common with
Bishops, Ordination must be excepted. If therefore the Imposition of the Hands
of Presbyters in St. Jerome's Time, was no Proof of their having Power to
ordain, it can be no Proof now See the Apostolical Constitutions, Lib. viii.
Cap. 28, where it is said of a Presbyter: Benedictionem recipit ab Episcopo, et
a Compresbytero; eamque pariter Compresbytero dat; Manus imponit, NON ORDINAT.
.

THIS Writer insists upon it, that the Imposition of the Hands of Presbyters,
in this Case, must be for the Purpose of Ordination; because it cannot be
pretended that it does only signify their witnessing to, or approbating, the
Thing done. But why not witnessing? This, he says, might as well be done by the
Laity who are present, or the Deacons All that are present are undoubtedly
Witnesses of the Transaction, but in some Cases chosen Witnesses may be thought
proper, as is appointed in the Office of Baptism for Adults, although the whole
Congregation are Witnesses at the same Time. Or, why not approbating? Is there
any Impropriety in calling upon the Clergy that are present, to signify their
Consent to, and Approbation of, the Ordination of a particular Person to that
sacred Office, with which they have been invested themselves? And may not the
Imposition of Hands, in the Manner required, be the established Sign of it? It
is true, the Church has not said that this is the Intention; nor certainly has
it said that Ordination is the Intention. And where no explicit Declarations
are made by the Church of its Views and intentions, every Person is left to
judge of them by the Evidence he can collect.

ANOTHER Argument that Presbyters in the Church of England have ordaining
Powers, is founded by this Writer on the Use of the Word OUR, in the Act of
Ordination, where the Bishop says: Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and
Work of a Priest in the Church of God, now committed unto thee by the
Imposition of OUR, Hands. To this a very brief Answer is sufficient. There are
Instances of the like Use of the same Word in our public Offices, which if they
will not prove what it positively does mean, will however enable us to
determine what it does not mean. At the Baptism of Infants, the officiating
Clergyman prays: Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by OUR Office
and Ministry, etc: -- And at the Baptism of Adults: Grant that they being
dedicated to thee by OUR Office and Ministry, etc. Now in these Places, the
Word OUR certainly does not mean, that those who are present assist in the
Administration of Baptism, or that this Ordinance is not administered by the
Priest only; And therefore we may depend upon it, that at the Ordination of a
Presbyter, it does not mean, that the Ordination is not performed by the Bishop
only. What the Word actually does mean, is not my Business here to determine.

I HAVE now done with Mr. Shaw; having shown the Weakness of his Arguments, and
having answered or obviated all that he or the Doctor says in Support of them.
Indeed I might have taken Notice, that both of them seem to proceed on the
Supposition, that whatever is ordered by Authority, is injoined as equally
necessary or important. According to this Mode of thinking, the Church of
England makes wearing a Surplice as necessary as the public Service; and the
Circumstance of kneeling at the Communion to be as essential, as the great Duty
of receiving that holy Sacrament. And then, to be sure, the Imposition of the
Hands of Presbyters at the Ordination of a Priest, must be as essential to the
Validity of the Performance, as the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands, since
both are ordered in the same Rubric. But such an absurd Way of Reasoning
deserves not a formal Refutation; and I am under some Apprehension that I may
be thought, by the sensible Reader, to have been already too particular in
replying to Things of this Nature. I shall therefore not stop a Moment to make
any Reflections upon such a gross Misrepresentation of the Ordinal, and of the
Church of England; but proceed immediately to other Matters.

IN his Answer to the Appeal, the Doctor urged, that if the Preface to the
Ordinal were explained by what appears to have been the Sentiments of those
that compiled it, it would not prove that the Church of England was episcopal,
at that Time, in the Sense of the Appeal. It was replied, that the Sense of any
Church must be taken from her public Offices and Declarations, and not from the
known or supposed Sentiments of Individuals. It was farther observed, that as
to the Compilers of the English Ordinal, it did not appear that their private
Sentiments were different from what they publicly expressed; but, on the other
Hand, that there was sufficient Evidence to convince the impartial, that the
principal Persons employed in that Service believed the divine, or apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy. In Order to show this, I entered into a particular
Examination of the Subject, and took proper Notice of all that Dr. Chauncy had
alleged, in Support of the contrary. I considered the Evidence contained in
the INSTITUTION, and ERUDITION, of a Christian Man, composed and published
under the Direction of Archbishop CRANMER, in the Reign of HENRY VIII, as far
as I could collect it from Collier's Abstract, and from other Accounts.

ON this Examination, the INSTITUTION appeared favorable to the Doctrine of
Episcopacy; and a Passage was produced, wherein, among other Things, it is
said, that Bishops are authorized by our Savior to continue the Succession,
and perpetuate the HIERARCHY. The Doctor indeed had quoted Dr. Calamy's
Quotation, from the INSTITUTION and ERUDITION of the following Sentence:
Priests and Bishops by Gods Law are one and the same; and the Power of
Ordination and Excommunication belongs equally to them both. These two
Sentences are contradictory; and the true Way of settling the Point, whether
they are fairly extracted or not, would be to have Recourse to the Books
themselves, which is not in my Power. But, from Collier's Account, I suspect
there is some Mistake made, either by Dr. Calamy or Dr. Chauncy, and that if
their Quotation is made fairly, it is from the ERUDITION only, and not from the
INSTITUTION. If the Doctor will prove that I am mistaken, and that the Sentence
quoted is contained in the INSTITUTION, I will allow that it greatly weakens
the Evidence I produced from it on the other Side, as, on that Supposition, he
argues justly, in p. 37. But since I have as high an Opinion of Collier's
Honesty, as he has of Calamy's, he must not expect me to give up the Testimony
of my Author, because it is contradicted by his. But if it should be found on
the other Hand, that the Doctor's Quotation, from Calamy, is not fairly made
from the INSTITUTION; and mine, from Collier, or the Substance of it, is: Then
my Argument is conclusive, and all that he says in Reply to it falls of Course.

AS to the ERUDITION, I allowed that it had, in Collier's Abstract, such a
doubtful Appearance, that nothing could be justly concluded from it, but that
the Principles of the Reformers were, at this Time, with Regard to some Points,
in an unsettled, fluctuating State. It contained Passages, if not directly
contradictory, yet which I knew not how to reconcile, to one another. In one
Place it says: the Scripture speaks expressly of no more than the two Orders of
Priests and Deacons. And yet, in other Places, according to Collier, that the
two Orders (of Bishops and Priests) were distinct and subordinate, is plain
from this ERUDITION. But then, as was observed farther, this Book was drawn up
only by a Committee appointed by the King, and did not express the general
Sense of the Church as the INSTITUTION did, which was formally consented to by
both Houses of Convocation. The Doctor says, p. 39, there is no Difficulty in
reconciling the Passages I had quoted. For if, as these Reformers say, the
Scripture makes mention of only the two orders of Priests and Deacons, Bishops
cannot in their Opinion be a distinct Order from Priests; and consequently,
what is ascribed to the Bishop, is ascribed to an Officer of the same Rank with
Priests. On this Supposition, the Conclusion indeed is just. But if, as Collier
asserts, who knew more of the Matter than either of us, it is plain from this
ERUDITION, that the two Orders are distinct and subordinate; I fancy it will
puzzle a Man, even of the Doctor's Dexterity, to reconcile all the Parts of
that Book, or so much as the Passages quoted.

AFTER all, the Sentiments of the Bishops and Clergy at this Period, were not
considered as of any great Consequence in this Dispute. The INSTITUTION was
published in 1537, and the ERUDITION in 1540, for temporary Use, while the
Nation was but just emerging from Popery, and before it had Time to purge
itself from the old Leaven See the Extracts from Bramhall and Burnet, in the
Appeal Defended, p. 25.
. To perform so great a Work properly, required much Time and Caution. Of this,
Cranmer and his Associates were duly sensible; and, for the Honor of the
English Reformation, they proceeded with much greater Coolness and
Deliberation, than the Reformers in any other Country had done. And the Method
they pursued was, to consider distinctly one Doctrine after another, with the
closest Attention, until the whole System should be examined, and placed on the
sure Basis of Scripture Authority, as was observed in my Defense. As a Proof of
this, the several Questions given out to the most eminent Divines for their
Examination and Decision, were pointed out. For it was at this Time, and not
Ten Years afterward, in the Reign of EDWARD VI, as Dr. Chauncy, following his
blind Guide the IRENICUM, asserts, that these Questions were given out for
Discussion, as is plain from Bishop Burnet The Appeal defended, p. 24.
, with whom Strype agrees Memorials of Cranmer, p. 78.
. To this he replies, p. 40, If this is plain from Bishop Burnet, he is the
blind Guide to the Doctor, and not the Irenicum to me. For it is observable,
these Questions with the Resolutions of them are published by Bishop Burnet ex.
M. S. S. D. Stillingfleet, as his own Words are.

IT is a Matter of great Importance in this Dispute, to settle the Time when
these Questions were given out and answered. Bishop Burnet says it was in 1540;
the Author of the Irenicum, that it was long afterward in the Reign of EDWARD
VI. One of them must be wrong, and the Question is, which of them is the blind
Guide. It ought not to be supposed that either of them intended to deceive his
Readers; but one of them must have been deceived himself. Which then, was most
likely to have made the Mistake?

AND here it deserves Notice, that Stillingfleet wrote his Irenicum with
evident Haste and Precipitation, and under the Influence of a Zeal bordering
upon Impetuosity. The Doctor knows, that Writers in these Circumstances are
liable even to mistake Facts; and Dates are more easily mistaken by them,
especially when they appear not to affect the chief Object in View. Thus the
Author of the Irenicum, when he became cooler, and took a Retrospect of his
Performance, heartily confessed, that it contained many Passages that showed
his Youth, and want of Attention.

BUT the History of the Reformation was the Work of Time, written with
Composure and Caution. In adjusting the materials for his History, which
chiefly consisted of original Manuscripts, the Author was obliged carefully to
attend to the Circumstance of Dates. In this Way he became so minutely
acquainted with the Progress of the Reformation, that, from the very Nature and
Words of those Questions and Answers, he must have been able to arrange them in
their proper Place, even if the Date had been omitted. And what renders his
Account the more credible is, that he assigns a special Reason for issuing out
the Questions, viz. That the Committee, which was appointed to review and
correct the Institution, might be able to do it to better Purpose. For he
represents them to have been given out during the Course of that Work, and when
the Part relating to the Doctrine of the Seven Sacraments, as they were then
called, came under Consideration.

BUT notwithstanding these obvious Remarks in Favor of the History, the Doctor
is positive that Stillingfleet must have been right, and Burnet wrong, because
the latter made Use of the Manuscripts of the former. It is strange, that a Man
of Sense can think this has any Appearance of Reasoning. If Burnet had
transcribed from the Irenicum, his Date must have been corrected by it; but to
infer, that, because he consulted the same Manuscripts that the Author of the
Irenicum had consulted, THEREFORE his History must be corrected by the
Irenicum, in the Instance before us, is a Specimen of new Logic, and curious it
is. For my Part, I think it much more reasonable to conclude, that the
Irenicum, in this Particular, should be corrected by the History; because the
Historian consulted the same Manuscripts, and yet altered the controverted Date
as published in the Irenicum; which he would not have done without sufficient
Reason while the Author, who was his intimate Friend, was living, and might
contradict him if he could. But more direct Evidence shall be produced
presently.

LET us at present attend to the Doctor. Nay, says he, Bishop Burnet himself
was of the same Mind, viz. That the Questions and Answers abovementioned passed
in the Reign of EDWARD VI: And to prove it, he transcribes from him, Words
which make it evident that his own Assertion is false. Let the Reader see with
his own Eyes, and wonder! I find, says the Historian, another Instance like
this, in the Reformation that was farther carried on in the succeeding Reign of
EDWARD VI; of many Bishops and Divines giving in their Opinions under their
Hands, upon some Heads then examined and changed The History of the
Reformation, Vol. I. p. 289.
. The Author is here evidently speaking of the very Questions and Answers under
Consideration, a Copy of which he inserts in his Appendix to the first Volume
of his History, and part of which had been published in the Irenicum. He says
that they were given out at the Time when the ERUDITION was preparing. He
speaks of such a careful Method of proceeding, as an Evidence of the great
Prudence used in the English Reformation. He takes notice indeed, that there
was another Instance of the like Care in the next Reign. But the Papers that
passed, in like Manner, in the next Reign, are so far from being the same with
those under Consideration, that here is not the least Intimation that they
related to the same Subjects; it being only said, that the Bishops and Divines
at that Time, gave in their Opinions upon some Heads, then examined and
changed. It would have been very natural for him to have said, the same Heads,
unless they were different.

WHEN he comes to the Time, to which he refers, in the Reign of King EDWARD, he
says: This Winter (1548) there was a Committee of selected Bishops and Divines
appointed for examining all the Offices of the Church, and for reforming them.
-- The Thing they first examined was the Sacrament of the Eucharist; which
being the chief Symbol of Christian Communion, was thought to deserve their
chief Care. And here they managed their Enquiries in the same Manner that was
used in the former Reign; in which when any Thing was considered in Order to a
Change, it was put into several Queries, to which every one in Commission was
to give his Answer in writing. It is no Wonder if the Confusions, that followed
in Queen Mary's Reign, have deprived us of most of these Papers; yet there is
one Set of them preserved, relating (N. B.) to some Questions about the Priests
single communicating History of the Reformation, Vol. II. p. 61.
. What was naturally to be infered from the former Passage, is fully expressed
in this. The Historian says plainly, that the Questions given out in the Reign
of King EDWARD, and to which he had refered in his former Volume, related to
the Eucharist, as it was thought at that Time "to deserve the chief Care".
HERE, says he, i. e. in examining the Doctrine of the Eucharist, they proceeded
in the same Manner that was used in the former Reign. He does not intimate that
the Queries now given out related to any other Subject, than that of the
Eucharist; so far from it, that the Words, and the whole Structure of the
Passage, necessarily imply that they did not. He moreover says, that most of
the Papers that passed on that Occasion, are lost; however, that one Set of
them has been preserved, a Copy of which he publishes in the Appendix to his
second Volume. The Questions, in this only Set of Papers remaining, he tells
us, related to the Priests single communicating; and upon Inspection, there is
not one of them that appears to have any more Reference to the Doctrine of
Episcopacy, than to that of the Copernican System. It is now as clear as the
Meridian Sun in an unclouded Sky, that Bishop Burnet himself was NOT of the
same Mind with my Opponent, but affirmed and proved the contrary -- that, with
Regard to the Date in Question, the Irenicum was the blind Guide -- and that
the Doctor is blinder still, who out-faces a much brighter Evidence than was
attended to by the Author of the Irenicum. It is a more difficult Task than
most Readers imagine, to deal with an Adversary that can misrepresent Matters,
at this Rate. To speak plainly of such Conduct, has the Appearance of Abuse and
Scurrility, which disgrace any Writer; and yet, on some Occasions, not to speak
plainly, is an Injury to the Cause of Truth, and Injustice to the Public. The
Author of this farther Defense is thus unluckily situated. He is sensible of
the Duty he owes to Truth, and to the Public; at the same Time, he wishes not
to be wanting in that Charity, which hops all Things, endures all Things. It
pains him to entertain a hard Thought, or to speak a harsh Word, of any Man;
and yet he sometimes finds both to be unavoidable, when thinking and speaking
of a Man, who is in high Estimation with many People, and whose Character he
greatly respected, at the Commencement of this Controversy. In this critical
Situation, as he knows the great Danger of acting improperly, he will be upon
his Guard; and he hopes to meet with that Candor, which is not extreme to mark
what, in such Circumstances, may be done amiss.


HAVING settled the Date of the Questions and Answers aforesaid, and fixed it
to 1540, I must again remind the Reader, that it was about Ten Years before the
Offices for Ordination were composed, and before Cranmer appears to have
settled his ecclesiastical Principles. It is therefore no wonder that, as
Bishop Burnet observes, in Cranmer's Paper, some singular Opinions of his about
ecclesiastical Offices will be found. But it deserves special Notice, that as
this Historian goes on to inform us, afterward he changed his Opinion. For he
subscribed the Book that was soon after set out [ the ERUDITION] which is, (the
very thing that Collier affirmed of it) directly contrary to those Opinions set
down in these Papers Hist. Ref. Vol. I, p. 289.
.

AS a farther Proof that Cranmer altered his Opinion soon afterward, it was
alleged, on the Authority of Doctor Durel, that he subscribed to the Two
Opinions of Dr. Leighton, in these very Papers, that were favorable to
Episcopacy. That Author says, that upon examining the original Manuscript, he
found Th. Cantuariensis subscribed to both; which is omitted, either
negligently or unaccountably, in Bishop Burnet's Copy. The Doctor objects to
the Evidence of Durel, which, says he, p. 42, is no Evidence at all, if Mr.
Boyse may be believed, who speaks of him as an Author too notorious for his
many Falsehoods and mistakes in this Kind to be depended on. But some have
given the same Character of Mr. Boyse himself. Be that as it may, Dr. Durel's
Character is not to be taken from Mr. Boyse, nor from any other Writer against
Episcopacy. He had said and done too much in Favor of it, to expect fair
Treatment from such as oppose it. He had shown that this Form of Government was
held in high Veneration by all the reformed Churches abroad; that the Church of
England was greatly commended and honored by them for establishing it; and
that the English Dissenters were utterly condemned by them for disobeying and
rejecting it. For this he was treated, in his Life Time, with the grossest
Scurrility by Hickman, and plentifully abused by Dr. du Moulin; but it ought
not to be forgotten that the latter of these Writers had the Grace to repent of
this Conduct, and retract it, in his "LAST WORDS." Some People since have
copied his Abuse, but not his Repentance. Durel was well known in almost all
the reformed Churches in Europe. In some of them he received Preferment, and
might have received it in others; and the many Letters still extant, written to
him by the most eminent foreign Protestants of his Time, demonstrate that his
Reputation was great, and his Character respectable. Having thus shown the
Credibility of this Witness, it is not doubted but the candid will admit, upon
his positive Testimony, that the two Opinions of Dr. Leighton were actually
consented to by Cranmer, and signed Th. Cantuariensis; notwithstanding the
negative Evidence of Bishop Burnet.

FROM that Time, viz. 1540, I find in this great Reformer no Fluctuation of
Principles; but many Proofs appear of his settled and steady Belief, that
Bishops are superior to Presbyters, by apostolical Institution Appeal defended,
p. 30.
. Here Reference was particularly made to the Catechism he published in 1548,
in which, Bishop Burnet who had seen it says, he fully owns the divine
Institution of Bishops. To this the Doctor replies. p. 46; Could a Sight of
this Catechism be obtained, it is PROBABLE it might be in our Power to refute
what it here said from Bishop Burnet. We see, that, however firmly the Doctor
relies upon the Bishop's negative Evidence, when in his Favor, he will allow
but little Weight to his positive Evidence, when it makes against him; and that
he offers his own bare groundless Supposition, as sufficient to confute it.

I AM not able to obtain a Sight of that Catechism, any more than the Doctor.
It is extremely scarce at this Day; however, some Copies are extant, and there
is one, in particular, in the Archbishop's Library at Lambeth. A Gentleman of
eminent Integrity, and whose literary Fame is well known both at home and
abroad, writes, in a Letter dated Feb. 16, 1770, that he had read this Copy
more than once, and had made Extracts from it, among which he finds the
following. First, it is necessary to our Salvation to have Preachers and
Ministers of God's Word to instruct us in the true Faith and Knowledge of God.
Secondly, that Preachers must not assume this Honor to themselves, but must be
ordained and appointed to this Office. For as it is impossible to be saved
without Faith, and we cannot believe without being taught of others, so
Teachers, except they be sent, cannot fruitfully teach. For the Seed of God's
Word does never bring forth Fruit unless the Lord of the Harvest do give
Increase, and by his Holy Spirit work with the Sower: but God does not work
with the Preacher whom he has not sent. -- To know who are sent, you are to
understand that when our Lord Jesus Christ began to preach, he called and chose
his 12 Apostles; and afterward besides these Twelve, he sent forth Three Score
and Ten Disciples and gave them Authority to preach the Gospel. And a little
before his Death and Passion he made his Prayer to his heavenly Father for
them, and for all those who should believe through their preaching. John xvii.
-- And after Christ's Ascension, the Apostles gave Authority to other holy Men
to minister God's Word. Where they found Men fit to preach God's Word they laid
their Hands upon them and gave them the Holy Ghost as they themselves received
the same Holy Ghost of Christ to execute this Office. And they that were so
ordained were indeed, and also were called the Ministers of God as the Apostles
themselves were. And thus the Ministration of God's Word (which our Lord Jesus
Christ himself did first institute) was derived from the Apostles Time to our
Days. And this was the Consecration, Orders and Unction of the Apostles,
whereby they at the Beginning made Bishops and Priests, and this shall continue
in the Church to the World's End.

THIS Passage, which is undoubtedly a faithful Transcript, is sufficient to
prove Bishop Burnet's Assertion. For it maintains a Difference of Orders by
divine Institution, between the Seventy, who could only minister the Word, and
the Apostles, who could also appoint others; and it asserts that the Power,
whereby Bishops and Priests were originally appointed, shall continue to the
End of the World. I shall make no farther Remarks upon it; the curious Reader
can examine the Passage at his Leisure.

IT was mentioned as a farther Proof that when Cranmer had once settled his
ecclesiastical Principles, he steadily adhered to them; that in his Sermon, of
the Authority of the Keys, published together with his Catechism, his Notions
of Episcopacy and Church Government are so high, that even the high-flying Dr.
Hicks reprinted it at large, in his Preface to, the divine Right of Episcopacy
asserted. The Doctor replies: This Sermon is, I conclude, the very one repaired
to by Mr. Drury in Order to prove that Cranmer retracted his Opinion about
Bishops and Priests; to whom Mr. Boyse replies, the Passage he has cited in
this Sermon no Way asserts Priests and Bishops to be at the Biginning two
distinct Orders. So then; the Sermon, it seems, does not prove the Point for
which it is alleged, because a particular Passage in the Sermon does not prove
it; and that Passage does not prove it, because Mr. Boyse says it does not. But
any one, who is acquainted with Dr. Hicks's Character and Writings, must know
that he was as good a Judge, in this Case, as Mr. Boyse; and his Inducement to
publish the Sermon, if it made not for his Purpose, surely was not equal to Mr.
Boyse's Temptation, after it was published, to say that it was not for his
Purpose, when it really was.

THE Doctor after denying that the Reformed Church of England was originally
episcopal, had said, in the Words of Mr. J. Owen, that the Doctrine of
Episcopacy, as now contended for, was FIRST promoted in the Church of England
by Archbishop Laud. It was answered: There may indeed be some secret Meaning in
the Word promoted, which I do not comprehend; but until it be unfolded, I must
take the Liberty to believe, that the national Establishment of this Doctrine,
again and again, and making it a fundamental Principle of the Reformation, was
doing something to promote it The Appeal defended, p. 32.
. In his Reply, p. 48, he thus explains himself: Archbishop Laud, without all
Doubt, was the first -- in Opposition to any national Establishment, or its
being at all a Principle, much less a fundamental one of the Reformation, that
openly asserted and pleaded for the Doctrine. This Response is more oracular
and mysterious than the former. If the Reader can understand such Language, I
am free to confess, that he has more Sagacity than falls to my Lot. Laud never
asserted and pleaded for this Doctrine in Opposition to any national
Establishment, but in Conformity with our own, as he proved at his Trial See
the History of his Troubles and Trial, by Wharton, p. 37^.
. I said not that he pleaded for the apostolical Institution of Episcopacy, as
a fundamental Principle of the Church of England, which I know not that he ever
did, in so many Words; but what I said was, that its having been established as
such, proves that it had been promoted before his Time. But I will not enlarge.
As I understand not this confused Sentence, I may mistake its Meaning, or give
it a Meaning where it has none.

IT was farther answered, that if the Meaning of the Word promoted, be, that
none before Archbishop Laud contended for the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters, by divine Appointment, in their Writings, I must still deny it; as
I am able to produce abundant Evidence to the contrary. This, I believe, was
Part, if not the whole, of the Doctor's original Meaning; and I proved his
Mistake, by producing many Authors before Laud, that contended for this
Doctrine in their Writings. He now half confesses his Mistake* by saying that
for this Assertion he depended upon the Authority of Mr. J. Owen. I advise him
to be more careful for the future, upon what Authors he puts his Dependence;
for some of them, if trusted too freely, will bring one into Trouble. The
Doctor comforts himself however, that, in the present Case, his Mistake is but
trifling. Of what great Importance is it, says he, whether he (Laud) was the
first, second, third or fourth that contended for this Doctrine? In his former
Pamphlet he urged it as a Point of great Importance. This brought on the
Dispute, whether the Fact was as he asserted it. In this Dispute, such as it
is, the only Question was, whether Laud in Reality was the first that
maintained the Doctrine, or not. If he was the second only, he could not be the
first, in the Sense of the Question. So plain a Case has but little need of
Illustration: However, let us suppose the Doctor had asserted that Lord Anson
was the first that had sailed round the Globe, and had insisted upon it as a
Matter of great Consequence; and that another had taken him up upon this Point,
and shown, from the best Authorities, that Drake, Cavendish and many others had
encompassed the Globe long before him: -- Would it have been deemed a just
Reply if he had said, it is a Matter of no Importance, whether Anson was the
first, second, third or fourth? Although this might be said perhaps truly, yet
it could not be said properly, with Reference to a Debate where it was the only
Point in Question.

THE Persons introduced as prior to Laud in asserting the divine Right of
Episcopacy, were Whitgift (under the Patronage of Archbishop Parker and Bishop
Cooper,) Bancroft, Hutton, Bilson, Hooker and Saravia. This List might have
been easily enlarged, but it was thought sufficient; and it was clearly proved,
that they all contended for the divine Right of Episcopacy. Dr. Chauncy says in
Reply: They were, it is true, Episcopalians on the Foot of divine Right, in a
QUALIFIED, MITIGATED Sense; but not in the Sense in which Laud and the Doctor
plead for this Right. p. 49. This Gentleman has the best Knack I have ever met
with, of shifting for himself, and repairing his Losses. After having been
obliged to give up the Point in Dispute here, and to allow that the
abovementioned Persons were Episcopalians on the Foot of a divine Right,
contrary to what he had strenuously insisted upon as a Matter of Importance; he
gets a Reinforcement from Stephen Lob, or some other Author of an anonymous
Pamphlet, and returns with his Distinctions, and explains away his Concession
-- by saying that the divine Right for which those Episcopalians contended, was
not a divine Right properly, but a divine Right in a qualified, mitigated
Sense. How many Sorts of divine Right there are in his Opinion, and what Degree
of Mitigation he intended, he ought to have told us; for it is in vain to
dispute with him, without understanding his Distinctions.

HE attempts not to show that the Principles of Hutton, Bilson and Saravia were
misrepresented; but what was said to prove that Whitgift, Bancroft and Hooker
believed and maintained the divine Right of Episcopacy, he confronts with
Evidence brought in by Stephen Lob, tending to prove, in his Opinion, that they
were Episcopalians, not of the first Rate like Laud, but in a qualified,
mitigated Sense. The first of these Writers is quoted, p. 50, as distinguishing
between Things that are so necessary that without them we cannot be saved, and
such as are so necessary that without them we cannot SO WELL and CONVENIENTLY
be saved; and then saying that it is only by this second Kind of Necessity,
that Government, or any particular Form of it, is necessary for the Church. But
this, which is given as the Opinion of Whitgift, by no Means implies, that he
thought Episcopacy not to be of apostolical Institution -- much less, that he
thought Men might depart from it without evident Necessity -- and least of all,
that they were at Liberty to set up a Form of ecclesiastical Government in
Opposition to it. Nor does it contradict the Declaration he made to Beza in the
following Words: We make no Doubt but that the episcopal Degree, is an
Institution apostolical and divine, and so always has been held by a continual
Course of Times from the Apostles to this very Age of ours. I know of no
Episcopalians that esteem any Form of ecclesiastical Government to be so
absolutely necessary, that without it we cannot be saved. Even Laud himself,
who was an Episcopalian of the first Rate, was not of this Opinion. He treated
the foreign Protestant Churches, that were without episcopal Government as
Members of the same Body with the Church of England, and maintained with them a
friendly Correspondence. See his Letter in 1639, to the Swiss Divines in the
Praestantium Virorum Epistolae, Ep. 552, where they are called by him
Confratres mei charissimi: And of their Letter to him he says, it was
agreeable to him on a double Account, as it was theirs, and exhorting to
Christian Peace. Such Men ought they to be who are Members of the same Body,
and who believe and profess the Communion of Saints. And in 1629, he writes to
Vossius with great Mildness and Concern for the whole reformed Church, and for
Peace among Divines, in Ep. 471. And he says to him in 1633, It is a mere
Invention that the English Bishops desired to extend their Jurisdiction over
the foreign protestant Churches: A Thing which they never so much as dreamed of
The Second Letter to the Author of the Confessional, p. 183.
.

WHAT has been observed hitherto, is on the Supposition that Whitgift spoke in
the Sense in which the Doctor understands him. But upon a closer Examination I
believe it will be found, that he had no particular Reference to Episcopacy, in
the Passages quoted. When he used those Expressions, he was combating a known
Maxim of many of the Puritans, viz. That every Thing relating to the Government
or Discipline of the Church, or to public Worship, that is not clearly
expressed in Scripture, is unlawful. This was one of the Pillars, on which
their famous Admonition to the Parliament was erected, rotten as it was
Strype's Life of Parker, p. 362.
. Neal, their Historian and Advocate, tells us, that Mr. Cartwright maintained
that the holy Scriptures were not only a Standard of Doctrine, but of
Discipline and Government; and that the Church of Christ in all Ages was to be
regulated by them. He was therefore for consulting his Bible only, and for
reducing all Things as near as possible to the apostolic Standard History of
the Puritans, Vol I. p. 231, Dub. Edit.
. In confuting this Principle, as it was applied by the Puritans, Whitgift
might have said: There is no certain Kind of Government or Discipline,
prescribed to the Church; but that the same may be altered as the Profit of the
Churches requires. -- I do deny, that the Scriptures do set down any one
certain Kind of Government in the Church to be perpetual, for all Times,
Persons and Places without Alteration: I say, he might have used these and the
like Expressions, speaking in the Sense of the Puritans, and yet have believed
the Doctrine of Episcopacy in as high a Sense as Laud himself did.

TO prove that Bancroft was not episcopal, on the Footing of a divine Right,
except in a qualified, mitigated Sense, and that he allowed Ordination by
Presbyters to be valid, the Doctor, in p. 51, mentions the Case of the three
Scots Presbyters who were consecrated Bishops with his Consent, without any
previous Ordinations by the Imposition of episcopal Hands. This Case he had
mentioned in his former Pamphlet with the like View; and it was said, in
Answer, that those Persons were immediately consecrated Bishops on this
Principle, that the episcopal Character, as it included those of a Presbyter
and a Deacon, might be conveyed by a single Consecration, as in the Case of
Ambrose and Nectarius. He now replies, as this is rested on no other Proof than
the Doctor's own Affirmation, it ought to be considered as nothing. Experience
has taught me not to be surprised, in this Controversy, at the most unexpected
and extraordinary Assertions; and therefore I can, with the utmost Calmness,
assure the Reader, that what is here said to be rested on no other Proof than
my own Affirmation, was rested altogether on other Evidence; and that Collier's
Ecclesiastical History, Vol. II. p. 701, and Grey's Answer to Pierce, p. 143,
were particularly quoted for this Account, as any one may see, upon turning to
the Appeal defended, p. 46, 47. If Spotswood gives a different Account of this
Affair, it only follows that it is a disputed Case; and it is a much fairer
Method to judge of Bancroft's Principles by what he clearly says in his
Writings, than from the doubtful Evidence of a disputed Fact. Every Man must be
supposed best to know his own Principles; and his own Declaration must be the
best Proof of what Doctrines he believes. Let the Reader then attend to
Bancroft himself explaining his own Principles, relating to this Head, and
placing them as the Foundation of his capital Work. As God himself, says he,
appointed an Inequality amongst the Priests of the Old Testament: As in
Christ's Institution, the Apostles were superior to the Seventy Disciples: As
the Apostles, when the Gospel began to spread itself, appointed sundry
Timothies and Tituses, to govern the Churches in diverse Countries and
Territories: As all the ecclesiastical Histories do record the Superiority of
Bishops, and do set down the Catalogues of many of them, and which of the
Apostles and apostolical Bishops, and in what Cities and Countries, they
succeeded: As all the ancient general Councils, and all the ancient and godly
learned Fathers have allowed of Bishops, and of their Superiority over the rest
of the Clergy: As Bishops have been accounted generally throughout the World,
to be the Apostles Successors, and have continued in the Church ever since the
Apostles Time: As there was never any one of all the ancient Fathers, nor any
learned Men for 1500 Years, but Aerius the Heretic, that ever held that there
ought to be no Difference betwixt a Bishop and a Priest, etc. Survey of the
pretended holy Discipline, p. 143, apud Maddox.
-- THEREFORE, we may fairly conclude, Bancroft, who believed all this, was an
Episcopalian on the Foot of a divine Right, without any Qualification or
Mitigation.

I WILL not detain the Reader with a particular Defense of Hooker, as being
episcopal in the Sense of the Appeal. His immortal Work the Ecclesiastical
Polity is in many Hands, and his Principles are well known. As to the Passages
quoted to prove the contrary, they were in Answer to the above mentioned Maxim
of the Puritans, as is evident from the whole third Book: and therefore what
has been said in the Case of Whitgift, is equally applicable to Hooker. In
other Places, where he has no immediate Reference to that Controversy, he
clearly and strongly expresses his Belief of the divine Institution and
Obligation of episcopal Government. A Bishop, says he, is a Minister of God,
unto whom with permanent Continuance, there is given not only Power of
administering the Word and Sacraments, which Power other Presbyters have; but
also a farther Power to ordain ecclesiastical Persons, and a Power of Chiefty
in Government over Presbyters as well as Laymen, a Power to be by Way of
Jurisdiction, a Pastor even to Pastors themselves Ecclesiastical Polity, Lib.
vii. Sect. 2.
. Again That so ( i. e. as the Ordinance of God) the ancient Fathers did think
of episcopal Regiment; that they held this Order as a Thing received from the
blessed Apostles themselves, and authorized even from Heaven, we may perhaps
more easily prove, than obtain that they all shall grant it when they see it
proved Ibid. Sect. 5.
. And he concludes the Section with these memorable Words: Wherefore let us not
fear to be herein bold and peremptory, that if any Thing in the Church's
Government, surely the first Institution of Bishops was from Heaven, was even
of God; the Holy Ghost was the Author of it.

THE Doctor had also argued that Reordination was not practiced in the Church
of England before the Time of Archbishop Laud. This occasioned the Case to be
fully considered and fairly stated, as may be seen in the Appeal defended. p.
42. Among other Things I said, that it was an established Law from the very
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that none should be admitted as lawful
Ministers in the Church of England without episcopal Ordination; using the very
Words of the Preface to the Ordinal, and meaning the Act of Uniformity which
established the Book of Common Prayer and all that it contained. The Doctor
replies, p. 55, this is said in direct Contradiction to the Act of 13
Elizabeth; from which he gives an imperfect and unfair Extract, that it may
furnish him with a Pretense of saying something in Opposition to me. That one
Act of that Reign was contradictory to another, without a Design of repealing
it, ought not to be supposed without good Evidence; and it is not denied, that
the Establishment I refered to was made. But it might much more plausibly have
been objected, after the Example of Bishop Bonner, that the Act of Uniformity,
although it in general established the Book of Common Prayer, yet took no
particular Notice of the Ordinal, which many of our Acts of Parliament
distinguish as a different Book. However, could it be proved that the Preface
to, or other Parts of, the Ordinal received no legal Force from the Act of
Uniformity; yet it had the Support of Art. xxxvi. in 1562; and there was an Act
in the 8th of Elizabeth, that particularly injoined, that such Order and Form
for the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and for the making of Priests,
Deacons and Ministers, as was set forth in the Time of the late King Edward the
Sixth, and authorized by Parliament in the Fifth and Sixth Years of the said
late King, shall stand, and be in full Force and Effect, and shall from
henceforth, be used and observed in all Places within the Realm, and other the
Queen's Majesty's Dominions and Countries Gibsons 's Codex, p. 310.
.

THAT the Reader may judge, whether what is here ordered was repealed, or
contradicted, or contravened by the Doctor's Act of 13 Elizabeth, I will give
an Extract of so much of that Act as relates to the Subject before us,
supplying the material Omissions in his Quotation of the same Passage, which,
that they may be distinguished, are printed in Italics. Be it enacted -- that
every Person under the Degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to be a
Priest, or Minister of God's holy Word and Sacraments, by Reason of any other
Form of Institution, Consecration or ordering, than the Form set forth by
Parliament in the Time of the late King -- or now used in the Reign of our most
gracious sovereign Lady, before the Feast of the Nativity of Christ next
following, shall in the Presence of the Bishop -- declare his Assent, and
subscribe to all the Articles of Religion -- and shall bring from such Bishop
-- in writing, under his Seal authentic a Testimonial of such Assent and
Subscription -- upon Pain that every such Person which shall not before the
said Feast do as is appointed, shall be (ipso Facto) deprived See Codex, p.
396, and Sparrows Collection, p. 118.
. The Doctor says that this Act, meaning this particular Clause of it,
continued in Force till Charles II; whereas it is evident, beyond
Contradiction, from the Words he endeavored to conceal, that it was to have no
Force, and could have none, after the Feast of the Nativity of Christ next
following the Time of its passing. He also says it is a full Proof that it was
not her (Queen Elizabeth's) Opinion that Ordination was, by divine Appointment,
appropriated to Bishops in Distinction from Presbyters, so that Ordination by
Presbyters only was invalid: Whereas there is no Appearance of its having any
Relation to the Validity, or Invalidity, of Ordination by Presbyters. The
Design of it was chiefly to provide for such Clergymen, as had received
episcopal Ordination according to the popish Ordinal, in the Reign of Queen
Mary; with a farther View to such as might have received, what was esteemed a
valid, Ordination abroad. But what was esteemed a valid Ordination, is neither
said nor implied. The Act does not provide that all, who had received any Kind
of Ordination, otherwise than by the established Ordinal, should be made
capable of holding Preferment; but that none, ordained otherwise, without
qualifying themselves in the Manner prescribed, should be admitted as such.
Whether those ordained by foreign Protestants, where Necessity, not Choice,
made it impossible to have episcopal Ordination, were (qualified to hold
Benefices) this Act does not say. And supposing the first Paragraph be
understood to indulge such till the Christmas following, upon subscribing, and
after that Period to refuse them: On this supposition, the Rejection being
perpetual, and the Indulgence only for a short Term, the Act is rather against
the foreign protestant Ordination, as not valid in this Church: And
consequently, however Whittingham might have availed himself of the Indulgence,
Travers, who was too late, could receive no Benefit from the Act.

THE Subject of the King's Supremacy was the next in Course; but as the Doctor
chooses to consider it in another Place, I shall not object, as I am not
disposed to contend with him for Trifles. He gives here, p. 57, an Extract from
Burn's Ecclesiastical Law, under the Title Supremacy, which, without being
first garbled according to his usual Manner, he knew could not answer his
Purpose; of which I shall take no farther Notice.

SHOULD it now be asked, what is all this to the Business of an American
Episcopate? My Answer is, I know not, but perhaps Dr. Chauncy does. This
Observation was made in the Appeal defended, after I had rambled from the main
Point 50 or 60 Pages in Pursuit of my Opponent, who ought, if any one, to have
been able to assign sufficient Reasons for it, as he alone was the Cause of the
Deviation. It was my Business, as Matters were circumstanced, to attend upon
him through all his Aberrations; and Duty required me, as well as I could, to
defend the Church of England against all his Attacks, which I had very
undesignedly occasioned. The same Observation I have too much Reason to repeat,
at this Time. I have been long pressing forward, but have not yet been able to
come to the main Point in Dispute. This I again lay to his Charge; as by the
Introduction of Ferdinand Shaw, and Stephen Lob, and his old Reprint, and his
new Distinctions, he has brought not only upon me, but also upon the Reader,
much needless Trouble.

WHAT was intended as Proof of the Necessity of an uninterrupted Succession of
Officers in the Church, the Reader may see in the Appeal defended, p. 59. The
Doctor allows what was said on the Subject to be even self-evident, p. 58; but
then he contends that it is no Proof of the Point, because it was raised upon a
bad Foundation. For I had taken for granted, that Authority, if conveyed
MEDIATELY, must be conveyed by PERSONAL SUCCESSION, which ought, it seems,
first to have been proved. He says farther; I can assure him -- it is the
Opinion of the non-episcopalian Colonists, that the Power of perpetuating the
Ministration of the Word and Gospel Ordinances, is so lodged with the Christian
Churches, that, whenever the Case requires it, they can begin a Succession de
novo, which Succession will be as truly vested with Authority from Christ, as
if it had been uninterruptedly handed down from the Apostles: And he pretends
that Hooker was of the same Opinion. I shall not spend Time in inquiring
whether the Sense of the non-episcopalian Colonists is truly represented in
these Words, or not. I could easily prove, that several of their most sensible
Writers have thought otherwise; but it is enough for the present Purpose, that
what is here expressed is the Doctor's Opinion, on which Account only an
Examination of it in this Place is necessary.

HE readily allows that none have Authority in the Christian Church, but those
who derive it from Christ, either mediately, or immediately. An immediate
Conveyance of ecclesiastical Authority from Christ, we have at present no
Concern with. We are only to inquire, in what Manner that Power, which Christ
formerly bestowed for the Edification of his Church, can now be obtained, for
those Purposes for which it was then granted. Now, I think it will not be
disputed, that wherever that Power was lodged, from thence it must be received,
if it be received at all. The most material Question then is, to whom was this
Power originally committed by Christ? It will be said by some, that it was
given to the Church. In one Sense this is true; as whatever is given to any
Members of a Society, for the general Benefit of that Society, may be said to
be given to the Society. But if we examine the original Grant of ecclesiastical
Power, it will appear, that it was not made to the Church diffusively, but to
certain Persons, under whose Care and Government the Church was immediately
placed. Those Persons, who undoubtedly understood what Authority they received,
proceeded forthwith to exercise it, in Discharge of the great Trust reposed in
them. Now the whole Conduct of the Apostles necessarily supposes and implies,
that the Government of the Church here on earth was left entirely in their
Hands. The Acknowledgement and Submission of all Christians also prove the same
Point. As, on the one Hand, the Apostles made Laws for the Government of the
Church; so we find, on the other, that those Laws were universally obeyed. All
disputed Matters were referred to their Decision, from which there was no
Appeal. In short, they exercised, in the Name of Christ, an uncontrollable
Authority in the Church; and, as Occasions required, they appointed particular
Persons to act as subordinate Ministers.

LET the Case be carefully and closely examined, and, I think, there can be no
Difficulty in determining, whether, in the first Instance, the Authority of
Christ was lodged in the Hands of the Apostles only and exclusively, so that
none could act as Officers or Ministers without their Consent and Appointment:
Or, whether it was lodged in the Church diffusively, in such a Manner, that the
Members of it, met together in a popular Assembly, might reject or displace an
Apostle, and put another in his Stead, by Virtue of the Commission given by
Christ. If the whole Power at this Time is allowed to have been in the Hands of
the Apostles, it will go very far toward deciding the Matter in Dispute. For
when was this original Constitution altered, and who had a Right to alter it?
Who could reduce that, which Christ had formed into a regular Society, with
proper Officers to govern it, from an organized Body into a confused Mass? To
say that the Apostles could make this Alteration, is to ascribe to them a very
extraordinary Power, without any Shadow of Evidence that they ever had it -- a
Power, which implies that they were better Judges of what was a proper
Constitution for such a Society as the Christian Church, than the divine
Founder himself. But supposing them to have had such a Power, when, and on what
Occasion, did they exert it? Where is the Proof, where are the Records, of this
remarkable Event? But, on the other Hand, if the very Nature of Things, and
every Monument remaining testify against it, as they certainly do; we may be
assured, that the Constitution of the Church was the same when the Apostles
left it, as when they were at first entrusted with the Care of it. And if it
was not changed by them, and they had no Power to change it, any more than
Aaron could change the primitive Constitution of the Jewish Church; whether
others, since their Time, can have had such a Power, may safely be left for
common Sense to decide. To this may be added, that if the original Constitution
of the Church has been altered, it is so far another Society, and not the same
that was founded by Christ.

WHERE a Society is constituted under a particular Form of Government, and
designed for Continuance, it is essential to it, that the Officers have a Power
of perpetuating themselves, by appointing Successors, if they are not
particularly appointed by the Founder of the Society. This was evidently the
Case of the Christian Church, if we may judge from the Practice of the
Apostles. Where they were present, none received ecclesiastical Authority, but
immediately from them. In distant Places, none received, or could receive, such
Authority, but from those Persons whom they had duly authorized to impart it.
Upon this Maxim Timothy was sent to Ephesus by St. Paul, and Titus was left in
Crete, to ordain Elders in every City.

THE Christian Church was thus originally constituted under Officers of divine
Appointment, as evidently as the Jewish Church was; and Christians, in the Time
of the Apostles, had no more Right to set up an Authority different from
theirs, or in Opposition to it, than the Israelites had, in the Rebellion of
Korah, to gainsay Moses and Aaron in these very popular Words: Ye take too much
upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord
is among them; wherefore then lift you up yourselves above the Congregation of
the Lord? ^
Let it now be observed, that what were the Rights of Christians in the
Apostles Days, the very same, neither more nor less, are the Rights of
Christians at this Day. If therefore the Church at Ephesus, for Instance, could
not ordain Elders, without, or in Opposition to, the Authority given to
Timothy; neither can the Church now, in any Country, ordain Ministers, without,
or in Opposition to, the Authority of those, who are in the same Station that
Timothy was The non-episcopalian Colonists, it seems, claim, in Neglect or
rather in Defiance of the Authority abovementioned, a Power to ordain, and to
begin a Succession de novo. This Claim, I suppose, is founded in the Privileges
given in common to all Christians, and not in the Privileges given to some
Christians in Preference to others. But the common Privileges of Christians are
equal in all, in male and female, bond and free; for the Gospel knows nothing
of these Distinctions. Now whatever power is exercised by a Body of Persons who
are equal in Authority, must be exercised by the Direction of the Majority, to
which the minor Part must submit. Supposing then an Assembly of Christians to
be called together for the Business of beginning a Succession de novo: As no
Christians can be excluded, the Voices and Rights of all being equal, it may
happen that the Women amount to a Majority, and agree in an Opinion different
from that of the Men. I would ask the Doctor, whether the Act of the Women,
thus circumstanced, can produce the Ordination intended? If he says no, he must
renounce his Principle, and that of the non-episcopalian Colonists. But indeed
I have long observed, that this Doctrine of ecclesiastical Authority lodged in
the People, is only used for Convenience on particular Occasions, and that it
is seldom or never made the Rule of Practice. Accordingly, in Church-Meetings
for the Purpose of Discipline, etc. among the non-episcopalian Colonists, the
Women are not consulted; they appear not by Proxy; although they are generally
as good Christians as the Men, and have an equal Right to direct in these
Matters; but the Men usurp all that Right to themselves, in which, by their own
Principles, they have but an equal Share.
.

FROM what has been said it appears, that in the Apostles Time, and
consequently at this Day, the Authority to govern and order the Church, which
was lodged in the Hands of particular Persons, and not in the Body diffusive,
could be derived in the first Instance, in no other Way than by personal
Communication; and in after Instances, could, and can be derived from the
Aposties in no other Way than by personal Succession, in a Line that has never
been interrupted. By personal Succession is here meant a Succession of
particular Persons in the Government of the Church, to whom the Power of
Ordination has been regularly conveyed, by those that have regularly received
it, in this Manner, from the Apostles themselves; and by its being
uninterrupted is meant, that throughout the Succession, ecclesiastical
Authority has been handed down by those who were duly authorized to convey it.

THE Point which was taken for granted before, is now, I trust, sufficiently
proved. If the Reader is of the same Opinion, let him take Notice, that Doctor
Chauncy allows, p. 58, that it is the only Thing that needed Proof, and that,
upon this Principle, the Necessity of an uninterrupted Succession is
self-evident. I have therefore no Need to enlarge farther on the Subject. I can
freely trust what has been now said, in Conjunction with what was formerly
offered, to the Judgment of every Reader that is not grossly partial.

THE Doctor has a Number of other Observations relating to the Subject of an
uninterrupted Succession, and many other Objections against what was said in
Favor of it, but they appear to me to be but of little Consequence. His
Quotation from Hooker, is introduced in such a Manner as to pervert his
Meaning: His Quotation from M. Claude, is unworthy of his Character: And his
Quotation from Dodwell, is contrary to the known Principles of that Author.
With the like Liberties, a Man may undertake to prove any Thing from any
Writer. -- As to what may be done in Cases of Necessity, it will be Time enough
to consider it, when the Necessity happens. We know that Necessity never could
be pleaded by the Dissenters at home, and their non-episcopalian Brethren in
the Colonies are anti-episcopal The Author of a critical Commentary on A. Bp.
SECKER' s Letter to Mr. WALPOLE, speaking of the Dissenters at home, at whose
Head he affects to figure, says: It was their Concern for, and their Desire to
preserve to the Americans of their own ANTI-EPISCOPAL Persuasion, the full
Exercise, etc. p. 82.
. At the same Time they care as little, the Doctor tells us, p. 62, about an
uninterrupted Succession of Presbyters, as of Bishops. For they not only
believe and are confident, but they KNOW they have Power from Christ to
constitute Officers for all the Purposes of the Gospel Ministry, whenever there
shall be Occasion for it. -- As to our Savior's Promise to his Apostles to be
with them to the End of the World, it implies that he intended that they, and
their Successors in the same Office, should continue to the End of the World.
This Promise therefore is a sufficient Security, that the Succession in
Question has not been, and shall not be, interrupted. Besides, it is incumbent
on the Objectors to prove, that the Interruption has happened; for until this
be proved, the Presumption will be that it never has. Indeed it appears from
the very Nature of Things morally impossible that it ever should have happened.
For it has been the Doctrine of the Church in all Ages, that no Ordination was
effectual, but what was performed by Bishops. This has been a perpetual Guard
to the Succession contended for, because no Ordination would be accepted of,
but such as was thought to be valid. -- These Hints are offered as a sufficient
Answer to all that is said in the Doctor' s Reply, from p. 59 to p. 65.

IN his former Pamphlet he had endeavored, in the Words of the Dissenting
Gentleman, to prove the Church of England to be inconsistent and absurd, in
maintaining the Validity of Orders derived through the Church of Rome, while
she is called in the Homilies, "an old withered Harlot," etc. To this I thought
it sufficient to oppose that Part of Mr. White's Reply to that Gentleman, where
he says: If I must derive my spiritual Pedigree from a Harlot, I had rather it
should be an old withered one, of an ancient and honorable Line, than a young
Strumpet of no Name and Family, and who came into the World but yesterday.
This, I confess, is rather ludicrously said; however, a more serious Answer was
scarcely deserved. The Doctor replies, that in both Cases we must be born of
Fornication. Is it possible, says he, a Whore, a foul, filthy Whore, should,
being an Adultress, bring forth any other than a base-born, spurious Race? A
real Whore, while she continues such, cannot; but perhaps a metaphorical Whore
may. The Church of Rome is called a Harlot in the Homilies, in Conformity to
the Language of Scripture. The Jews were said to "play the Harlot," and to go a
whoring after their own Inventions, when they corrupted their Religion with a
Mixture of idolatrous Rites and Practices. In the New Testament we read of the
great Whore which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornication; by which great
Whore is intended, in the Opinion of most Commentators, either Rome Heathen, or
Rome Christian. In speaking therefore of the Church of Rome, and her
superstitious and idolatrous Corruption of Christianity, at a Time when the
Nation was still smarting under the Wounds received from her galling Yoke, it
was very natural for the Composers of the Homilies, and not improper, to call
her a Harlot; in the Sense wherein the Jewish Church was so called by the
Prophets. But they never intended to signify that her Ministrations were
invalid; for they knew, that, at the Time of her Whoredoms, the Sacrifices and
other Ministrations in the Jewish Church, when duly performed, were effectual
to those Ends for which they were appointed. They were far from adopting the
Opinion of the ancient Donatists in these Matters; and what they believed of
Churches and Bishops, of corrupt Principles and Practices, we may judge from
what they believed of Priests in such a Case. Those that composed the Homilies,
were soon after employed in framing what are called King Edward's ARTICLES; in
one of which they say: Although in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled
with the good, and sometime the evil have chief Authority in the Ministration
of the Word and Sacraments: Yet for as much as they do not the same in their
own Name, but do minister by Christ's Commission and Authority, we may use
their Ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving the
Sacraments. Neither is the Effect of God's Ordinances taken away by their
Wickedness, nor the Grace of God's Gifts diminished from such, as by Faith
rightly receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's Institution and Promise, although they be ministered by
evil Men. It need not be added, that this is equally applicable to Ordination
by a popish Bishop.

WERE it worth the Reader's Attention, I could show that the Doctor is much
mistaken in his Opinion of the Sentiments of Archbishop Usher and Bishop Burnet
concerning Episcopacy, and that he judges from partial and imperfect Evidence.
Enough, I believe, was said of Usher, for the impartial Reader's Satisfaction
in the Appeal defended; but as the Doctor seems to require farther
Satisfaction, I must refer him to a Book written in Answer to Dr. Bernard's,
entitled, Respondet Petrus, by Dr. Heylin. As to Burnet, it is sufficient that
he affirms in his Exposition, that Christ appointed a Succession of Pastors, in
different Ranks, to be continued in the Church for the Work of the Gospel, and
the Care of Souls; and that as the Apostles settled the Churches, they
appointed different ORDERS, of Bishops, Priests and Deacons On Art. xxv.
: And, in his History of the Reformation, in a Passage that has been held out
to public View In the Appeal defended, p. 25.
-- that to deny Bishops and Priests "to be two DISTINCT ORDERS," is not only
heretical and popish, but some of the worst Part, "THE VERY DREGS OF POPERY."
But, that after the Time of writing his Vindication of the Church of Scotland,
which I have not seen, he was truly episcopal in his Principles, in the full
Height and Depth of the Expression, I may appeal, not only to particular
Passages, but to the whole Tenor of his subsequent Writings.

IT is an easy Thing, by the Help of single Sentences, with here and there
Scraps of Sentences, artfully arranged and properly managed, to prove almost
any Authors to be, what we choose they should be. In such a Way, I could easily
prove Dr. Chauncy himself to be an Episcopalian, from the Pamphlet before me. I
could collect Sentences, wherein he acknowledges the fundamental Principles of
an uninterrupted Succession of Bishops to be self evident. I could show that he
is an Advocate for the Sentiments of Whitgift, Bancroft, Hooker, Usher, Burnet,
and a great Majority, nineteen in twenty of the Members of the Church of
England, relating to the Subject, which are notoriously episcopal -- that he is
so convinced of the Usefulness and Necessity of an American Episcopate, that he
is not only willing that it should be established, but blames the Clergy of the
Church of England in the Colonies for not having exerted themselves more in
Order to procure Bishops, and thinks they should have applied for them to the
Moravians, or even to the Papists in Canada, rather than be without them. But
such an Amusement I will not pursue, as it would interfere too much with
Business, and be too great a Trespass upon the Reader's Indulgence. For these
two Reasons I shall take no farther Notice of what he says concerning Usher and
Burnet, but seek for more useful Employment in his next Section.

HERE my Opponent begins thus: The Doctor has seen fit, for Reasons BEST KNOWN
TO HIMSELF, to pass over almost every Thing this (second) Section relates to,
that was material, p. 57. But the Reasons for my doing this are as well known
to the Reader, as to my self. The Passage, in which he was informed of these
Reasons, must have been immediately under the Doctor's Eye when he made the
Remark, as it stands in the Front of the Section, to which he was preparing to
reply. What was there said, is in these Words: The Objections that have been
made to the second Section of the Appeal, wherein the Powers peculiar to the
episcopal Office are shown, as they relate chiefly to the Evidence of
Scripture, explained by the Practice of the primitive Church, so far shall be
passed over, they coming not within the Intention of the present Defense. Why
this was not within the Intention of my Defense, was carefully explained in p.
77, and the Reasons there assigned have appeared to be abundantly satisfactory
to the Public. What can we now think of the Fairness and Candor of such a
Remark?

IN discoursing of the Nature of the episcopal Office, it was thought proper to
distinguish, between those Things that belong to it originally and essentially,
and such external Appendages as had been added in after Times, and which have
no necessary Connection with the Office itself. The Doctor, in his Answer,
attempted not to invalidate the Distinction, but impertinently remarked, that
it is highly UNREASONABLE to add such Appendages. In my Defense it was replied:
Whether the Addition of such Appendages be reasonable or unreasonable, is
nothing to me; and, which is more, it is nothing to the Case of such an
Episcopate as is proposed for America. I had said nothing, nor was it my
Business to say any Thing of its being reasonable that these Appendages should
be added; nor was it his Business as an Answerer to me, to say any Thing of its
being unreasonable. Much less was it his Business to object Appendages of this
Kind to an Episcopate, which it certainly is, and ever was intended, shall
exist without them *. He now rejoins: Why then, in the Name of Wonder, did he
say any Thing about these Appendages? If it was nothing to him, that is, to the
Cause he is defending, and nothing to the Case of an American Episcopate, it is
certainly to no Purpose to say a Word about them, p. 72. Fair and candid again!
without any Mixture of Sophistry! But however, the Subject of such Appendages,
and the Reasonableness of making them, are different Things. In the Appeal, the
Appendages were distinguished from the Office itself, because it was necessary
in Order rightly to conceive of the episcopal Office, as proposed to be
exercised in America; and in my Defense I did not say that the Subject, or the
Distinction, was nothing to me, but that the Reasonableness or Unreasonableness
of adding such Appendages to the episcopal Office, was neither my Business, nor
his, to consider. How then, in the Name of Wonder, could Dr. Chauncy show so
little Regard to his own literary Character!

IN explaining the Nature of the episcopal Office it was observed, that the
Office is exactly the same in a large Diocese as in a small one, and that this
Circumstance affected not the Validity of any Act performed by the Bishop. The
Doctor answered, that if the Validity of the Bishop's Acts is not affected by
the Largeness of his Diocese, his Capacity to serve it undoubtedly is. It was
said in Reply to him, the Answer amounts to this, that although what I said is
allowed to be true, yet something that I did not say is certainly false. The
Thing which I did not say is, that the Bishop is as able to serve the great
Ends of his Office in a large Diocese as in a small one. Let us now hear the
Doctor's Rejoinder. It is true, he did not say this; but it is as true, that it
was with Propriety, and IRRESISTIBLE FORCE that I said it, p. 72. Whatever
Opinion my Opponent may have of the IRRESISTIBILITY of his own Force, in this
Instance it was certainly misapplied. Nor could there be any Propriety in an
Answerer's thus shifting the Question, from the Validity of an Act, to the
Capacity of the Agent.

IT was farther said in Reply to him, that he was also wrong in his Opinion
relating to the Bishop's Capacity of taking due Care of a large Diocese, as he
judged of the episcopal Charge upon Congregational Principles, confounding the
Office of a Bishop with that of a Parish Minister. He still insists upon it,
that it is highly improper, and an intolerable Grievance, that Bishops should
be at the Head of large Diocesses; because it destroys their Capacity to serve
the Ends, designed by Christ in the Institution of their Office. This confirms
the Observation I made upon his wrong Method of proceeding. He believes the
Design of the Institution of Bishops was, that they should take the spiritual
Charge of single Congregations, and perform the parochial Duties. Accordingly
he looks upon himself to be a proper Bishop, agreeably to the Institution of
Christ. In this Sense, it is confessed, Bishops ought to be confined to narrow
Districts, as their Incapacity to serve large ones, such as common Diocesses,
cannot be disputed. But the Bishops in Question are an ORDER of Men very
different from that of Bishop Chauncy, and the Ends of their Office are as
different as their Order. Parochial Duties they may occasionally perform; but
the proper Business of their Office is, Ordination, the Superintendency and
Government of the Clergy, and Confirmation. Now if a Diocese is not so large
but that a Bishop can duly perform all these Offices, it cannot be justly
objected that he has not a Capacity to serve it. In an episcopal Church the
Number of Parish Ministers is as great as it would be, if the episcopal Order
had no Existence; and the Addition of Bishops to super-intend the parochial
Clergy and oblige them to perform their Duty, is so far from being an
intolerable Grievance, that such an Institution, in its Nature and Design, is
an invaluable Advantage. Here the Doctor quotes and misapplies our blessed
Savior's Declaration, my Kingdom is not of this World; which has no more
Relation to the Subject under Consideration, than these Words of Moses, In the
Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth.

I SHALL not spend much Time in controverting what he says about Aerius and
Colluthus. These I had represented to have been the first Contrivers of
Ordination by Presbyters; but herein I may have been mistaken, as I find the
learned Dr. Lee points out an Instance of the like Nature, among the
Montanists, in the latter End of the second Century, of one Blastus, a Greek
Presbyter, who formed, says he, the first Presbyterian Church we read of; for
which he was duly reprimanded by St. Irenaeus History of Montanism. p. 137.
. That Aerius was condemned as an Heretic, chiefly for his Opinion of the
Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, is agreeable to the Account given by all the
most considerable ecclesiastical historians, and the Opinion of all the most
considerable Writers, that have mentioned the Case. That Jerome, Austin,
Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom and Theophylact were of the same
Opinion with Aerius, with Regard to the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, as
the Doctor pretends was the Belief of Reignolds, Jewel, Bridges, Whitacre, and
Stillingfleet, whom he calls episcopal Writers of the first Figure, but some of
whom were notorious Puritans; is, as he says in another Case, in direct
Opposition to as known a Truth as is contained in History.

TO what was said concerning Colluthus, from the Bishops of Egypt, Thebais,
Lybia and Pentapolis, and the Clergy of Mareotis, he opposes the evasive
Distinctions of Blondel, given in the Irenicum, as a sufficient and full
Answer. Blondel, it seems, thought fit to say, the pronouncing such an
Ordination (as that of Ischyras by Colluthus) null does not evidence, that they
looked on Ordination as belonging, of divine Right, only to Bishops. For it
might, says he, have been condemned as contrary to the Canons, as not performed
in the proper Diocese, as being without a Title, etc. Whereas the Bishops
abovementioned, in their synodical Epistle, say expressly, in the Extract I
had given, that the Ordination was null, because it was performed by a
Presbyter. How came Ischyras, say they, to be a Presbyter, and by whom was he
ordained? Was it by Colluthus? For that remains to be said. But Colluthus died
a Presbyter, SO THAT ALL the Impositions of his Hands were INVALID and NULL: --
and the Clergy of Mareotis, in their joint Letter, from which also I had given
an Extract, say: Ischyras who calls himself a Presbyter, is not a Presbyter,
since he was ordained by Colluthus, who assumed an imaginary Episcopacy, and
was afterward commanded by Hosius, and other Bishops synodically assembled, to
return to the Order of Presbyters, whereto he was ordained. And CONSEQUENTLY
all those, whom Colluthus ordained, returned to their former Stations, and
Ischyras himself became a Layman. Let the Reader now judge, whether,
nothwithstanding the Doctor's full Answer and Proof to the contrary, the
Condemnation of that Ordination was not founded on an Opinion of its essential
Nullity and Invalidity, because it was performed by a Presbyter, or one who
assumed only an imaginary Episcopacy.

IN speaking of Ordination as one of the peculiar Branches of the episcopal
Office, I took Notice there is not an Instance of Ordination by Presbyters to
be found in the Church for several Ages after Christ; and that Aerius and
Colluthus, in the latter End of the fourth Century, were the first that
endeavored to introduce that Kind of Ordination. The Doctor, in his Answer,
demanded one Instance, within the long Period of 150 Years from Christ, of an
Ordination by any Bishop. It would have been a more complete Answer to have
said, that there was not an Instance of episcopal Ordination to be found within
the same Period that I had mentioned, than to say there was no such Instance
within the long Period of 150 Years; which long Period was shorter by more than
Half. However, not insisting upon this most material Difference between my
Period and his, I replied, that he had made the same Demand some Years before,
in his Dudleian Lecture, to which a direct and formal Answer had been given by
Mr. Leaming In his Defense of Episcopal Government.
, whereof he had not taken the least Notice. This appeared to me to be a
'Curiosity,' and indeed such as I had never met with in the Regions of
Controversy. I then gave Mr. Leaming's Reply, which I esteemed to be a full
Answer to the Demand. If the Doctor himself thought otherwise, still there was
something curious in his taking no Notice of the Answer that had been attempted
to this Challenge, when he came to repeat it.

HE now says, p. 78, by Way of Excuse: I did not esteem it worthy of the least
Notice, OR (meaning, that he did not imagine) that any one else would, that had
any considerable Degree of intellectual Discernment. Yet in the next Words he
tells us, that Mr. Wells thought it worthy of Notice, for that he nullified
this produced Instance, and all that was said upon it. This, by the Way, looks
like treating Mr. Wells very ungenerously, after the many kind Offices and
Compliments he had received from him; as the Words fairly imply an Opinion that
Mr. Wells had no considerable Degree of intellectual Discernment, at least in
that particular Case. Again: He tells us he did not choose to take Notice of
Mr. Leaming's Answer, because, as he informed the Public, in his Letter
prefixed to Mr. Welles's Piece, that was he inclined to engage in the episcopal
Controversy, he should choose for his Opponent, one that is better able to
manage the Dispute, than he appears to be. But the Dealers in public
Controversy have not always the Liberty of choosing their Opponents. And as to
Mr. Leaming, he is well known to be abundantly able to manage the Dispute about
Episcopacy, against any that may oppose him. This same prefixed Letter contains
illiberal Reflections, upon a Gentleman of a very amiable and respectable
Character. And here, as we are on the Subject of Curiosities in the Regions of
Controversy, it may not be amiss to point out a very remarkable one, to be
found in that short Letter to Mr. Wells. Says the Doctor: I have NO OTHER
KNOWLEDGE of this Gentleman (Mr. Leaming) than what may be collected from this
small Work of his (his Defense, etc.) Yet within the Distance of a single Page
he also says: by THE ACCOUNT I HAVE of Mr. Leaming, he is not equal to the
Performance that comes out in his Name. But to return from this Digression in
Pursuit of Curiosities.

THE Doctor contends that Mr. Leaming's Answer was improper, because the
Example of episcopal Ordination wanted, and desired, was to be selected, not
from the Scripture, but from one or another of the Fathers of the Two first
Centuries. But this does not appear from the Challenge, in which there is not a
Word said of those Fathers. The Dudleian Lecturer had been saying, that he
could find nothing in Favor of Episcopacy in the Scriptures, nor in the
Fathers before Clemens of Alexandria, except a Sentence in Irenaeus, which he
endeavored to explain away. Upon this, he called upon Episcoparians to favor
him with only one Example of episcopal Ordination, in their Sense of it, within
the Time above-described Dud. Lect. p. 70.
. The Demand therefore, by all the Rules of fair Construction, must have been,
to produce the Example from those Writings wherein he was unable to find it
himself; which were the Scriptures and primitive Fathers of the Church. If then
Mr. Leaming was able to point out an Example in Scripture, he complied with the
Demand, as directly as if he had produced it from any of those Fathers.

THE Doctor argues that the Example given is not to be admitted by him, because
such an Example would, on our Side, be rejected. For if, in Answer to a
Declaration in the Appeal that no Instances of Presbyterian Ordination are to
be found in the Church for several Ages, he had replied, in Words like those of
Mr. Leaming; that he could produce many, but for brevity Sake he would mention
but one Instance, viz. The Ordination of Timothy, by "the laying on of the
Hands of the Presbytery," producing only those Arguments that had been used a
Hundred Times over, in Support of it; he imagines he should be laughed at by
the Doctor, and that convened Body which first put him upon writing. But a Man
is seldom laughed at for producing Arguments, notwithstanding they may have
been used frequently, provided they are produced and applied properly. Good
Arguments will wear a long while, and not be the worse for it. But when a Man
uses Arguments that have been refuted a Hundred Times over, in Opposition to
plain Facts, and the settled Belief of the Church for 1500 Years; I will not
answer for myself, nor am I authorized to answer for our Convention, that he
will not be laughed at. If it could be made to appear, by any Kind of
Arguments, that the Consecration of Timothy was an Example of presbyterian
Ordination, I believe we should consider it as a very serious Matter, and allow
that it would answer the Purpose of our Adversaries.

BUT whether the abovesaid Answer was proper or not, of which the Reader must
judge for himself; the Doctor goes on to challenge me, with the Appearance of
greater Intrepidity than ever, and more in the Style of a Champion, to produce
one single Instance of episcopal Ordination, in the appropriated Sense, from
some or other of the Fathers within 150 Years from Christ, p. 80: And he allows
me to call in the Assistance of any of the episcopal Clergy on the American
Continent; and promises to admit as genuine any Instance that may be brought
from Ignatius's Epistles, although certainly spurious or interpolated. But he
has no Right to expect that I will take Notice of this Defiance, daring and
provoking as it is, until he makes some Answer to a Challenge I gave him In the
Appeal defended, p. 259.
, to support a certain Charge he brought against the episcopal Clergy -- or
else to retract it. However, with him I will not insist upon the Strictness of
established Forms, and therefore I now give him the following Answer.

1. IF he himself will point out any Instance in those Fathers, wherein a
particular Ordination is mentioned, I do, by these Presents, engage to prove,
without the Assistance of any Clergyman on the Continent, that such Ordination
was properly and strictly episcopal.

2. IF no such Instances are to be found, the Cause of Episcopacy may be
supported without them. The Doctor, I suppose, will not give up the Cause of
Infant Baptism, because he can produce no Instances of it, within 150 Years
after Christ. The Fathers, within the Period prescribed, of whose Writings any
Part is now extant, are but few, and there is not one of them whose Works are
entire. The Works of Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, are lost; the same Fate has
attended the Writings of Hegesippus -- a few Fragments of both, preserved by
Eusebius, excepted. The literary Productions of Melito, Bishop of Sardis, which
were numerous, and chiefly relating to ecclesiastical Subjects; of Dionysius,
Bishop of Corinth; of Quadratus, Aristides, and Agrippa surnamed Castor,
besides many others that might be mentioned, have all perished. Were they now
extant, especially the Works of Hegesippus, the particular Intelligence wanted,
might reasonably be expected. For Eusebius and Jerome, who saw the Works of the
last-mentioned Writer, inform us, that he composed a complete Body of
ecclesiastical History, in Five Books, wherein he related all the principal
Occurrences that happened in the Church, after our Savior's Passion to the
Time of his Writing.

AS to those Works, belonging to the Doctor's. Period, which are extant, they
might all be contained in a Pocket-Volume. Some short Epistles to particular
Persons or Churches, exhorting to Perseverance and Patience -- one catholic
Epistle, partly written with the like View, but chiefly giving an allegorical
Explanation of the ceremonial Law -- one practical Discourse -- a Dialogue with
Trypho the Jew, proving that Jesus is the true Messiah -- a few Apologies for
the Christian Religion, in Answer to the Calumnies of its Adversaries -- two or
three Discourses against the Gentiles, exposing their Errors and Idolatries --
with a Fragment or two concerning the Resurrection -- are all the Works of St.
Barnabas, St. Hermas, Clemens Romanus, St. Ignatius, St. Polycarp, Justin
Martyr, Theophilus of Antioch, Tatian and Athenagoras, which have survived the
Wreck of Time; a great Part of their Writings having been irrecoverably lost.
Now as nothing that remains is of an historical Nature, we could hardly expect
that they would give us historical Accounts. Yet,

3. FROM these very Writings, and others of the second Century, we are
abundantly able to prove, that there were three Orders of Officers in the
Church at this Time, viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and that the Church was
under the Government of Bishops, as an Order distinct from, and superior to,
the other Two: -- from whence it follows, that Ordinations were performed by
Bishops.

IT cannot be expected, in a Work of this Nature, that I should collect all the
Passages in those Writings, which relate to the Subject; however, a few of them
by Way of Specimen, I beg Leave to present to the Reader. Clemens Romanus, who
was a Fellow Laborer with St. Paul, and one of those whose Names were written
in "the Book of Life Philip. iv.3.
, in his celebrated Epistle to the Corinthians, speaking of the Christian
Ministry, which he illustrates by the Jewish Priesthood, says: the chief Priest
has his proper Services; and to the Priests their proper Place is appointed;
and to the Levites belong their proper Ministries Sect. xl.
. Here are evidently three Orders in the Christian Church pointed out,
corresponding with the like Distinctions in the Jewish Church; and to the
highest Order belongs the Superintendency and Government of the whole.

IGNATIUS, in his Epistle Dr. Chauncy very graciously allows us, pro hac Vice,
what we have long claimed and possessed as a Right, the Use of Ignatius's
Epistles, which he is pleased to say are certainly spurious or interpolated;
but which others say, who are incomparably better Judges than he, are
undoubtedly genuine -- meaning those which are published as such by Usher and
Vossius. The following Hints are worthy of the Reader's Attention. The Epistles
of Ignatius were mentioned by Polycarp, in his Epistle to the Philippians, soon
after the Martyrdom of Ignatius; and he informs them, that he had collected and
sent to them these very Epistles. They are mentioned by Irenaeus, Origin,
Eusebius, Athanasius, Jerome, Gelasius and Theodoret, to say nothing of others:
and quoted in the very Words of the Copies now extant. No ancient Writings,
those of the Holy Scriptures excepted, are oftener quoted, or better attested
to be genuine, than the Epistles in Question; and the Arguments used against
them, would equally prove every other ancient Writing spurious. It deserves
Notice, that none but those, whose newfangled Tenets are contradicted by the
Epistles of Ignatius, ever attempted to disprove their Authenticity; and we all
know, that for the same Reason, even the Holy Scriptures have sometimes met
with the like Treatment.
to the Magnesians, says: Forasmuch as in the Persons beforementioned (viz.
Damas their Bishop, Bassus and Apollonius, their Presbyters, and Sotio their
Deacon) I have seen all of you in Faith and Charity, I exhort you that you
study to do all Things with divine Concord; your Bishop presiding in the Place
of God; your Presbyters, in the Place of the Council of the Apostles, and your
Deacons, being entrusted with the Ministry of Jesus Christ Sect. vi.
. He also exhorts the Trallians, to do nothing without their Bishop; to be
subject to their Presbyters; and to reverence their Deacons; and says, he that
does any Thing without the Bishop, and Presbyters, and Deacons, is not pure in
his Conscience Sect. vii.
. To the Philadelphians he says: I cried whilst I was among you: I spoke with a
loud Voice; attend to the Bishop, and to the Presbytery, and to the Deacons
Sect. vii.
. In his Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, he salutes their very worthy Bishop, and
their venerable Presbytery, and their Deacons, whom he calls his
Fellow Laborers Sect. xii.
. And in an Epistle to Polycarp, the Bishop of the Smyrnaeans, he says: My Soul
be Security for them that submit to their Bishop, with their Presbyters, and
Deacons. Such is the Testimony of this venerable Martyr, in Favor of the
Superiority of Bishops to Presbyters; and it is no Wonder, that the Enemies of
Episcopacy use every Effort to weaken its Force.

THE Doctor acted very wisely in not extending his Period any farther
downwards, than 150 Years after Christ; for he knew that his Cause would too
evidently suffer by an Examination of the Authors that immediately followed;
whose Testimony in Favor of Episcopacy no Arts could evade, and the
Authenticity of whose Writings he was unable to dispute. I shall
notwithstanding venture, with his Leave, or even without it, to step over the
Line which he has marked out for me, for a few Moments, to point out some
Passages in those Authors, that are directly to my Purpose; but still confining
myself within the Limits of the second Century.

HEGESIPPUS, in a genuine Fragment of his Works preserved by Eusebius, says:
when I came to Rome, I composed a Succession ( i. e. a History of the
Succession) of the Bishops of that City to the Time of Anicetus (about the Year
153 Vide Fabricii Bibliog. antiq. Cap. vii.
) whose Deacon Eleutherus was at that Time. After the Death of Anicetus, Soter
succeeded him, and Eleutherus succeeded Soter, etc Eusebii Eccles. Hist. Lib.
iv. Cap. 22.
. The regular Succession of Bishops, in the Time of Hegesippus, we see, was
spoken of, not as Novelty, but as a Thing commonly known; and in composing his
ecclesiastical History, he visited the most eminent Sees, and wrote his Account
of their Bishops upon the Spot, where he had the Advantage, not only of common
Information, but of consulting the Records of the Church.

THE Three Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are frequently mentioned by
other Writers of the second Century. Clemens of Alexandria, who was instructed
by those who had seen the Apostles Stromata, Lib. l. p. 201, edit. per Heinsium.
, says: There are many other Precepts concerning the elect ( i. e. Christians)
which are written in the Scriptures; some relating to Presbyters, some to
Bishops, and others again to Deacons -- of which I shall take another
Opportunity to speak Paedagogus, Lib. iii. p. 194.
. Again says he: In the Church, the Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
are, I suppose, Imitations of the angelic Glory; and of that Economy which the
Scriptures say those expect, who, following the Steps of the Apostles, have
lived righteously, according to the Gospel Strom. Lib. vi, p. 481. The famous
Origin, who was the Disciple of Clemens, and his Successor in the catechetical
School of Alexandria, makes the same Distinctions. Although he lived in the
second Century, yet as he wrote not until the Beginning of the third, I will
only take Notice of the following Passage; which the candid Reader will excuse
as it is given in a Note. More, says he, is required from one in my Station (of
a Presbyter) than from a Deacon; and more from a Deacon, than from a Layman.
But more still is required from him, who has, in ecclesiastical Matters, the
Sovereignty over all of us -- meaning the Bishop. Apud Bev. Cod. Can. Lib. ii,
Cap. xi. Sect. 3.
.

IF we go on to Irenaeus, we shall find him boldly declaring: We can reckon up
those whom the Apostles ordained Bishops in the several Churches, and their
Successors down to own our Times. And if the Apostles had known any hidden
Mysteries -- they would have committed them to these Men, to whom they
committed the Churches themselves. For they were very desirous that those
should be perfect and unblameable in all Things, whom they left as their
Successors, and to whom they committed their own Authority Adversus Haereses,
Lib. iii, Cap. 3, Edit per Grabe.
. He then, as an Example, enumerates the Succession of Bishops at Rome in the
following Order: Linus, (mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy)
Anacletus, Clemens, Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, and in the 12th Place Eleutherius, who was the Bishop at that
Time. And in another Place, he speaks of a regular Succession of Bishops from
the Apostles, as an essential Mark of the true Church Lib. iv. Cap. 43. See the
learned Dr. Grabe's Notes, in p. 343.
.

THESE Passages, to which many other of the like Tendency, from Writers of the
second Century, might have been easily added Most of these have been collected
by Bishop Pearson, in his Vindicia.
, prove directly and immediately, as well as unanswerably, that throughout the
second Century, Bishops were distinct from, and superior to, Presbyters, and
had the chief Government of the Church; and, by necessary Consequence, that
ORDINATION was their peculiar Office. For there never was in Fact, so far as we
can discover by the Light of History, nor indeed in the Nature of Things can
there be, an episcopal Church, wherein any other than episcopal Ordination was,
or can be, allowed of. In every Society, the Appointment and the Commissions of
the various Degrees of Officers, must proceed from those that govern it. This
is so evident, that there never was, I believe, an Advocate for the
Presbyterian Parity, but would readily grant, that whenever and wheresoever
the Government of the Church was episcopal, the Ordinations were also
episcopal. Therefore the above-recited Passages, although they do not inform us
of any single Ordinations that were performed by Bishops, yet do more; they
give sufficient Evidence, that all Ordinations were thus performed.

WE come now to the Case of the Waldenses. It was said in the Appeal, that
until the Beginning of the Reformation, no Instances worthy of Notice occur, to
favor Ordination by Presbyters. The Doctor alleged the Example of the
Waldenses to the contrary. I replied, that it appeared from Commenius, that the
Waldenses pretended always to be episcopal, and that the Bohemians applied to
them as such, for Ordination; which they would not have done, had there been
Reason so much as to suspect, that they had not the Authority that was wanted.
And, besides the Account given from a very respectable Writer in Answer to Mr.
Owen, I quoted Dr. Mosheim and Dr. Allix, the latter of whom probably
understood the Waldensian History better than any Writer of his Time, to prove
that they were episcopal.

THE Doctor now, in p. 81, endeavors to support his former Assertion, by the
Assistance of Two more Authors. The first is Paul Perrin, whose Book I have not
seen; nor does he say, or intimate, that he has seen it himself. But if he has
seen it, why may he not mistake that Author even where he speaks plainly, as he
does Bishop Burnet? Let the Reader also judge how far his Testimony should be
admitted in such a Case, after he has represented that, in the Church of
England, Presbyters have as much Authority to ordain, as Bishops. But Allix and
Mosheim had seen Perrin's Book, and they both believed notwithstanding, that
the Waldenses were episcopal: From whence I infer, that Paul Perrin proves not
the contrary.

HIS other Author is that famous Episcopalian, (he should have said, Leader of
the Puritans) Dr. Reignolds, [Reynolds] who more than equaled in Learning
(because he was a Puritan) either Mosheim or Dr. Allix; and he peremptorily
affirms in his Letter to Sir F. Knolls (Knollys) that the Waldenses were of the
same Opinion with Aerius (the Heretic) as to the Identity of the Order of
Bishops and Presbyters. This is pompous indeed, and calculated to lead the
Reader to believe, that this Letter contains such a clear and particular
Account of the Matter, as would convince the most stubborn. But the very
Letter, unless I am greatly mistaken, as much as the Doctor has seen of it, is
in Neal's History of the Puritans; and to gratify the Reader's Curiosity, I
will present him with as much of it as has any Relation to the Subject. All
that have labored in reforming the Church for 1500 Years, says the
Letter-Writer, have taught, that all Pastors, be they entitled Bishops or
Priests, have equal Authority and Power by God's Word; as first the Waldenses,
next Marsilius Pativinus, etc. The Reader here sees the whole of the Evidence
afforded by Reynolds; and feeble as it is, the Doctor is forced to place upon
it a great Part of his Confidence. He produces nothing but a Reference to this
Extract, and his Account of Paul Perrin's History, to oppose to the great Names
of Allix and Mosheim.

HERE I might safely rest the Matter; but as it is now in my Way, I will
farther confirm what I think already well established, by one or two ancient
Authorities, out of the many I have at Hand. In an ancient Abridgement of the
Opinions of the Waldenses, recorded by Wolfius, at the Year 1160, it is said:
They absolutely deny the Pope's Primacy over all Churches, and more especially
his Power over all Policies, that is, his Power of both Swords; neither do they
hold, that any other Orders ought to be retained in the Church, but those of
Priests, Deacons and Bishops Remarks upon the ancient Churches of Piedmont, by
Dr. Allix, p. 139.
. And Mr. Limborch produces out of the Book of the Sentences of the Inquisition
of Toulouse, passed in that Court, from the Year 1307 to 1323, the following
Charge, which, among many others, was brought by the Inquisitors against the
Waldenses, viz. That they held that in the Church there are but three Orders,
namely, Bishops, Priests and Deacons History of the Inquisition, Vol. 1, Book
1, Chap. 8, translated by S. Chandler. Let the learned Reader also consult
Usher's elaborate Work, de Christianarum Ecclesiarum Successione et Statu, Cap.
vi, et viii, where he will find the same Point most abundantly and unanswerably
proved.
. When the Doctor shall have invalidated these ancient Authorities, by showing,
either that they are certainly interpolated or spurious, or that they are no
Evidence of what they are alleged to prove, others shall be at his Service.

ON the Subject of Confirmation he says but little. He had objected against the
Practice in the Words of the Dissenting Gentleman, and I had answered him in
the Words of Mr. White. He now requests the Reader, and I heartily join in the
Request, that he would compare the Objections and the Answer; and if the latter
will not be found adequate to the former, I can only say that I am greatly
mistaken. He concludes with declaring, that Mr. Towgood was a Man of much
greater Abilities than Mr. White, and Mr. Pierce than Dr. Gray. One Reason for
this Opinion is obvious; Mr. Towgood was a Dissenting Gentleman, and -- so was
Mr. Pierce Perhaps this may be disputed. Dr. Troughear says; it is well known,
that Mr. Pierce of Exeter, who pretended to be a Presbyterian, or independent
Teacher or Minister there, was not only a Jesuit, but an Heretic too, and had
his Followers as such. See his LEGACY, etc. p. 9. He says also: After he (Mr.
Pierce) had been a Preacher in a Conventicle for many Years he declared himself
an Arian, and was discovered to have been all the Time a Jesuit in Disguise.
Ibid. p. 33.
.

HIS next Section contains all that he says in Reply to five Sections of the
Appeal defended, written in Support of as many Sections of the Appeal; wherein
it was shown, that without an Episcopate the Church of England in the Colonies
must necessarily be without Ordination, Confirmation and a regular Government
-- that so considerable a Part of a national Church, suffering so long under
the Want of its own Institutions, was an unparalleled Case -- and that
Application for an Episcopate at that Time was apprehended to be peculiarly
seasonable, for many Reasons that were there assigned, and particularly on
Account of the American Heathens, whose Case was largely explained. These
Subjects all directly tended to the Point in Hand, and were necessary Parts of
such a Publication as the Appeal; and as so little is now said relating to them
by my persevering Antagonist, what was advanced in those Sections may now be
considered as generally established. But notwithstanding their being thus
secure, I shall attend to the few straggling Exceptions still remaining, that
have any Appearance of Force or Plausibility.

IN this Number can hardly be included what is said in p. 86, in Opposition to
an Observation made in the Appeal, that none but Bishops have a Right to govern
the Church. This Proposition was affirmed of the Church in its simple, original
State, considered barely as a spiritual Society; and the Government spoken of
was evidently such as is purely spiritual. The Doctor objected that the Church
of England has no Authority of a spiritual Nature, because She acknowledges all
Manner of Jurisdiction to flow from the Crown. Instead of a direct Reply to the
Objection in that Place, it was thought proper to refer the Reader back, to
where the Subject had been formally considered Appeal defended, p. 49.
, and where it was clearly proved that the Supremacy of the Crown was never
thought to include spiritual Power, in the Sense of the Objection. And I still
think it would have been paying but an ill Compliment to the Reader's
Understanding, to repeat to him what had been said but 50 Pages before: And I
beg Liberty again to refer to it, as a sufficient Refutation of all the Doctor
said on the Subject in his Answer, p. 56, and of all he now says in his Reply,
p. 86, and indeed of all that he can say.

NOR do I think it worth while to follow him through his Disquisition about the
Head of a Thing, and the Middle of it: Not that I mean to retract what I said
about his mistaking one for the other, but because it can be of no Consequence
to our Readers I had advanced, in what, if he pleases, he may call the Head of
my third Section, this general Proposition, that without Bishops the Church of
England in America must be without Government. This Proposition, I observed,
was not meant absolutely and strictly, but in a qualified Sense. The Doctor
objected to this in his Answer; to which it was said in Reply, that it is
agreeable to strict Method, first to lay down a general Proposition, and then
to mark out the Exceptions and Limitations with which it is to be understood.
He now rejoins, p. 89, that it is neither consistent with Method, or (nor) good
Sense to limit a Proposition that is not capable of Limitation. I know of no
general Proposition that is incapable of Limitation. Indeed universal
Propositions, in Strictness, do not admit of Limitation; but yet, as they are
sometimes used by the most correct Writers and Speakers, they must be taken in
a qualified Sense. The Psalmist says: They are all gone out of the Way, they
are altogether become abominable; there is none that does good, no not one.
And yet this Proposition, predicated of "the Children of Men," although it be
an universal Affirmative, guarded both by positive and negative Terms, was
never true in any other than a limited Sense. But as to general Propositions,
as distinguished from universal ones, a Capacity of Limitation is essential to
their Nature; for a Proposition that admits of no Limitation, is not general,
but universal. However, the Limitation of which a general Proposition is always
capable, is not always required. For,

AS to Ordination, the general Proposition, that without Bishops the Church of
England in America must be without Ordination, is true without any Exception,
or Limitation. In Answer to this the Doctor said, that notwithstanding our Want
of Bishops, we might have the Ordination we wanted in America, attended with
some Inconvenience and Charge. This, considered as an Answer to the Complaint,
I thought amounted to saying, that we might have Ordination in America, by
having it in England. Dr. Chauncy says in Reply, the Doctor is here illogically
insensible that he is sneering at himself. p. 90. That I am here sneering at
myself, I am truly insensible; but whether my Insensibility be, according to
this admirable Distinction, of the logical or illogical Kind, must be left to
the Decision of the learned Reader. The Complaint was, that Ordination cannot
be had at all in America, and that a Voyage to England for that Purpose is
attended with great Inconvenience, Danger and Expense. What could put it into
the Doctor's Head to dispute this, and to oppose it with a Number of
Distinctions, which after all amounted to no more than saying, that we might
have Ordinations in America by having them in England, I am unable to conceive.

BUT we are now shown that there is no Reason for either Part of the Complaint;
and we are directed how we may have Ordination in America, without having it
in, or from, England. Notwithstanding this mighty Outcry, there are at least
two Bishops now residing in British America, one in the North, the other in the
South Part of it, from either of which it is reasonable to think, the episcopal
Office might be conveyed, with incontestible Validity, to an episcopal
Presbyter; which would, at once, put an End to all farther Complaint of the
Expense and Hazard in going to England to have Ordination in America. p. 91. We
do not dispute the Validity of Orders given by any true Bishop, whether he be
Moravian or Papist; and I had rather receive Ordination from such an one, than
from all the Presbyters, or Presbyteries, in the Christian World. But we have
other Objections against applying either to the Moravians or Papists, some of
which, as the Doctor appears to be serious, I will mention.

1. WE are neither Moravians nor Papists ourselves; and therefore we cannot
consistently think of making this Application to them, until we have no
Prospect of Relief from the Bishops of that Church to which we belong.

2. SUCH an Application, before we know that our Petition for Bishops will be
absolutely and finally rejected, much more while there is a fair Prospect of
its Success, might be construed as undutiful, both by our civil and
ecclesiastical Governors, whom Providence has placed over us, and to whom we,
the Clergy in particular, have sworn to behave dutifully and obediently.

3. IT would be schismatical. We should thereby separate and withdraw ourselves
from that sound Part of the Catholic Church, which justly claims us as its
Members, and is entitled to our Obedience. And we look upon Schism in the
Church of Christ to be as criminal as it was in the Jewish Church, although it
be not immediately punished by the like visible Interpositions of Heaven. We
look upon Schism in the Church to have much of the same Nature with Rebellion
in the State; and the Guilt of both is so flagrant in our Opinion, that we
constantly pray in our Litanany, to be preserved from it -- from all false
Doctrince, Heresy and Schism, as well as from all Sedition, privy Conspiracy
and Rebellion. Were the British Colonies independent of their Parent-Kingdom,
the Episcopalians in this Country would be a Society independent of the
national Church; and in that Case they might seek for an Episcopate from any
Part of the Globe, from which they could expect most easily to obtain it. But
such an Independency they do not affect -- they wish not to see; they desire no
more than the common Rights of British Subjects, and the common Privileges of
their Fellow Christians; or, in other Words, such a Toleration as the
Government allows to the Dissenters from its own religious Establishment.

4. WE have also a great Regard for the ancient Canons of the Church, which
required that Three Bishops should impose Hands at the Ordination of a Bishop.
Although this may not be absolutely necessary, yet it has been always
canonical; and we have such a Veneration for the Church in its primitive Ages,
that we would rather submit to the Trouble of going to any Part of Europe for
an Episcopate, than depart from the Example She has set us: -- especially in
the Consecration of our first Bishops, from whence, in that Case, all our
future ones would probably proceed. Now the Bishops in the British Colonies are
but Two; and they are so remote from each other, and their Principles, as well
as Interests, are in many Respects so opposite, that it would be extreme
difficult to persuade them to come together, and to join in such a Consecration.

5. THE Bishop of Canada and the Moravian Bishop in Pennsylvania, are both
British Subjects, and both tolerated by a peculiar Indulgence; and they would
probably conceive it to be very unbecoming in them, without the Consent of
Government, to convey the episcopal Character to the Church of England in the
Colonies, the Tendency of which would be to render it independent of the
national Church. And before the Government would consent to this, it would
undoubtedly consent to our having an Episcopate in such a Manner as is
requested.

THUS our not having applied to the Moravians or Papists for a Bishop hitherto,
has been a Matter both of Prudence and Conscience; and the following
Reflections are very unjust, and very uncharitable. It may reasonably, and will
be strongly suspected, says the Doctor, Something more than that which is
purely spiritual is hankered after, if the poor Church of England in the
Colonies, is suffered to continue in a lamentably perishing Condition for Want
of a Bishop, when She may have one, without any Hazard of Life, and at a small
Expense of Pocket, by only repairing to an American Bishop. Surely the Cry of
Distress and Misery, for Want of a purely spiritual Bishop, will be
disregarded, as it ought to be, until it be made evident, that due Application
has been made to one or other of the continental Bishops, and that they have
refused to consecrate a Bishop for the Colonies, or to ordain Candidates for
holy Orders. If the episcopal Clergy had been as zealous in their Application
to the Bishops in America, as they have been elsewhere, they might without all
Doubt, have had one from among themselves vested with the episcopal Powers of
Ordination and Government long before now. p. 92.

THE Doctor now takes a Leap over more than 20 Pages of my Defense, and lights
down upon that Part of it, where the Society's offering to defray the Expenses
of going to England for Ordination was considered. He complains bitterly, p.
93, of what he calls the scurrilous Treatment he received in one of the
New York periodical Papers, on Account of his Answer to what I had said of the
Expensiveness of such a Voyage to our Candidates. As I was not the Writer of
that Paper, I will leave it to the Author to defend it, if he thinks proper, or
to give the Doctor Satisfaction. But he complains bitterly of me too, for
having remarked upon it in a Manner much below the Gentleman, not to say the
Christian Divine. How the Matter was, will appear presently. He hopes the
Reader will bear with him, while he explains the Affair; and I hope the Reader
will also bear with me, while I consider that Explanation.

WHAT relates to this Subject in the Doctor's former Pamphlet, is in p. 81, in
the following Words. Another Reason (of Complaint) is, the Expense of the
Voyage, which cannot be reckoned at less, upon an Average, than One Hundred
Pounds Sterling to each Person. And this is aggravated by the Consideration,
that the Expense must generally fall upon such, as, having already expended the
greatest Part of their Pittance, in their Education, will find it extremely
hard to raise a sufficient Sum for the Purpose. I heartily suppose the Dr. had
never seen, or, if he had, did not remember at the Time of writing, the Account
of the Society, published in 1706, in which they say p. 74, all young Students
in those Parts ( meaning the Colonies) who desire episcopal Ordination, are
invited into England; and their EXPENSES in coming and returning are to be
defrayed by the Society. According to this Invitation, there is no Hardship as
to the Article of "Expense," that can be complained of, unless absurdly, but by
the Society themselves; and they cannot have just Reason for Complaint, as the
Money they expend in this Way is as properly bestowed, as in Support of the
Missionaries themselves.

BEFORE the Reader proceeds farther, I beg of him to review this Passage, and
to mark its apparent Design and Tendency. Is it not manifestly worded in such a
Manner, as to excite the Idea, that the Voyage to England is not expensive to
the Candidates? I know of several, that upon reading the Passage, understood
that the Doctor absolutely affirmed this; and I know of but one Person, who at
first perceived that he did not affirm it. It had been asserted, that the
Expense upon an Average was no less than L. 100 Sterling to each Person; does
not the Answer lead one to believe that it is not a Farthing? Nay does it not
appear to be artfully calculated to lead the Reader also to believe something
farther; namely, that concerning a plain Matter of Fact, with Regard to which
it is impossible that any Missionary can be mistaken, I published to the World
an absolute wilful Falsehood? -- and that I was so abominably stupid, as to
publish a Falsehood which was known to be such, not only by every Missionary on
the Continent, but by every Member of the Society both here and at home, and by
every Bishop in the Kingdom Appeal defended, p. 124.
? This is what I asserted; and the Assertion is true, that to me it had that
Appearance. It was not affirmed that the Doctor intended, but only that I
feared it was his Intention, to lead his Readers thus to conceive of me. The
Suspicion, if there had been no Foundation for it, would, I confess, have been
injurious to his Character, as such Conduct is inconsistent with common
Honesty; but as the Words, in my Opinion, naturally suggested it, and I had no
other Way of judging of his Design, than from the natural Tendency and the
known Effect of the Passage, he has no Reason to complain; as I formed my
Judgment according to the Evidence which he himself afforded.

MY Representation of the Expensiveness of the Voyage to Candidates I knew to
be true; he could not know it to be false, or unfair; why then did he dispute
it? And by disputing it, why would he appear to contradict me? By alleging
against me the Society's Invitation to Candidates in 1706, he appeared to say,
while he seemed careful to avoid expressly saying, what was yet strongly
insinuated by the whole Structure of the Paragraph, that the Expense fell upon
the Society, and not upon the Candidates. He knew that if what was thus
artfully insinuated was received as true, what I asserted must have been
received as false; and that I must have been thought a Liar, in a Case wherein
I could not possibly have been mistaken, and consequently a wilful Liar. In
this View of the Case, his supposing that I had not seen, or had forgotten, the
Society's Invitation, was no more than supposing, that I did not recollect that
such Evidence was in the Hands of the Public, as was a Proof of the Falseness
of my Assertion. A very candid and charitable Supposition truly!

HE conceits that I was inconsistent with myself, in pretending to suspect him
in this Manner, while I allowed that he heartily supposed I had not seen the
Society's Invitation. But to speak plainly, and without a Figure, I did not
imagine that there was Candor in any Part of the Affair. The Word heartily was
his own; I used it as such with the Mark of Quotation, and returned it to him
in an ironical Sense. In Order to heighten the Irony, I introduced it with
very, a Word of my own, saying that he VERY heartily made the Supposition;
which ironical Use of the Word I would not have made, I assure him, had I
imagined it could have possibly been mistaken.

IN explaining himself upon the Subject he now declares, in these Words: in
direct Contradiction to this ACKNOWLEDGED CANDOR, he (Dr. Chandler) would lead
the Reader to think, that it was my Intention to represent him as an abominably
stupid Liar. It was in Truth my real Design, explicitly as well as heartily
signified, to guard him against entertaining any such Thought. p. 97. Some
People have a strange Way of putting their Designs in Execution. What the Doctor
says was his Design, I heartily believe to be true, in the Sense wherein he
means it. But whether I, or a common Reader, can come at that determinate
Sense, there is Room to doubt. A Man may be a Liar, and yet not a stupid one;
he may be stupid, and yet not abominably stupid: And whether he means, that he
endeavored to guard against the Reader's conceiving of me as a Liar, or as a
stupid Liar, or only as an abominably stupid one, he has not said with
sufficient Precision. And why should he have endeavored to guard against this,
if he was not conscious of having said what would otherwise tend to lead into
the Mistake?

THAT I made not a fair Representation of the Matter, he still insinuates,
without positively affirming. For, says he, though I neither said, nor intended
to say it before, I say it now in plain Words, that he did not declare the
Truth -- IF -- (if what? Why if) he intended to make his Readers believe,
agreeably to the evident Import of his Words, that the Expense of the Voyage to
England for Orders, was, to each Person, out of his own Pocket without
Exception, One Hundred Pounds Sterling. I never meant to say this; nor do my
Words import, that without Exception, every Candidate expended in his Voyage to
England L. 100 Sterling, out of his own Pocket. I knew very well, that every
Candidate's Pocket does not contain L. 100 Sterling, and that what it does not
contain cannot be expended out of it. But this I said, that the Expense of the
Voyage, on an Average, is L. 100 Sterling to each Candidate; it being to some
more, and perhaps to some a little less. This Expense has never been defrayed
by the Society; the Candidates have generally born it themselves: But in those
Instances wherein they have been unable, Donations for that Purpose have been
made by their Friends, or Money has been advanced by the Congregations in which
they were to officiate; and in this Case it is most commonly deducted
afterward, if they live to return, either wholly or partly from the stipulated
Salary, so that thus far it finally falls upon the Candidates themselves.

BUT it seems that, in New England, it is common for Candidates to be much
assisted in their Voyage. This much Assistance, except in the Case before
mentioned, seldom amounts to more than the Sea-Stores for the Passage to
England, if I have been rightly informed. But supposing it to be otherwise, L.
100 Sterling is the Expense attending the Voyage of each Candidate; and whether
it falls upon himself, or his Friends, or his future Congregation, it does not
weaken the Complaint. What an intolerable Burden would the Congregationalists
in New England esteem it, if every Ordination of theirs was loaded with the
Expense of L. 100 Sterling, to be paid, either by the Candidate, or his
Friends, or the Congregation? Were this the Case, if I know my own Heart, I
should be ashamed of appearing to oppose, but would heartily join in promoting
any proper Plan for their Relief.

AS to the Defense of the Doctor's Conduct, in the Instance under
Consideration, attempted by the Author of a fictitious Letter from a Member of
the Society, (the Letter is called fictitious, because the only Member of the
Society, with the initial Letters of whose Name it was signed, disavowed it
with abhorrence) I am not sensible that I said any Thing relating to it, that
was inconsistent with the Character of a Gentleman or Christian Divine. What I
said was, that without 'an abler and fairer Advocate' than the Author of that
Letter, the Doctor's Reputation must suffer, by the Charge of Falsehood, which
a Writer in one of our periodical Papers had brought against him, on Account of
the Passage that is still before us. The Falsehood charged upon him was, his
publishing that all the Candidates for holy Orders in the Church of England,
have the Expenses of the Voyage home paid by the Society A WHIP for the
American Whig, Numb. XIV.
. The Doctor did not directly say this; but the abovementioned Writer thought,
as most People did, that he attempted to prove it, and that attempting
publicly to prove a Falsehood, was equal to publishing a Falsehood, and might
justly be called so. It had been alleged by the Doctor as a Medium of Proof
that the Voyage to England was not expensive, as was represented in the Appeal,
that the Society published such an Invitation to Candidates in 1706, as he
mentioned. The Fact was not denied; but such an Application of it was the
Object of the Censure. The Vindication therefore that took no Notice of this
wrong Application, fell short of the Accusation; on which Account it was
imperfect and feeble, and insufficient to secure the Reputation that was at
Stake.

THE Doctor affects to think that the Society's Invitation in 1706 is still
binding to them, unless it has been formally recalled. But as it was not
expressed in Words that extended it forward, it expired of Course. It appears
upon the Face of the Invitation, that it was only an occasional Act. All is
expressed in the present Time, without a single Word to intimate an Intention
of its being a standing and perpetual Rule. I believe that every Vote or Law of
a Body Corporate, that is designed for Continuance, has some Words that clearly
express that Design; and where no such Words are used, that it is always
understood to be only occasional, or to serve for the present Time. But, says
the Doctor, the Society Five or Six Years afterward ordered the same Account,
etc. containing this Invitation, to be reprinted with a Continuation; so that
the Invitation, by their Order, was printed and reprinted: From whence he would
have his Readers to infer, at least, that the Invitation was in Force Five or
Six Years after it was first made. But the Book might have been ordered to be
reprinted, without any particular View to this Passage; and the Passage might
have been designedly presented again to the Public, to show a Step that had
been formerly taken, in Order to supply the Church in America with the
Missionaries wanted. It appears that none accepted of the Invitation when it
was first made, and that it never was repeated, any farther than every new
Edition of the History that records it, made by the Society's Order, may be
called a Repetition of it.

WHEN the first Candidates went home from hence, which was not until many Years
afterward, they received no Benefit from the Invitation in Question. The
Society knew that, both in its Nature and Design, it was then antiquated;
otherwise, if they chose not to fulfill it is Promise, they would have taken Care
to recall it. About Eight Years after the Time now spoken of, Dr. Berkeley, who
had resided a considerable while in this Country, in his Sermon before the
Society, speaking of such Missionaries as had been born and educated in
America, says: I verily think it might increase the Number of such useful Men,
if Provision were made to defray their Charges in coming hither, to receive
holy Orders; passing and repassing the Ocean, and tarrying the necessary Time
in London, requiring an Expense that many are not able to bear. This implies
that he knew nothing of any Provision then in being, by Virtue of any Order, or
Vote, or Invitation of the Society, for defraying the Expenses attending the
Voyage of Candidates: And as the Sermon was ordered to be printed, without a
Correction of this Passage, or any explanatory Note, we may be certain that the
Society, as a Body, knew nothing of it neither. But I will not enlarge farther
in so plain a Case. I will only return to Dr. Chauncy some of his own Language,
relating to this Head, it being not so much my Property, as his. The Doctor,
perhaps, may in Time make higher Seize in Learning of this Kind, than he
is at present possessed of. -- For it is no infrequent Thing with him to affirm
that, both publicly and boldly which he never would have done, had it not been
for want of more Knowledge. p. 102.

IT has always been thought very hard, that the Church of England in the
Colonies should be distinguished, and, as it were, stigmatized by a Want of
those religious Privileges, which are granted to all other Denominations of
Christians. The Doctor, whom I will warrant -- as the most complete and
universal Opponent that ever dealt in Controversy, denies this Fact too. He
affirms, that it is the exact Truth, that the Episcopalians have the same
Liberty with all other Persuasions. The same Liberty to do and enjoy some
Things, they undoubtedly have: But have they the Liberty of enjoying their own
peculiar Form of ecclesiastical Government, in the same Manner that other
Denominations have? Can their Candidates be ordained without great Loss of
Time, Hazard and Expense, as those of the Presbyterians and Congregationalists
may? If they cannot, says the Doctor, it is not owing to any Want of Liberty,
but to their not using that Liberty which is equally granted to all
Denominations without Distinction. p. 103. What we have not a Liberty to enjoy
consistently with our Principles, we have no Liberty to enjoy at all. But, says
this professed Defender of LIBERTY, it is then from your Principles only that
you are hampered with Difficulties. This, as I told him before, is the Language
of Tyranny and Persecution, but notwithstanding he repeats it. But what can he
mean, by being hampered by Principles? If we are allowed to enjoy and practice
what our Principles require, we are not hampered by them: But, if we are not
allowed this, we have not an equal Liberty with those, who are permitted to
enjoy and practice all that their Principles do require. If no public Worship
were permitted in the Colonies, but according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, the Dissenters might be told, according to the Doctor's Mode of
reasoning, that they had the same Liberty with the Members of the Church;
meaning that they had Liberty to do, contrary to their Inclination, what the
Members of the Church chose to do. But would such Liberty as this content them?
Would telling them that it was only from their Principles that they were
hampered with Difficulties, silence their Complaints? I trow not. The great
Complaint is that we are hampered by Difficulties, from, or on Account of, our
religious Principles. We wish to have such Embarrassments removed, and to be
upon the same Footing with those that are not thus embarrassed.

THE Doctor, who is so lucky as never to want for Distinctions, says, that we
are under no more Restraint, than the other Denominations, by any interposing
ACT OF THE STATE. p. 104. But what is this to the Purpose of proving, that we
have the same religious Liberty with Christians of other Denominations? If we
are not under Restraint from any Act of the Legislature, yet if we are under
peculiar Disadvantages on some other Accounts, which render us incapable of
enjoying what our Fellow Christians of all other Denomitions enjoy, why should
not a Remedy be provided for those peculiar Disadvantages? Nay, should it
appear that our Principles and Connections are such, that a proper Remedy could
not be provided, without an interposing Act of the State in our Favor, we
humbly conceive that this would be an Object not unworthy of the Attention of
the Legislature, and that we should have a Right to petition for such an Act:
And as barely religious Liberty, and not any Authority over others, is the End
in View, no true Friends to religious Liberty and Toleration ought to oppose
us. Religious Liberty consists in a Freedom to perform all the Offices and
public Duties which Men's Religion requires, without Molestation or Restraint.
And the Enjoyment of this Liberty may be interrupted or prevented by other
Ways, as well as by the Interposition of Government. The Effect may be the
same, whatever Cause, or Concurrence of Causes, may have produced it. The
Episcopalians in the Colonies know and perpetually feel, that they have not the
same Liberty, which they see others around them possess and exercise. They do
not enjoy some of the most necessary Institutions of their Religion, and of
this they complain. But they never have complained, that they had no Dominion
over any of the religious Sects in the Colonies: -- They have never complained
of not being distinguished by any superior Advantages: -- They only request,
and they only wish, to be raised to an Equality. They think themselves entitled
to so much, by the common Rights of Christians, which they are not conscious
that they have forfeited.

THE Doctor goes on to speak of me, in the following high and figurative
Language. He can perceive no Difference between Difficulties, suffered upon
Principle, in Consequence of the Non-bestowment of distinguishing Favor, and
Difficulties that are suffered for not complying with the arbitrary, tyrannical
Precepts of Men, in Violation of the Rights of Conscience: Yea, he would make
us believe, that Difficulties suffered, upon Principle, through Want of a Grant
of Favor, may, with as much Pertinency, be complained of as any of the
Tortures the Saints of the most High have been harrassed with, for their
Adherence to their God, from the greatest Persecutors that ever existed. p.
104. All this is occasioned by the Animadversion I made upon a certain
Assertion of his, in his former Pamphlet, that there is no other Hardship or
Difficulty in the Case (of the Episcopalians in America) than what naturally
arises from professed Principles. This, I told him, looked, as if in his
Opinion, Men were not to be pitied, when their Sufferings result from their
Principles. The most dreadful Persecutions are no more than Sufferings
inflicted upon Men for, and consequently, in some Sense, resulting from their
professed Principles. But (as I proceeded) does the Doctor mean that we should
be left to suffer, because it is on Account of our Principles? Or that Men, of
whose Principles HE does not approve, ought to be persecuted Appeal defended,
p. 136.
? Such was the Provocation given him! Upon so slight Basis is this massy Column
of Misrepresentation erected! There ought, no Doubt, to be a Difference made
between Difficulties, although suffered upon Principle, in Consequence of
Non-bestowment of Favor, absurdly here called distinguishing, when the Design
of it is to put an End to Distinctions, and Difficulties that are suffered from
arbitrary and tyrannical Precepts. But Difficulties are still Difficulties: and
when Men, who are under no Difficulties that can interfere with the full
Enjoyment of all their religious Privileges, endeavor to obstruct the Removal
of Difficulties in the Way of others, because they do not approve of their
Principles; they so far are actuated by the Spirit of Inquisitors, and so far
discover that very Disposition, which has inflicted the severest Tortures, the
Saints of the most High have been ever harrassed with. It concerns some People
to examine their own Hearts, whether they have not, in Reality, too much of
this abominable and accursed Spirit.

THE Doctor now takes another Leap that is prodigious indeed, from p. 136 to p.
196 of my Defense, containing the whole fourth, fifth, sixth, and the far
greater Part of the seventh Sections. As he professes himself in his Title Page
to be a Rectifier of my Mistakes, and a Refuter of my false arguing, it will
naturally be concluded, that he could find no Mistakes, in those 60 Pages, that
he was able to rectify, nor any false arguing that he was able to refute; or,
at least, none that was of material Consequence. He therefore passes on to the
Case of a Negative put upon the Request of the Non-Episcopalians in Boston, for
a Royal Charter, to enable them to conduct and manage a Fund of L. 2000
Sterling raised by Subscription, for the Support of Missionaries among the
Indian Natives. The Defeat of this Application he insinuated to have been
occasioned by episcopal Influence. What he meant by this Expression, I
collected from a Passage in his REMARKS on the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon,
wherein he says: It is hoped the Accounts we have had are not true, that the
Negative upon this Act (of the Boston Assembly) was principally owing to the
Influence of some of the most important Members of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel. I replied in the Words of an able Writer, in his
VINDICATION of the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon, wherein the utter Improbability
of such a Suspicion was pointed out, and an Extract of a Letter from one of the
most important Members of the Society was given, declaring, that the Scheme
sent home was rejected on Account of its internal Defects, and that the
Society, MADE NO OPPOSITION TO IT. I also produced a Declaration from Mr.
Apthorp, another Member of the Society, who affirmed, after due Inquiry and
upon proper Authority that the Rejection was merely on political and commercial
Reasons, which arose from the Manner of drawing it up, and were represented by
the Board of Trade to the Privy Council, who unanimously disapproved it, when
there was not one Bishop present Mr. Apthorp 's Review of Dr. Mayhew's Remarks,
p. 39.
.

THE only Evidence of the Interposition of episcopal Influence to defeat the
abovementioned Petition, was the Testimony of an unknown Letter-Writer; and
even he affirms only that there is Reason to think, that the Case was as he
represented it to be. Such a Testimony, in Proof of a Fact that was important
in its Consequences, no reasonable Person could think worthy of Notice,
especially after direct Evidence was produced to the contrary; wherefore I
treated it with the Contempt it deserved. The Doctor now does not endeavor to
establish the Reputation of his unknown Witness, nor to introduce any new ones;
but he attempts to weaken the Influence of mine. The Archbishop, he conceits,
prevaricated; Mr. Apthorp was a Quibler; and neither of them answered directly
to the Point. However, he seems to allow, that the Society in their Character
as such "made no Opposition" to the incorporating Act under Consideration. Nay,
he confesses, it may, in like Manner, be true, that, although Episcopalians
might use their Influence against the passing this Act, yet they might not do
it as SUCH. But if Episcopalians, in their Opposition, acted not as such, or in
Consequence of their episcopal Principles, the Opposition they made, cannot,
with any Propriety, be called an Exertion of episcopal Influence; that not
being episcopal, which has no Relation to, or Connection with, the Doctrine or
Cause of Episcopacy.

BUT notwithstanding the Want of Evidence to support it, and notwithstanding
his own Concessions against it, the Doctor appears to be resolved not to give
up his Suspicion, that the Plan of the Bostonians received an episcopal
Overthrow. The Society, he is sure, could wish it no good; but were jealous of
the Success that would probably attend it, if suffered to proceed. I am
heartily sorry, says he, I am obliged to say that this Number of eminently
pious Men, have given the Public so little Reason to think, that they have the
Conversion of Savages much at Heart. Had this been the real Truth, it is
impossible but they should have done much more than they have ever yet done to
promote their Conversion. They have made it abundantly evident, that they had
at Heart the PROPAGATION OF EPISCOPACY much more than the Conversion of
Savages; and if we may be permitted to judge from their Conduct, we shall
naturally, and almost necessarily, be obliged to think, they would be in
Readiness to oppose any Plan for the Conversion of Savages, that did not
propose to convert them by episcopising them. p. 105.

LET us consider the Particulars of this candid and charitable Representation.
The Society appear not to the Doctor to have the Conversion of Savages at
Heart, because they have done no more in Order to effect it. He judges of their
Inclination from their Attempts, and of their Attempts from their Success; and
he allows not their Success to have been so considerable as it really has been.
And yet they have always declared their earnest Desire of christianising the
American Heathens; and their Declarations have been made under such
Circumstances, from Time to Time, as gave no Room justly to suspect their
Sincerity. Their Attempts also to convert them were early, and frequently
repeated; and they have constantly, from their first Incorporation to this Day,
sought for Opportunities, and have never neglected one that has offered with
any Prospect of Success, to propagate the Gospel among the native Heathens of
America.

THEY were no sooner formed, than they inquired for, obtained, and sent a
Missionary to South Carolina, to see what religious Impressions might be made
upon the Indians in that Quarter. This was in 1702, the very next Year after
their Incorporation. In 1704, having tried without Success to persuade both an
English and a Dutch Clergyman in this Country, that were conveniently situated
for the Purpose, to engage in such a Service, they provided and sent over a
Missionary from England, of an excellent Character, to the Mohawks; with
Information that another Minister might be expected for the Oneidas, and one
for every Tribe in Alliance with them, as soon as proper and willing Persons
could be found. This Missionary, meeting with a very unfavourable Reception,
thought proper, after a Year's fruitless Trial, to give over the Attempt.
Notwithstanding, another was sent over and introduced to them in 1709, but to
little Purpose; yet, in the Year following, the Request of the Four Sachems,
then in England, being thought favorable to the Society's Intentions, it was
agreed forthwith to send over Two Missionaries, with an Allowance of a Salary
of L. 150 Sterling to each, besides an Interpreter and Schoolmaster to attend
him. One actually was sent; another probably could not be found to accompany
him: But after a Course of unavailing Efforts to answer the great Ends of his
Mission, and finding himself to be in Danger of his Life, this Missionary also
was obliged to leave them. I might continue the like Account to the present
Time; but as the Society's Conduct relating to the Indians has been clearly and
justly represented, by a Writer of eminent Abilities and Candor, in his Answer
to Dr. Mahew's Observations, nothing farther need be said in Vindication of it.

AND here it deserves special Notice, that propagating the Gospel among the
American Savages was not the primary and principal Design of the Society, if we
may judge, either from the Words of their Charter, or the Views of those worthy
Persons who petitioned for it, or the Opinion of its leading Members from that
Time to this. The Society was erected in Order to promote the Glory of God, by
the Instruction of OUR PEOPLE in the Christian Religion. It was to provide for
the King's LOVING SUBJECTS in the American Plantations, who are repeatedly
spoken of in the Preamble to the Charter, as the great and immediate Object of
the intended Charity; and the Indians are not so much as once mentioned on the
Occasion. The religious State of the King's Subjects in most of the Colonies,
at that Time, was lamentably bad. Many of them had no Opportunies at all for
public Worship, and were as destitute of the Christian Sacraments as the
Heathens themselves. Accounts were sent home, by Persons of the best Character
amongst them, that for Want of public Instruction People were daily falling
away, even from the very Profession of Christianity into Heathenism, or a State
of Nature. Now the Design of the Society was to stop the Progress of this
Apostasy; and to recover the lapsed, by sending orthodox Clergymen to reside
and officiate among them. And let Envy itself say, whether there could be a
more worthy and charitable Design than this!

THE Prevention of a Christian's Apostasy to Heathenism, is of as much
Consequence in itself, at any Time, as the Conversion of a Heathen to
Christianity. The Recovery of an Apostate is as great an Acquisition, as the
gaining of an original Heathen. The Conversion of a civilized Heathen or
Infidel, and such were many of the King's Subjects, was as good a Work as the
Conversion of a Savage one. It was therefore highly necessary that the
Society's Charity should begin at home, among our own People -- with a View, at
the same Time, of extending it farther, as their Circumstances and
Opportunities should permit.

SUPPOSING the Society had been at Liberty to expend as much of their Fund in
propagating the Gospel among the Indians, as in supporting and propagating it
among our own People, which was by no Means the Case; yet it would have been
right and judicious Conduct, in the Exercise of such a discretionary Power, to
expend the far greater Part of their Money in providing for the King's
Subjects. For many of the latter were not only willing to accept of
Missionaries, but sincerely desired them, and earnestly requested to have them:
Whereas the very Reverse of this good Temper appeared in the Indians. There was
therefore Reason to expect, that the same Sum expended in the Colonies would be
far more useful, and produce a much better Effect, than if expended among the
neighboring Tribes of Indians. Indeed, as St. Paul observes, Men cannot hear
without a Preacher; but if they have Preachers, and will not hear them, it is
impossible that they should believe in Consequence of their preaching, or be
proselyted to that Faith which comes by hearing. This seems to have been the
general Temper and Disposition of the Indians, with Regard to Christianity.

DR. Wheelock, who has thought much upon the Subject of propagating the Gospel
among the Indians, says: There is no such Thing as sending English
Missionaries, or settling or maintaining English Schools to any good Purpose,
in most Places among them, as their Temper, State and Condition have been See a
plain and faithful NARRATIVE, etc. p. 19.
. Again: As to most Places, there is no such Thing at present as introducing
either English Schoolmasters or Missionaries to continue with them; such are
their Prejudices in general, and such the malevolent and ungovernable Temper of
some, that none but an Indian would dare to venture his Life among them Ibid.
p. 21.
. Such is the Character and Disposition of the Indians in general, and such it
has been ever since the Incorporation of the Society, according to Dr. Wheelock.

THAT the Society have made it abundantly evident, that they had at Heart the
Propagation of Episcopacy, much more than the Conversion of Savages, is a vile
Reflection on that venerable Body. Dr. Mayhew, taught by another, and
instigated by his own anti-episcopal Zeal, was guilty of this Abuse some Years
ago, for which he received public Correction. Dr. Chauncy has the Hardiness to
repeat it, notwithstanding a Vindication of the Society, that has been deemed
fully satisfactory by the candid and impartial; for which I beg Leave to refer
to the beforementioned Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observations.

IF the Society had the Propagation of Episcopacy at Heart, in the Sense
wherein it is objected, they would undoubtedly have instructed their
Missionaries to make this a considerable Part of their Business. It can never
be supposed that they would send Persons abroad, at a great Expense, with a
View to any particular Service, without informing them that such Service was
expected from them. But nothing of this Kind has ever been given in Charge in
their public Instructions: On the other Hand, their Missionaries are directed
to keep always in View the great Design of their Undertaking, viz. To promote
the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, by propagating the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior; and it is required of them, that the chief Subject of their
Sermons be the great fundamental Principles of Christianity, and the Duties of
a sober, righteous and godly Life, as resulting from those Principles See a
Collection of Papers, etc. p. 20 and 23.
. And as to private Directions, although from the very Nature of them I cannot
be so positive about these, as their public ones; yet I most firmly believe,
from every Thing that I can recollect or learn upon Inquiry, that no Missionary
was ever instructed, either verbally before he came abroad, or by any Letter or
Letters afterward, to endeavor to propagate Episcopacy, or any of the
distinguishing Principles of the Church of England. And if any Missionaries
have made the Attempt, or have behaved in such a Manner as to give just Umbrage
to any of their Neighbors, it has been their own free and voluntary Act, and
what the Society have never required at their Hands.

THE Missionaries wish, that all the King's Subjects, throughout the British
Dominions, would become Episcopalians and Members of the Church of England:
But, as they are not employed to molest any Protestants in the Enjoyment of
their own Principles, so I believe they seldom do -- farther than their own
necessary Defense may require* Within the Compass of my Knowledge, I am verily
persuaded, that for every Instance of an Attack made upon the Dissenters by any
Missionary or Member of the Church, Twenty at least are made by Dissenters upon
Churchmen. I know more of their Conduct of this Kind than perhaps they imagine;
and I have often been surprised to discover, to what low and pitiful Arts some,
who think themselves Men of Consequence, can descend, in Order to prevail with
the most insignificant Person, and sometimes even with a stupid Negro, to leave
the Church and go to their Meeting.

THE Assertion, that we are naturally and almost necessarily obliged to think,
from the Society's Conduct, that they would OPPOSE any Plan for the Conversion
of the Savages, that did not propose to convert them by episcopising them, I
should not have expected from a Gentleman of the Doctor's Character, as it is
worthy of a Savage only. Unless the Society look upon Presbyterianism, for
Instance, to be no better than Indian Heathenism, they would choose rather that
the Indians should become Presbyterians, than remain in their present State.
They undoubtedly wish, in the first Place, that every Indian may be converted,
and that every such Conversion may be complete; i. e. that every proselyted
Indian may become not only almost, but altogether such, both in Faith and
Practice, as the Rules and Precepts contained in Scripture are thought to
require. If they cannot be persuaded to become altogether such, they wish, in
the next Place, that they may become almost, and as nearly such as possible.
The Society wish to be instrumental in converting all the Indian Tribes: But,
as they know that they are unable to carry this into Execution, they envy none
the Honor of being Sharers in this good Work, that are able and willing to
promote it in any Degree. If they had rather the Indians should become Members
of that Church which they prefer, than stop short of it, they are not
censurable for this; for, at the same Time, they had rather they should become
Protestants, of any Denomination, than Papists -- and they had rather they
should become Papists, than continue to be Heathens. I could produce, from
their History and annual Abstracts, many Proofs of this Disposition; and I defy
their bitterest Enemies, even Dr. Chauncy himself, to bring any Proof of the
contrary.

THE Indian Mission at Stockbridge, under the Direction of the Commissioners
(of the Society in Scotland) residing in Boston, is indebted to Members of our
Society for considerable Donations. It is more indebted to the Members of the
Church of England; who have given more to promote that single Mission, than I
believe the Dissenters have ever given to the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel, from its first Existence to this Day. If Missionaries from
New England should receive Checks from Government in any Part of their
Proceedings, this cannot, with any Justice or Propriety, be charged to the
Account of the Society. If Government should hereafter discover, or have Reason
to suspect, that any of those Missionaries endeavor, together with the
Propagation of their Religion, to establish a political Interest of their own
Party, different from the general Interest of the Nation; or, that they
incumber the Sale of Lands to the British Crown, by stipulating with the
Indians for certain Conditions in Favor of their own Schemes; they will have
no Right to expect the Countenance of Government in such Proceedings. The
Doctor knows that Things of this Kind may hereafter happen, for this good
Reason, that they lately have happened; he will therefore do well to be
cautious in blaming the Society in such Cases The Author has seen, and could
publish, some curious Copies of Letters, of a late Date, to and from one of the
Indian Missionaries from New England; but as he hopes the Commissioners will be
careful that those whom they employ to proselyte the Indians, behave in an
unexceptionable Manner for the future, these Letters for the present shall not
be exposed.
.

IT was thought strange that he should insinuate that the beforementioned
incorporating Act was defeated by episcopal Influence, without taking Notice of
Mr. Apthorp's Declaration to the contrary, which he could not have been such a
Stranger in Israel as not to have seen. The Matter is now clearly accounted
for, in p. 108. It is at once solved, replies the Doctor, by only saying, it
was none of my Business to take Notice of this Evidence, until it had been
produced. The Reader here sees in what Manner he has rendered himself so very
exceptionable, both in his Reasonings and Representations. He neglected all
Evidence on one Side the Question, how fully soever he was acquainted with it,
unless I had produced it; and he thought it was not his Business, to balance
and compare counter Evidences, but to rake together every Thing that had an
unfavourable Aspect only; in Order to vilify and abuse the Church of England,
and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, with a farther View of
obstructing the Progress of our Plan. After this honest and artless Confession,
his Readers will know how to make proper Allowances, for what he advances in a
controversial Way.

IN the eighth Section of the Appeal, a full and fair Account was given, of the
only Plan on which it was requested than an American Episcopate might be
granted, with Expostulations on the Reasonableness of such an Appointment. In
Answer to this Section the Doctor seemed really to exert himself; and he called
in, to aid his own Efforts, what he says was POWERFULLY offered by the late
excellent Dr. Mayhew. In my Reply, particular Notice was taken of every Thing
produced, either from his own Store or the late Dr. Mayhew's Magazine, that
appeared to have Force; and enough was said to show, if I am not greatly
mistaken, that every Objection exhibited was either groundless or impertinent.
The Doctor in his Rejoinder, which he miscalls his Reply, seems to say a great
deal in Support of his former Objections. It is here, if any where, that he
aims his Blows directly at the Vitals of the Episcopate requested, and does his
utmost; for which Reason I shall take a particular Review of what, in this
Place, he has done and said.

BEFORE he proceeds to an immediate Attack, he has some Observations of a
miscellaneous Nature, several of which I shall pass by as utterly impertinent.
He begins with endeavoring to raise, in the Minds of Readers, but an
indifferent Idea of what I had said upon the main Point. He tells them that he
was greatly disappointed, that I fell short of his Expectation, and that what I
said on the Subject was less convincing than what I had offered in any Part of
my Performance. p. 109. This, I think, discovers his Heroism, rather than his
Policy; for according to the apparent Weakness of his Antagonist, the Honor of
a Victory will be proportionably abated.

HERE he again takes Notice of our Convention's Address to the University of
Cambridge, on the Subject of American Bishops; and he seems to to think, that,
because some of his Friends have published a spurious Copy of that Address,
therefore he is entitled to a true one. He is determined not to be satisfied
until he sees a Copy that is genuine, and will continue to suspect that the
obnoxious Expressions contained in the false Copy were also in the true one,
notwithstanding our Declarations to the contrary. This is treating us rather
ungenerously, as the Testimony of a Number of Persons that have seen and are
acquainted with any particular Writing, is always allowed to have more Weight,
than the Testimony of a single Person, perhaps an unknown one, that has never
seen it -- where the Dispute is about the Contents of that Writing. If
therefore he determines not to submit to the Evidence of our Testimony, I
advise him, for the present, to suspend his Judgment of the Matter, until he
shall obtain a Sight of the Address, and to wait with Patience; as Time may
possibly bring forward, what it is not in his Power to hasten.

AMONG a Number of paradoxical Things advanced in his Answer to the Appeal, it
was said: Some of the most respectable Episcopalians, in these Parts, for
Sobriety, good Sense, and a steady Attachment to the Interest of the Church of
England, have declared it to be their Opinion, that Bishops would be of no
Service here, and they did not desire they should be sent. What was meant by
the indefinite Word some, whether Two or Two Hundred, I was unable to
determine. The Doctor says I might have known the Meaning of it, i. e. its
precise Meaning, if I had attended to the following Sentence. Let us see then
how the Matter is cleared up in the explanatory sentence. And it is to me, as
well as to MANY I have conversed with on this Head, EPISCOPALIANS among others,
very questionable, etc. Here the Word many is imposed upon the Reader, as an
Explanation of the Word some in the foregoing Sentence: Whereas many
Episcopalians are not here mentioned, but only many People, some of whom were
Episcopalians; so that the Word some is still left as indeterminate as ever. I
then questioned whether there was an Episcopalian on the Continent, justly so
called, that was averse to American Bishops on the Plan of the Appeal. I knew
of none, had heard of none, could conceive of none. Such a Character is so
absurd, that I did not imagine it had an actual Existence. An Episcopalian is
one that, at least, approves of the Government of the Church by Bishops; but he
that only approves of the Government of the Church by Bishops residing at the
Distance of 3000 Miles, can hardly be said to approve of it at all, or to be an
Episcopalian in any Sense. An Episcopalian is one that also approves of
Ordination by Bishops; but he that only approves of episcopal Ordination under
the Circumstances of a long, dangerous and expensive Voyage to obtain it, may
be thought by the Doctor to be respectable for his good Sense, and may be
esteemed by him for SUCH an Attachment to the Interest of the Church of England
in the Colonies; but as an Episcopalian he will appear to all its real Friends
to be truly ridiculous. It was therefore natural to interpret the Word some in
as scanty a Sense as it would any Way bear; and it was paying great Regard to
his Testimony, in so incredible a Case, to believe his Assertion in that Sense.

BUT what is all this to the Point: says he. It is a Fact, not a speculative
Truth, we are now upon, p. 112. This is calling the Credibility of a Fact a
speculative Matter; but it is speculative in no other Sense than that, wherein
the Persons he mentions are Episcopalians -- a Sense, which will never be
admitted by those, who content themselves with Words in their common
Acceptance.

BUT, where is the Difficulty of supposing, that most Episcopalians on the
Continent may have a quite different Notion of the Plan for an American
Episcopate, from that the episcopal Clergy have of it, who were its ONLY
FORMERS, and the ONLY PETITIONERS that it might be carried into Execution? If
by the episcopal Clergy he means those of America, it is not true that they
were the only Formers of the Plan in Question. They do not pretend to have
formed it at all; but they have adopted it when formed by others, not
exclusively of the Laity. Nor were they the only Petitioners in Favor of it;
for several of the most considerable Lay-Gentlemen in the Colonies have
recommended and petitioned for it, although not jointly with the Clergy of our
Convention. Many others were also consulted, who signified their Approbation of
it, before our Petitions were framed. All of them could not be consulted in a
private Way, and therefore it was thought proper to publish it to the World,
before it could be put in Execution; that all might have an Opportunity to
consider it, and to offer their Objections if they had any.

THERE were many Members of the Church that were, upon the whole, averse to an
Episcopate in this Country; imagining it would either expose them to
considerable Expense for its Support, or put them to some other
Inconveniences. But when they came to see, that every Thing of this Kind had
been carefully guarded against, and that from its Design and Tendency it would
be mild and beneficial in its Operation, which appeared as soon as it was
explained to them; their Aversion immediately ceased, and from that Time they
have generally viewed it in the same Light with that wherein it is seen by the
Clergy.

ALTHOUGH what has been said of the Episcopalians in these Parts is universally
true, without an Exception, to the best of my Knowledge, the Doctor however has
this to comfort him, that the Episcopalians in and about Boston, are of a
different Opinion. For, says he, that the Mission of Bishops into the Colonies
would do more Hurt than good, I KNOW, is, in Fact, the Opinion of MANY
Lay-Episcopalians, and, I believe, of the greater Part of them in the
New England Colonies. What is here said of the Episcopalians in New England,
must not be understood to extend to Connecticut, which contains more in Number
than the three other Colonies, and where they are unanimous in wishing for an
Episcopate. As to the Episcopalians in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and
Rhode Island, they are not yet universally acquainted with the Plan. It is
therefore not improbable that the Doctor may know, either personally or by
Information, of many, i. e. of Eight or Ten, for the Word does not necessarily
mean more, that still think unfavourably of an American Episcopate. But it is
remarkable that he does not yet say, that any are averse to an Episcopate on
the Plan of the Appeal, who are acquainted with it otherwise than by
Misinformation. I fancy it would be difficult to find many such, or even some.
I have inquired of Persons that are not Strangers in Boston, and I have never
heard of but one such Episcopalian; and he is generally looked upon by
Churchmen, and frequently by others, to be a Disgrace to his Profession. While
he calls himself a Churchman, he associates and connects himself with the
bitterest Enemies of the Church, is governed by their Influence, and suffers
himself to be used as an Instrument in their Hands to injure its Reputation and
destroy his own.

AND here it may deserve Notice, that there are many People in New England,
besides Episcopalians, that have no Aversion to an American Episcopate. This
may be justly said of the Quakers in general, unless they differ widely from
their Brethren in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where they are more numerous and
more respectable than in any other Parts of his Majesty's Dominions, compared
with the other Inhabitants. And a Writer in Favor of the Baptists in
New England, who is supposed to express the general Sentiments of that
Denomination of Christians, says, with a Tartness that seems to have been
excited by an Opinion of their Oppression: "The Fraternity," (meaning the
Presbyterian or congregational Ministers) last Year have sent Letters to
Baptist Ministers in New England, requesting their Aid against the Church of
England. But truly it is the Interest of the Baptists that the Church of
England should multiply in Massachusetts and Connecticut, so far as to form a
Balance of ecclesiastical Power there, as in other Colonies. And as for
Bishops, they are welcome there; their coming thither is an Object worthy of
PETITIONS; we cannot be worse off; we may be better: they are Gentlemen at
least, and have some Generosity for vanquished Enemies. But the New England
People (of a certain Denomination) are supercilious in Power, and mean in
Conquest. I will venture to say, that all the Bishops in Old England have not
done the Baptists there so much Despite for 80 Years past, as the Presbyterians
have done this Year to the Baptists of New England Goddard 's Pennsylvania
Chronicle, Nov. 26th, 1770.
. And that the latter are not inconsiderable in Number appears from what this
Writer tells us, who asserts that there are 37 Congregations of them in
Massasetts only; to say nothing of Rhode Island, where they are more numerous
and much more powerful than in any of the other Colonies.

THE Doctor objected against our Plan, that it had been illegally settled. This
Objection, if just, more nearly concerns the Friends of the Plan, than its
Enemies: And while he objects the Illegality of the Plan, he says much to
persuade us to put it far more illegally into Execution. But why was it
illegally settled? Because, says he, it was projected and formed, to the entire
Neglect of his Majesty, without whose LICENSE, not even the Convocation have
any Right to settle such a Plan, or so much as ATTEMPT to form it. p. 113. In
Reply to this he was told, that under whatever Restraints a Convocation might
be laid, the Plan was not the Work of a Convocation. But he argues, that if the
Convocation, without a special License, cannot attempt such a Thing, much less
can it be attempted by Clergymen out of Convocation -- Clergymen of less
Distinction perhaps, and fewer in Number. But this Argument is by no Means
conclusive. The Parliament of Great Britain, for Instance, when met together
upon public Business, are tied up to the Strictness of Rules and Forms; but
when the Members meet together occasionally or designedly, in their private
Character, they are free from those Restraints to which they were subject in
their parliamentary Capacity. The like may be said of the Convocation; the
Members of which, at a private Meeting, may lawfully do many Things, and in
such a Way, as are not permited to be done at all, or in that Way, in
Convocation.

NOR has his Majesty been entirely neglected in this Affair. Indeed the Prince
upon the Throne was never neglected, when the Scheme for an American Episcopate
was made the Object of Attention. The Case of the Episcopalians in the Colonies
was duly considered by the Society, and the Plan for an Episcopate, peculiarly
fitted to their Circumstances, was brought nearly to its present Form, in the
Reign of Queen Anne -- when an Order was issued by the Crown, for a Bill to be
drawn and presented to the Parliament for the Confirmation of it See the
Appeal. p. 52.
. An American Episcopate was proposed long before this Time: The Subject then
was brought before the King's Privy Council, so that we have no Reason to think
his Majesty was neglected, at that Time. The same venerable Person, who
furnished the Extract from Cranmer 's Catechism, in another Letter of Feb.
28th, 1770, to a different Person, says: -- that he had met with an original
Letter, that fell into his Hands by Executorship, from Dr. Alexander Murray, in
which he found that the Council had come to a Resolution to establish
Episcopacy in Virginia; that he himself (Dr. Murray) who had attended Charles
II. abroad, should be the first Bishop; that the Plan of Establishment was
referred to the Bishop of London and Sir Orlando Bridgman, and this was, so far
as he could recollect, Oct. 16, 1673. And he supposes the Matter then died, by
the Cabal's throwing out Sir Orlando in the November following, before the
Bishop and he made their Report The late Archbishop discovered, from some
Papers of Bishop Gibson, that there was such a Design in the Time of Charles,
II. and that Letters Patent for that Purpose are still extant.

Let. to Walpole. p. 17.
. He adds, that he had returned the Original to the Duke of Bedford, with
several other Papers belonging to the Duke's Family, but had taken a Copy of
it. To say nothing farther of the intermediate Reigns, the Plan was properly
laid before his present Majesty, and he heartily approved of it; and of this
Royal Approbation some Members of our Convention had received authentic
Evidence, before their Petitions were voted. As therefore our Friends have no
just Reason to blame us for proceeding illegally, to the entire Neglect of his
Majesty, our Enemies have certainly no Right to reproach us with it.

WHY then was not the Plan introduced with particular Notice of so important a
Point of Deference to the Royal Supremacy? p. 118. Because it was not needful.
The Design was to inform the ignorant of the true Plan that was proposed for an
American Episcopate, and to convince the prejudiced of the Reasonableness of
it; and it would not have promoted either Part of the Design, to have told the
Reader what the King thought of it. But afterward, in replying to the Doctor's
Objections, this Information became proper, and he doubtless received from it
no small Consolation. However, he is not altogether satisfied, for he inquires
farther: Why is there not now exhibited in Form some authentic Proof of the
King's LICENSE to contrive and publish the Plan we HAVE HAD HELD out to View?
p. 116. The King could give no License to contrive a Plan that was contrived
long before he existed; but authentic Proof of his Approbation of it, and that
he does not look upon the Steps that have been taken as any Infringement of the
Royal Supremacy, we are able to give. We pretend not to have proceeded in all
the Forms of a Convocation, which would have been a ridiculous Affectation, nor
to have received a License under the great Seal. Such a License was not
necessary; it was sufficient for our Convention, that his Majesty had
considered and was favorable to the Episcopate in View, and that our Evidence
of his favorable Disposition was such as could not be questioned. Our Evidence
of this important Fact we have not laid before the Public, because this would
be taking a Liberty that has not been granted; and we are resolved to do
nothing but what is strictly warrantable.

IF nothing else could be said to justify the Conduct of those who proposed the
Plan, yet the Charter granted to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
has the Nature and Efficacy of a Royal Commission, and warranted them to
concert any Plans that might be thought necessary, in Order more fully to
answer the Ends of their Incorporation. They soon were convinced that an
American Episcopate would be highly useful to this Purpose. They mention the
Matter as early as the Abstract annexed to the anniversary Sermon preached in
1703, by Bishop Burnet. From their entering so soon upon the Subject, it may
fairly be concluded, that, in their Opinion, the Charter gave them the
Authority in Question.

INDEED the Doctor allows, that the Society had a Right to form a general Plan
for sending Bishops to America, and that this may be perfectly consistent with
due Honor to the Royal Supremacy; but not to plan such an Episcopate as that of
the Appeal. For, it seems, the Bishops therein proposed, are to carry on the
Business of ecclesiastical Government and Discipline in a Manner quite
different from that which is injoined by the Authority of the King and
Parliament. p. 117. The King and Parliament have prescribed in what Manner
ecclesiastical Government shall be administered in England; but the Statute is
not quoted, wherein they have injoined any Form of it for the Colonies. Indeed
he alleges the 73d Canon, which is pointed against those that impeach or
deprave the Government or Discipline established in the Church of England; but
nothing which has not this Tendency is forbidden by the Canon. The Canon could
have no Reference to the Colonies, because they were not settled at the Time of
framing it; and therefore it is not violated, by proposing an Episcopate for
the Colonies, that is peculiarly adapted to the Circumstances of the
Inhabitants.

BUT, says the Doctor: Why do Colony-Episcopalians glory in being Members of
the Church of England, if there is no Church of England here? And if there is,
it is as reasonable to suppose the Canon was intended to guard its established
Form of Government against Impeachment and Depravation here, as at home. p.
118. We glory in being Members of the Church of England, because we esteem it
to be the purest and best Church upon Earth. We are Members of that Church,
notwithstanding our distant Situation, because we not only receive her Articles
and embrace her Liturgy, but more especially because we submit to her
Authority, and all our ecclesiastical Offices are performed by Power derived
from her Bishops. The Church of England therefore extends itself into the
Colonies, and partly exists here; although at present in such an imperfect
State, for Want of an Episcopate, as to be a proper Object of the charitable
Interposition of all its Friends.

BUT if the Church of England exists here, it is argued, that the Canon must
have been intended to guard its established Form of Government here, as well as
at home. But how could the Canon be intended to guard its established Form,
where no Form is established? The Canon was evidently designed to extend, and
it can extend, no farther than to where the Church was, or is established. It
may be established here by the same Authority that has established it at home,
and yet under a different Form, in many Respects, without impeaching or
depraving any Part of the Establishment which it has in England. For in framing
Laws for the external Regulation of a Church, as well as of any other Society,
Reference ought always to be had to the Circumstances of the Country, and the
Opinions or Prejudices that generally prevail in the Minds of People. On this
Account, the Government of the Church may require one mode of Administration in
England, and another here; and such a Difference will be no Impeachment on
either Side. For while it is allowed, that a certain Mode of Administration is
the fitest for that Country in which it obtains; it is no Reflection to say,
that it is not fit for a different Country, with a View to which it was never
framed. The present ecclesiastical Government in England, although perhaps in
some Points capable of Improvement, yet, upon the whole, may be better adapted
to that Kingdom, than any other Form that can be devised. At the same Time, the
Episcopate proposed for America, may be fiter for America, than such an
Episcopate as is established in England. In these Cases, the American
Episcopate will imply no Reflection upon the English Episcopate, nor the
English upon the American; as each may be best fited, in such different
Countries, to answer the great Ends of the general Appointment.

THE Church of England claims to herself a Right, and she allows the same to
all Churches, to regulate or alter the Externals of Religion, as Circumstances
may require. Previously to the Settlement of ecclesiastical Matters soon after
the Accession of Queen Elizabeth, this Point was fully canvassed; and at a
public Disputation between the protestant and popish Divines, the former
contended for and supported this Proposition -- that every particular Church
has Authority to institute, change and abrogate Ceremonies and Rites of the
Church (meaning every Thing belonging to its Worship or Discipline that is not
essential) so that it be to Edification Strype's Annals, p. 92, and Appendix,
p. 40.
. Accordingly the Doctrine of this Proposition was soon after brought into Art.
xxxiv. It is not necessary, says the Article, that Traditions and Ceremonies be
in all Places one or utterly like, for at all Times they have been diverse, and
may be changed according to the Diversity of Country and Men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained contrary to God's Word. -- Every particular or national
Church has Authority to ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the
Church, ordained only by Men's Authority; so that all Things be done to
edifying. The same Language is used in the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer
established by 14 CHARLES II, and in many other Places. According therefore to
the Doctrine of the Church of England, the Diversity of Country and Men's
Manners may be a sufficient Reason, for settling an Episcopate in America under
different Regulations, and a different external Form, from what may be esteemed
preferable in England.

WERE the Circumstances of this Country the same with those of England, an
Episcopate of the same Kind with that in England would have been the Object of
our Plan; for we believe, as the Legislature at home believe, that such an
Episcopate is best fited for such a Country. Were the Circumstances of England
the same with those of the Colonies, such an Episcopate as would be best for
the Colonies, would also be best for the Mother Country. In that Case, I
confess, it would be an idle Thing to say, that Circumstances in America
require that the Externals of an Episcopate should be under a Regulation
peculiar to this Country. But he that cannot see that the Circumstances of the
Two Countries are widely different, must be blind with a Witness; and he that
can argue for the Propriety of any Mode or external Form under certain
Circumstances, because it is proper under different Circumstances, is idle
indeed. Strange! that the Doctor, who can frequently make Distinctions where
there is no Difference, should not be able to distinguish so glaring a
Difference!

BUT we are told, that no Circumstances, unless those of a mere worldly Nature,
which have nothing to do with a purely spiritual Kingdom, can make it fit,
suitable or reasonable, that the Mode of an Episcopate should be different
(here) from what it is at home, p. 120. It may be said, in the like Strain,
that no Circumstances, but those of a mere wordly Nature, which have nothing to
do with a purely spiritual Kingdom, can make it reasonable or fit, that the
Mode of supporting the Clergy here, should be different from what it is at
home, namely, by Tithes. This Proposition is in the same Style with the
Doctor's, and is as unexceptionable as his. The spiritual Kingdom of Christ is
indeed not of this World; yet it exists in the World, and as the Subjects of it
are not pure Spirits, like the Bishops the Doctor allows us, it may be greatly
affected by the Things of this World. But I will not enlarge on so plain a
Subject. If the Episcopate now proposed, would be better received, and probably
have a better Effect in America, than the English Episcopate; it is, of the
two, the fiter for this Country. It is of no Consequence in this Debate,
whether the Fitness arises from Considerations that are purely spiritual, or
not. Fitness is Fitness; Reasonableness is Reasonableness; and whatever is fit
and reasonable to be done, ought always to be done. It is therefore submitted
to the Reader's Judgment, whether the Plan for an American Episcopate which has
been offered to the Public, has any Tendency to impeach or deprave the
established Government of the Church of England -- any more, than a particular
Mode of maintaining the Clergy in one Country, is an Impeachment of a different
Mode of maintaining them in another Country.

AFTER all, what is this to the Doctor, or his Adherents? Are he and they, on a
sudden, become so friendly, as to desire that the Advocates for the Episcopate
in Question may not incur the Penalty of a Canon? He, good Man, seems to be
under great Concern for us on this Account. We are obliged to him for his
Friendship; but he may spare himself all his Uneasiness, as we are safe without
it.

HIS Fulminations hitherto have resembled that distant Cannonading, which often
precedes and introduces a close Engagement, where Noise and Smoke are the most
that is expected. But now he proceeds to immediate Action. His Five capital
Objections, like so many standing Batteries formerly erected, he again brings
to bear upon the Plan that has been advanced -- but, with what Force and
Execution, will shortly appear from a distinct View of each.

OBJECTION 1. The Government and Discipline of the Church of England, under the
proposed American Episcopate, is injurious both to the Church, and the Bishops
that are to preside over it, p. 121. He thought it injurious to the Church,
because it was to have no immediate Effect upon the Laity. To this it was
answered: If the Laity are not to be affected by the Bishop's Authority, they
are certainly not to be injured by it; that, which does not operate at all,
producing no Effect, either injurious or beneficial Appeal defended, p. 206.
. He now asks: Is this a fit Answer for public View? It was offered as such,
and I see no Reason to be ashamed of it. No one, says he, I believe, before the
Doctor ever said, it was not injurious to deprive the Laity of a spiritual
Privilege they are supposed to be entitled to, and by a Grant from Jesus
Christ. For my Part, I believe Dr. Chauncy is the first, that ever talked of
depriving Men of what they never had in Possession. If the not bestowing a
Favor may be called a Deprivation, it may be said of him, that he has been
deprived of the Bishopric of London.

THE spiritual Privilege, of which he supposes the American Laity to be
deprived by our Plan, is that of being immediately under the Government of
Bishops; but if they are not desirous of being under such Government, they
certainly cannot consider it, nor ought it to be mentioned, in the Light of a
Privilege. The Doctor often speaks of ecclesiastical Discipline, as only the
Rule for punishing, or the Punishment itself, of ecclesiastical Delinquents;
according to which Use of the Word, the Privilege for which he contends, in
Behalf of the American Laity, is the Privilege of being punished for their
Offenses. So that his Privilege is of as new and extraordinary a Nature, as his
Deprivation. For tell a Criminal of his Privilege of receiving public
Correction, and he will take it as an Insult. If the Doctor had contended for
ecclesiastical Punishment, which he means by the Word Discipline, as a Benefit
to the Church in general, or sometimes even to the Delinquents themselves, and
not as a Privilege to the Sufferers, he might have been free from Absurdity.

THIS Matter of Discipline seems to have been strangely misunderstood, or
misrepresented, by my Opponent. It is not proposed that the American Laity of
the Church of England, after the Settlement of an Episcopate, shall be under no
ecclesiastical Discipline at all; for they are not so at present. It is the
Duty of the Clergy now, and it will be considered as their Duty under the
proposed Episcopate, to make Use of public and private Admonition, and to repel
from the holy Communion, as Cases may require; and it does not appear, that a
more severe Discipline than this, would, in the present Age, and in this
Country, tend to Edification. The Enemies of the Church of England reproached
the Establishment of it by Queen Elizabeth, with the Neglect of Discipline; but
its celebrated Apologist maintained in Answer to them, that She was guilty of
no criminal Neglect in this Respect. Nos -- quantum his Moribus et Temporibus,
etc. i. e. as far as the present Times, and the present State of Manners, in
this Age of general Corruption, will admit of, we do carefully administer
ecclesiastical Discipline Bp. Jewel' s Apology. p. 66.
. This he thought a sufficient Justification of the Church of England; not
imagining that She was obliged to make Use of a severer Discipline than the
Times would admit of. The same Plea is offered for the Episcopate proposed for
the Colonies. As much Discipline over the Laity as the State of this Country
will admit of, is in the Hands of the Clergy; and therefore more will not be
introduced by the Bishops of our Plan. Consequently, in this Respect, they will
not be immediately beneficial to the Laity. However, as they will probably
cause some of the Clergy to be more attentive to their Duty in general than
they would otherwise be, and to that of Discipline, as well as others; in this
Way they will be really beneficial to the Laity, by the Instrumentality of the
Clergy.

UNDER this Objection the Doctor urged, that our Plan would be injurious to the
Bishops proposed, by restraining their Power. It was answered, that if such a
Restriction was not injurious to the Church, it could be no Injury to the
Bishops. I could not conceive of the Authority of Bishops, under the Notion of
so much private Property belonging to them; in Consequence of which every
Limitation of their Authority would be so much Damage sustained by the Bishops.
This was mentioned as an absurdity attending the Doctor's Position. He now
refers to it, not as a supposed Absurdity of his, but as a Principle of mine;
and makes a Flourish in the following abusive Exclamation: It is amazing, one
of the Doctor's Character should not be able to see, that Bishops were (are)
capable of sustaining Damage in other Ways besides that of being touched in
their private Property. p. 123.

TO what was said on this Subject in the Appeal defended, which stands in full
Force notwithstanding the Doctor's Attempt to weaken it, I will now add, as
worthy of his Attention, the following Considerations. The episcopal Order has
Authority, given by Christ, to govern the Church. This Authority extends to all
the Members of the Church, the Laity as well as Clergy; but its immediate
Action or Operation was chiefly intended to take Place upon the Clergy. The
Discipline of the Church, so far as the Laity are its immediate Objects, has
always been exercised by the parochial Clergy, except in some extrordinary
Cases, and not by the Bishops in their own Persons. It appears therefore, that
no great Innovation will be the Consequence of our Plan; it being intended only
to provide, that no new Discipline over the Laity shall be introduced into
America, nor the common Discipline exercised by different Persons, under the
proposed Episcopate. And where it is said that the Bishop's Authority shall
operate only upon the Clergy of the Church, and not upon the Laity; the Meaning
is, that it shall operate only upon the Clergy as its immediate Objects, and
that others can have no Reason to dread its Effects. Not that the episcopal
Authority over the Laity shall be entirely suspended; for when the parochial
Clergy exercise an Authority, given them by the Bishops, and under their
Superintendency, it is an Exercise of the Bishop's Authority. What a Bishop
does properly and effectually by Means of his subordinate Officers, is his own
Act; and there is no just Room to complain, that the Bishops of the Appeal are
injured, by being divested of all Authority over the Laity. The Authority given
by Christ to Bishops ought always to be exercised in such a Manner, as may best
answer its original Intention, of which they are the proper Judges. If the
Governors of the Church had not some discretionary Power in Matters of this
Nature, in many Cases the Exercise of their Authority would tend more to
Destruction than to Edification, and thus defeat its own End.

OBJECTION II. The Bishops in this Plan are so widely different from the
Bishops of the Church of England at home, that it is not reasonable they should
be desired or sent, p. 124. In Answer to this it was said, the Bishops in this
Plan are essentially the same with the Bishops at home, how widely soever they
may differ in some Circumstances. So far as they differ from the Bishops in
England, they are more adapted to the State of the Colonies, and are
proportionably more to be desired than such Bishops; the Difference being
proposed for this very End, that they may be rendered more desirable in this
Country. And I observed to this Objector, in Words that have not escaped his
Notice, that let them be ever so different, if such Bishops as are proposed are
fiter for the Colonies, than such Bishops as are in England, and the Doctor
will hardly say they are not; then it may be reasonable that they should be
both desired and sent Appeal defended. p. 207.
. But behold here, another Curiosity in the Regions of Controversy! The Doctor
replies in these remarkable Words: The plain Answer is, they are not fiter for
the Colonies, than -- (than what? I dare say every Reader expects the next
Words to be, such Bishops as are in England. But no such Matter; for thus it is
in my Copy, than) for the Mother Country. See here, in a protestant Divine, an
Instance of Jesuitical Sophistry, that is worthy of a FILIUCIUS or an ESCOBAR!
The Bishops proposed were said to be fiter for this Country, than such Bishops
as are in England would be; but they were not said to be fiter for the Colonies
than they are for England, although this be undoubtedly the Case. The
Proposition that I advanced, this accomplished Disputant was unable to deny;
but in the Place of it he denied a Proposition that I had not advanced, that he
might appear to contradict me.

UNDER this Branch of the Objection, the Doctor insisted, that it was
unreasonable for a comparative Handful of episcopal Professors in the Colonies
to expect, that the Powers and Appendages of Bishops should be so mightily
abridged in Favor of them; when the Dissenters in England, and others who
desired it, could not obtain this Gratification at home. To this I gave no
particular Answer, as the same Point had been already considered, and what had
been said was, in my Opinion, a full Answer to it. But WHERE (this was
considered) says the Doctor, he has not told us; nor can I find that he has any
where given such an Answer, or even attempted it, p. 125. As I frequently find
Reason to suspect, that he has never read, with proper Attention, the Pieces he
undertakes to refute, I shall not question the Truth of what is here asserted,
namely, that he knows not where I had obviated the Remark under Consideration.
And as I am willing to give him any friendly Assistance he may think himself
entitled to ask, I will inform him, that I had Reference in particular to p.
113, preceding; for the Pertinency and Force of which, I appeal to every
Reader, one only excepted.

THE Doctor also complains, that I took no Notice of what he said, concerning
the Inconsistency of our Plan with the Doctrine of Uniformity, which is, made
so important a Matter in the Church of England. I assure him, that whatever in
his Answer I passed by without Notice, was omitted, either from an Opinion that
it had been already obviated, or that it did not deserve particular Notice. It
was on the latter of these Accounts, that I made no Remarks upon the Passage
referred to. And here I will only observe by the Bye, that Uniformity is not
more strenuously required by the Church of England, than by every other
national Church. An Uniformity of Worship and Doctrine, and even of Discipline
in all its essential Parts, with what is established in England, will be
maintained in the Church of England in the Colonies, under the proposed
Episcopate. And as to the Difference in the Appendages of our Bishops, it will
be no greater than has lately been proved, from the 34th Article -- that, in
the Opinion of the Church of England, Diversity of Countries and Men's Manners
will justify.

IT was farther objected, that if Bishops should be sent to the Colonies, with
these restrained Powers (as mentioned in the Plan) undesirable Consequences
might be naturally feared, both here and at home. The Consequence to be dreaded
here, was said to be, that the Bishops would throw off this Restraint as soon
as might be, etc. In Answer to this it was observed, that Men's endeavoring to
free themselves from Restraint, is no just Reason why they should not be
restrained, on proper Occasions. It was also observed, that no Uneasiness under
such a Restraint was justly to be apprehended in our American Bishops; for as
they will know what to expect before they accept of the Office, there can be no
Disappointment. I then proceeded in the following Words, which I beg Leave to
transcribe; because I think them a sufficient Answer not only to all that was
objected under this Head, but to all the Doctor now says in Support of his
Objection. Why should they (the American Bishops) be uneasy, because the
Bishops at home are invested with civil Authority? The Bishops at home may be
as properly uneasy and restless, because they are not, like some of their Order
on the Continent of Europe, sovereign Princes. Perhaps the Uneasiness of
American Bishops may be supposed to arise from the Reflection, that destitute
as they are of civil Power, they are Bishops of the same Church with their
Brethren in England. But they will not be able to avoid the farther Reflection,
that they are Bishops of the same Church in different Countries, and under
different Circumstances; which essentially alters the Case. And no better
Reason can be given, why they should not be contented with less Power than
belongs to the Bishops in England, than why the other Bishops in England should
not be contented with less Power than belongs to the Bishop of Durham. This
same Kind of Reasoning would operate as strongly against episcopal Clergymen in
America, as against Bishops. The Clergy of the Church of England at home, are,
in a great Measure, supported by Tithes; therefore, it might have been said, at
the first Settlement of the Colonies, if Clergymen of the Church of England are
once admitted in this Country, under whatever Restrictions or Limitations, they
will not be easy, until they shall have secured to themselves the Tithes of our
Estates Appeal defended. p. 208, 209.
.

IN Reply to this Illustration, the Doctor says: The Fact here supposed is, I
believe, strictly true, that the Clergy of the Church of England will never be
easy until they may have secured to themselves from our Estates here, what will
be, in substantial Signification, the same Thing with the Tithes in England. p.
129. I believe that the Clergy, of whatever Denomination, as well as Men, of
whatever Station in Life, will not, and cannot, be easy, without a competent
Maintenance. And I agree with the Doctor, that a competent Maintenance in one
Way, is, in substantial Signification, much the same Thing with a competent
Maintenance in any other Way. But something seems to be here insinuated, to the
peculiar Disadvantage of the episcopal Clergy in the Colonies, as if they were
apt to be more restless, uneasy and rapacious, than other Men; or, at least,
than the Clergy of other Denominations. But such an Insinuation is not more
illiberal than unjust To show that one Ecclesiastic is not always innocent of
the Crimes of which he accuses others, and to give a little Relaxation to the
Reader, who may be fatigued with traveling through so many dry Pages of
Controversy, I beg Leave to introduce the following Ancedote. Bilibaldus
Pirckheimerus, the great Friend of Erasmus, in a Company where much was said in
Commendation of him, took Notice that a certain Mendicant Monk, discovered, by
his Countenance and Gestures, that he was greatly dissatisfied with the
Encomiums that passed. And being hard pushed to declare what he had to censure
in Erasmus, he said, that this Man, whom they affected to extol so much, was a
notorious Eater of Fowls; and that he knew it to be true, not from the
Testimony of others, but of his own Eyes. Did Erasmus buy them, or steal them?
Said Pirckheimer. He bought them, said the Monk. -- But is it then a Sin to eat
Fowls? Most certainly, answered the Monk: It is the Sin of Gluttony; and it
becomes the more heinous, when it is committed and frequently repeated by
Churchmen. Perhaps, said Pirckheimer, he eats them upon Fast-Days. No, said
the Monk; but we Ecclesiastics ought to abstain upon all Days from such
Delicacies. Ah, my good Father, said Pirckheimer, it is not by eating dry
Bread, that you have got that huge Paunch of yours; and if all the Fowls, which
have gone into it, could lift up their Voice at once, and cackle in Concert,
they would make Noise enough to drown the Drums and Trumpets of an Army Jortin'
s Life of Erasmus. p. 216.
. This, it is hoped, will be as acceptable to the Reader, as the Story of my
good Friend, the Doctor, about a Cock and a Bull and Three RAM-CHICKENS with
which the Children are sometimes diverted. See his Appeal answered, p. 25, in a
Note.
; as I verily believe, from all that I know of such Matters, that it is
entirely groundless. Why then should they be the Objects of any peculiar
Jealousy? And why did the Doctor, on my happening to mention them, seize upon
the Occasion to give this Evidence of his brotherly Affection toward them?

IT was pretended that Two undesireable Consequences would arise at home, from
granting to the Colonies the Episcopate requested. One is, that vast Numbers of
People there, meaning the Dissenters and disaffected Members of the Church,
would think themselves hardly treated, when they found such an Episcopate
granted to the Americans, as has been refused to them. I think them very hardly
treated by such an Objection as this; wherein they are represented as a Set of
peevish and unreasonable People, disposed to behave weakly, absurdly and
perversely, and in a Manner grossly unworthy of Men and of Christians. They are
here supposed, in the first Place, to prefer such an Episcopate as is proposed
for the Colonies, to the Episcopate in England -- then, to have applied for
such an Episcopate themselves, which has been refused them -- and lastly,
because they cannot obtain it in England, to be unwilling that the Americans
should have it. The Doctor may be better acquainted with the Genius and
Disposition of those People than I am; but I can hardly believe such an
unfavorable Representation of them to be just, at least, without many
Exceptions.

IN making this Objection, I thought my Opponent had forgotten his proper
Business and Character; which was to answer the Appeal, upon the Principles of
the Dissenters in this Country. Now if we may judge of them from their Writers,
they would willingly inflame, rather than allay, the Discontent at home with
the present ecclesiastical Establishment; and therefore they cannot
consistently object, that the Execution of our Plan would increase that
Discontent, or, in other Words, produce an Effect which they wish to see. The
Doctor says, that I had injudicously misplaced this Remark -- that had I made
it under the former Objection, it would have appeared more plausible. p. 130.
The Remark here was proper and pertinent; and by introducing it in this Place,
I meant not to confine it to this particular Objection. And I expressly said,
that the Doctor mistook his proper Business, not only where it was then pointed
out, but IN MANY OTHER PLACES Appeal defended. p. 209.
. The former Objection was so glaring an Instance of this Mismanagement, that
it was needless to mention it.

NOTWITHSTANDING, the Doctor thinks he had a Right to make Objections upon any
Principles, as Objections of all Kinds were called for. But who called for all
Kinds of Objections, in the Latitude wherein he has produced them? i. e. For
good, bad and indifferent; pertinent and impertinent; consistent and
inconsistent; reasonable and unreasonable? I will undertake to answer for the
Author of the Appeal, that he did not. But if, in Fact, he had made so absurd a
Proposal, the Doctor should have had more Discretion than to have accepted of
it. But to clear himself partly from the Charge of Inconsistency, he informs
us, that he and those who are commonly called Dissenters, are in real Earnest
that the episcopal Laity may not be imposed on by their planning Clergy -- and
that the Design of the Objection was to serve them. It appears to me that the
Account would have been far more just and candid, had he said, that he and his
Adherents were in real Earnest, to excite, in the Minds of the episcopal Laity,
a Jealousy, that their Clergy have combined to impose upon and deceive them.
For, I believe, it is not so much Friendship to the Laity, as Enmity to the
Clergy, that has caused them to be so mightily in Earnest. Their planning
Clergy! How often must this Objector be told, that the Episcopate in Question
was never planned by the American Clergy? It was shown in the Appeal, that it
was planned by others; and that the Plan is no otherwise ours, than as we we
have adopted it, and are desirous of promoting it. But what is worst of all, he
says it was a Scheme they had contrived FOR THEIR OWN SAKES. They must have
been wretched Contrivers, if in forming a Scheme for their own Sakes, they
could project no other Advantage to themselves, than that of being more
strictly governed, and the Doctor's PRIVILEGE of being punished when they do
amiss. That the Clergy have been influenced by mercenary Motives, in their
Application for Bishops, is as groundless and unjust a Reproach as Malice can
invent. If ever a disinterested and benevolent Resolution was formed by any
Body of Men; this of our Clergy, to solicit and promote an Episcopate,
calculated to bring themselves under Restraint, without the least Prospect of
personal Advantage, and with a View only to the Interest of Religion, is fairly
entitled to this glorious Character. The whole Plan is laid before the Public;
let the Public judge of it, and say -- whether the Ease, or the Wealth, or
Authority of the Clergy, can be the Object in View. Jealousy, Envy, and a
gloomy Tribe of malevolent Passions, are always ready to entertain unfavorable
Suspicions; but the Suspicion, in this Case, has not the least Appearance of
Evidence to support it. The Clergy therefore, conscious of the Rectitude of
their Aims, will be neither detered nor disconcerted by any Abuses they may
receive from the Enemies of the Church; but they will steadily pursue, and
persevere in pursuing, what they judge to be their Duty with Regard to an
Episcopate, through evil Report and good Report.

IN dealing with one Branch of this general Objection, I expressed what I took
to be the Sense of it in my own Words; in which I did not other Harm, than to
express it in stronger Terms than were used by the Doctor. In speaking of the
Dissenters at home, he said they would think themselves hardly treated; this I
expressed by their being clamorous, substituting noisy Words for hard Thoughts,
which was no great Disadvantage to his Argument. However, he says, and in
Strictness of Speech it is true, that it was not mentioned as an Objection that
Dissenters at home would grow more clamorous in Consequence of the Settlement
of the proposed Episcopate. But he is also of Opinion, that there was no just
Foundation for my substituting the Word clamorous; and that there is a wide
Difference between the Dissenters being clamarous, and their thinking
themselves hardly treated. The two Things, it is confessed, are different in
themselves, and in some Cases should be carefully distinguished; but it appears
from the History of the English Dissenters, that with them there is such a
close Connection between their thinking themselves hardly treated, and their
being clamorous, that mistaking the former for the latter is very excusable. I
speak not of Individuals; there are undoubtedly many among them of amiable and
excellent Characters; who are mild, gentle and peaceable; and who would suffer
much, before they would make any public Disturbance, or act any Way
disrespectfully toward Government. But hitherto, this has not been the general
Character of the Party.

WHAT was absurdly put into the Mouth of the Dissenters, I allowed that some
others might consistently say; and for their Satisfaction, I thought it
sufficient to refer them to what had been offered to this Purpose -- viz. That
such an Episcopate might be erected here with ease; but it cannot be effected
in England, without subverting an Establishment, and making a very visible
Alteration in the national Constitution -- a Work never to be undertaken but in
the greatest Extremity, and even then, not without a trembling Hand. The Doctor
tells us, all this is a Mistake. The proposed Episcopate could not be erected
here with that Ease that is insinuated. But certainly it can be erected here
with Ease, in a comparative Sense; i. e. with less Difficulty than would attend
the Settlement of an Episcopate in any other Form. It will meet with no
Opposition from the Friends and Members of the Church; and as to Opposition
from those who have no Concern with it, it is unreasonable and pragmatical, and
not to be regarded.

AND as 'to subverting an Establishment,' and making a visible Alteration in
the national Constitution, the Doctor sees no Difficulty in the Matter -- it is
one of the easiest Things in Nature. Some People may think the Subversion of
the national Establishment to be a good Work, and perhaps a pleasant Work; but
I believe this Writer is singular in thinking it an easy Work. It is
surprising, that he has not seen enough with his own Eyes, to convince him of
the Grossness of this Mistake. Has he never known of Attempts to introduce
Innovations in small Matters, where Religion was thought to be concerned, that
have been attended with violent Contests, and have ended in incurable Schisms?
Has he never heard of Congregations that have been torn in Pieces, by the
Endeavors of some, to substitute a new and better Version of the Psalms, for
Instance, in the Place of an old one? And does he think that a general
religious Establishment, to which the greater Part of the Nation is firmly
attached, will be given up with more Ease, than a single Congregation can be
persuaded to part with, or exchange, a Matter of but trifling Consequence? It
seems to be almost impossible that he can be serious, when he talks at this
Rate. He concludes this labored Paragraph with telling the Public, that he
thinks it high Time that the national Constitution should be new-modelled: And
if he could find a sufficient Party to support him, I doubt not but he would
undertake the Work himself, without so much as a trembling Hand, and that
immediately, without a Moment's Hesitation or Delay; for, says he, the sooner
the better. p. 132, 133.

THE other ill Consequence to be dreaded at home, I will lay before the Reader
in the Doctor's Words, as he thinks I did not fairly represent it, when I
undertook to express it in Words of my own. It can scarce be supposed, says he,
it should escape the Thought of our English Bishops, that the Settlement of
such an Episcopate in America, as is proposed, may prepare the Way for such a
Change in the Power of Bishops at home, as they would not be very fond of. To
the Objection thus expressed, it is a sufficient Answer to say -- that the
Bishops at home universally approve of the Plan The late Archbishop of
Canterbury was of Opinion that there scarce ever was a Bishop of the Church of
England, from the Revolution to this Day, that has not desired the
Establishment of Bishops in our Colonies, upon much the same Plan with that
under Consideration.

Let. to Walpole. p. 9.
-- that they have considered it in every Light, and viewed it in all its
probable Consequences -- and, that they are, in Fact, under no Apprehensions on
this Account. But, on the other Hand, they would have just Cause to be uneasy,
should the proposed American Episcopate not be granted; as there would be
Reason to suspect, that such a Refusal proceeded from Hatred to the episcopal
Order itself -- a Hatred, which in Time might overthrow them and the Church of
England together, as it once did.

OBJECTION III. The Church of England knows no such Bishops as are specified in
the Plan, nor can they, in Consistency with its Constitution, be sent to the
Colonies. p. 134. To this I gave no particular Answer before, as I conceived
that what had been offered on the Subject of the King's Supremacy, from which
the Inconsistency was infered, was a full Refutation of the Objection, and of
all that was said to support it. But the Doctor will not be satisfied, without
a particular Answer. Let it then be observed, that what the Church of England
allows of and has provided for, it not inconsistent with her Constitution, and
what She has experienced, She may be properly said to know: -- But, such
Bishops as are specified in this Plan, She allows of, has provided for, and
experienced: -- Therefore, such Bishops are consistent with her Constitution,
and She is no Stranger to them. The minor Proposition is thus proved. The
Bishops of our Plan are, and were originally called, Suffragan Bishops: --
Suffragan Bishops are consistent with the Constitution of the Church of
England: -- Therefore, the Bishops of our Plan are consistent with her
Constitution. The Act of 26 Henry VIII, Cap. 14, to which the Bishops
consented, makes Provision for Suffragans in the Church of England. Such
Bishops were frequently appointed, during the whole Reigns of Edward VI, and
Queen Elizabeth See Strype' s Memorials of Cranmer, and Wharton' s Observations
on D^. passim.
. They are mentioned in the Canons that were framed in the Reign of King James,
as belonging to the Church, and were continued some Years afterward: For in
1606, it appears that Dr. Stern, then Suffragan Bishop of Colchester, was
suspended, for some Irregularity of Conduct. After the Restoration, the
Bishops, in Answer to some Proposals made by the Presbyterian Divines, say, in
Words which are recommended to the Doctor's particular Notice, on more Accounts
than one: We cannot grant the Extent of any Diocese is so great, but that a
Bishop may well perform his Duty, which is not a personal Inspection of every
Man's Soul, but the pastoral Charge, or taking Care that the Ministers, or
other ecclesiastical Officers within their Diocese, do their Duties; and if
some Diocesses should be too large, the Law allows of Suffragans Neal 's Hist.
of the Puritans. Vol. IV. p. 23^.
. The Law equally allows of Suffragans at this Day See Gibson 's Codex. p. 157.
. It is evident therefore, that the Bishops of our Plan are consistent with the
Constitution of the Church of England; and it is farther evident, that the
Doctor, in talking of these Matters, betrays his Ignorance, understanding
neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms.

HE chooses here to introduce the Subject of the King's Supremacy, although the
Consideration of it more properly belonged to another Place. He brings it in
here, because it will swell this Part of his Performance, wherein he professes
more immediately to attack the Episcopate in Question. For by such a Maneuver
the unwary Reader may be led to think, from the Number of Pages in this
Section, that the Doctor has said much in direct Opposition to the proposed
Episcopate; while, in Reality, he has said but very little that is pertinent to
the Subject.

HE had objected, that, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, all
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is derived from the Crown; that as to Authority
purely ecclesiastical, there is no such Thing in the Church of England; and
consequently, that the Bishops of the Appeal, who are described as having such
an Authority as is altogether derived from the Church, and not from the State,
cannot be Bishops of, nor be sent by, the Church of England to America. This
occasioned me to consider the Subject largely, and to make a particular
Examination whether his Assertion were true. And to prove that he was mistaken,
I produced a Variety of most authentic Evidence; particularly, the Explanation
of Henry VIII, to the Convocation of the Province of York, the Words of the
Letters Patent granted by Edward VI, Queen Elizabeth's INJUNCTIONS, and the
37th Article -- with a brief historical Account of the Occasion, and Operation,
of these several Declarations and Writings. And it was made abundantly evident,
that the Supremacy claimed by our Princes, given them by the Constitution, and
maintained by the Church of England, allows to our Bishops a purely spiritual
or ecclesiastical Authority, which is derived, not from the Crown, but from
Christ himself.

THE Doctor says but very little to invalidate the Force of this Evidence. He
says that all I attempted to prove is ONLY this, that, notwithstanding the
King's Supremacy, it is from Christ, not the King, that the Authority of the
Bishops, as such, in the Church of England, is conveyed to them. p. 137. This
is all that I had Occasion to prove; and the Proof that I made, is sufficient
to overthrow one of the main Pillars that supported his Opposition to the
Episcopate requested. Notwithstanding, he affects to think very differently of
the Matter. It is, to me, says he, beyond all Doubt, that his (the Author's)
Labor on this Head is altogether vain. This is easily said in any Case; but his
Manner of saying it in this Place, is justly suspicious. Here is a capital
Point disputed between us; I had taken more than common Pains to place it in a
proper Light, and to convince the Doctor of his Mistake; and his Reply is, that
he thinks my Labor is vain. So far as his Conviction was the Object, I may
probably have labored without Effect; however, I have this Satisfaction, that
although he is not convinced, he is in a Manner silenced. For he only repeats,
and insists upon, the Words of the Statute, where all Manner of Jurisdiction is
said to flow from the Crown, etc. and refers to Dr. Burn' s Ecclesiastical Law,
for the several Acts of Parliament relating to the Subject. p. 138. What was
meant by that, and such like Expressions, was explained in the Appeal defended;
and it was shown that this Language was consistent with the Doctrine and Belief
of purely spiritual Power in the Church, in its strictest Sense. It were easy
to support, by innumerable Authorities, what I advanced upon the Subject; but
against Dr. Chauncy it needs no Support. I fear not but it will stand forever,
by its own Strength, notwithstanding all the Attempts he may make against it.

SHOULD it be supposed, says he, not granted, that the Authority of Bishops
does not flow from the Crown, but from the Church, which is the utmost the
Doctor has endeavored to prove, it will not follow from hence, that he has
answered, or so much as attempted to answer 'all that is said in Support' of
the Objection in Debate. But should it be supposed, not granted, that this is
not an Answer to all that was said in Support of the Objection, yet enough for
the Purpose had been said in other Places; and the Reader was refered to what
had been said relating to the Subject in general, without being limited to any
particular Passage.

WHAT was said to support the Objection, cannot be answered, says the Doctor,
until it is shown, how that Authority is altogether from the Church, and not
from the State, which can be exercised, neither in the Affair of Worship,
Ordination, Government or Discipline, but by and under the Guidance, Control,
and sovereignly prescribed Order, not of the Church, but of the State. p. 139.
But this was shown too, and illustrated, in the Appeal defended, p. 55; and in
such a Manner, as, I doubt not, will be allowed by the impartial to be
satisfactory and convincing. The Origin of any Power is one Thing, and the
Regulation or Obstruction of the Exercise of that Power is another. The Doctor
himself claims an ecclesiastical Authority, originally derived from Christ; but
the Exercise of it is, in some Respects, regulated by the Laws of his Country.
And had it a more particular Direction from the Government than it now has, it
would still be the same, as to its Nature and Origin, as it now is. So plain a
Case has but little Need of Illustration; however, with this View, I considered
one particular Branch of ecclesiastical Authority, the Power to baptize. This
Power is generally esteemed to be purely ecclesiastical, and not derived by a
Commission from the State; and yet in common it cannot be exercised by a
Clergyman, without the Approbation and Consent of other Persons. But such
Approbation alters not the Nature of the Power, nor is it the Source from
whence it is derived; any more than my Consent and Submission to the Operation
of a Surgeon, is the Cause of the Skill with which he performs it. In like
Manner, the episcopal Authority may be altogether from the Church, and not from
the State; and yet it may be guided and controlled by the State; without losing
its Nature or essential Character. If the Consent of the King or the State is
necessary, in Order to a Bishop's coming over to America, so is the Consent of
the Master of the Ship in which he comes over; and the former does not change
the Nature of his Office or of his Authority, and more than the latter. I shall
now pass on to

OBJECTION IV. We are in Principle against (...) Establishments in Religion;
and as we do not desire any such Establishment in Support of our own religious
Sentiments or Practice, we cannot reasonably be blamed, if we are not disposed
to encourage one in Favor of the episcopal Colonists. p. 140. It requires
almost the Patience of a JOB, to deal with such an Objector. He argues against
the Episcopate of the Appeal, which asks only for a Toleration, because he
would not encourage an Establishment; and he may as well object against Things
that are strait, because he approves not of Things that are crooked.

AS to his desiring no Establishment in Favor of his own religious Sentiments,
I am persuaded that he says it in a qualified Sense; especially as he
undertakes to express the general Opinion of the Congregationalists in
New England. For that they had generally become, in Principle, against all
Establishments in Religion, in the common Extent of the Expression, was a Piece
of Intelligence for which I was beholden to the Doctor. For, as I told him, I
was in Possession of certain historical Accounts and Anecdotes (since which
Time I have collected more, and of a fresher Date) from which one would
naturally infer the contrary. However, supposing the Representation to be just,
it may be proper so observe here, that so far as the Doctor and his Friends are
against Establishments, they are Deserters from the Principles of their
Ancestors, the first Settlers of New England; who were not only, in Principle,
for an Establishment of their own Mode of Religion, but for an Establishment
without a Toleration. This Doctrine they received from the Puritans, who aimed
at nothing less than such an Establishment in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as
was shown from Bishop Maddox. The Doctor denies this; and says that the
Puritans are herein injuriously misrepresented by Maddox. But if so, they are
misrepresented by all our Historians, and even by their own Writings; and I
could easily prove, from Neal's History of them, as much as is here asserted.

UPON this the Doctor is all on Fire, and his Indignation flashes out in the
following Language. He (meaning the hapless Author) must not take it amiss, if
I tell him, that we are not surprised at his endeavoring to uncover the
Nakedness of his Ancestors, as he is a DESERTER from that GREAT CAUSE which
brought them over to this then desolate Land: Nor is it beyond what we
expected, to find him, and many of the Society's Missionaries, who are either
Proselytes themselves, or the Sons of Proselytes, fired with extraordinary Zeal
in propagating High-Church Principles. This has all along been the Way, on this
Side [of] the Atlantic, in which Converts to the Church, especially clerical
ones, have endeavored to give Proof of the Sincerity of their Conversion. p.
141. Are all then, that mention the Bigotry and Intolerance of the first
Settlers of New England, to be charged with endeavoring to uncover their
Nakedness? This will bear hard upon some of the most respectable Characters
among their Descendants. For my Part, I wish that their Nakedness could be
concealed, from a Regard both to their Honor, and that of their Posterity; but,
in Truth, neither the Doctor, nor his Friends, will be able to find a Cloak
large enough to cover it, in such a Manner, that the Shame of their Nakedness
(in this Part) "do not appear."

AS to deserting the great Cause that brought them over to America; if the
whole of their religious System be here meant, Dr. Chauncy himself (if 'certain
historical Accounts and Anecdotes' may be credited) must be reckoned among the
Deserters, in several Respects. In one Respect at least, the Words of this
Objection make it evident, that he is a Deserter from them. I do not indeed
always look upon such Conduct to be criminal; but he charges it upon me as a
Crime: And therefore while he exemplifies it himself, he is condemned from his
own Mouth -- a much feverer Condemnation, than what proceeds from an Enemy.
According to my Way of thinking, the Doctor and I are under no greater
Obligations to maintain all the religious Principles of our puritanical
Ancestors, than the Puritans themselves were, to adhere to all the Principles
of their Popish Ancestors. I do not mean to insinuate any Comparison between
the Puritans and Papists; nor to be wanting in any due Respect to the first
Settlers of New England. For it gives me Pleasure to say, that I think they
were, in general, Men of more Reputation, more Religion, and more Learning,
than the original Settlers of new Colonies commonly are. But an
undistinguishing Fondness for all their Sentiments, and, in particular, a
Justification of their intolerant Spirit, are no Parts of that Respect which is
due to them, from the Friends of religious Liberty, although their Descendants.

WHAT is here said of the Society's Missionaries* who are either Proselytes, or
the Sons of Proselytes, from Congregationalism, is too general a Charge to
admit of a particular Reply. It seems to have been dictated by a Spirit of
Resentment, occasioned by their Success in propagating the true Principles of
the Church of England, invidiously and illiberally styled High-Church; in
which, it has by no Means been yet made to appear, that they have generally
used unjustifiable Methods. Their Zeal for the peculiar Doctrines of the
Church, may sometimes have been excessive; but when this could justly be said,
it may have been occasioned by the unreasonable Opposition they met with, in
the Discharge of their proper Duty. However, we are not surprised -- nor is it
beyond what we expected, to find, that the Missionaries, who have been
proselyted, or are the Sons of Proselytes, to the Church of England, are
severely censured, by so strict an Adherer to, as well as so zealous a Defender
of, the great Cause of his Ancestors, as Dr. Chauncy.

AS the Presbyterians in Scotland, and the Calvinists in Geneva, Holland and
other Places, have always been Friends to religious Establishments; I thought a
full and particular Evidence was necessary in Order to convince us, that the
Presbyterians or Calvinists in New England have adopted a different Principle.
For the more incredible a Fact is, the stronger Evidence is required, in Order
to prove it. Dr. Priestley is of Opinion, that all Denominations of
Protestants, except one, are fond of Establishments in their own Favor -- and
of something more, viz. Of depressing all other Sects. "This I own," says he
(namely Confidence in their Moderation) is more than I could promise myself
from any other Body of Christians whatever (viz. Than the Quakers) "the
Presbyterians by no Means excepted Essay on the first Principles of Government.
p. 187.
." Accordingly he says, in another Treatise: If I were to pray for the general
Prevalence of any one Sect of Christians, it should be that of the Quakers;
because, different as my Opinions are from theirs, I have so much Confidence in
their Moderation, that I believe they would let me live, write and publish what
I pleased unmolested among them. (I suppose the Church of England does not
suffer Dr. Priestley to live, write and publish what he pleases, without
Molestation.) And this I own, is more than I could promise myself from any
other Body of Christians, whatever; the Presbyterians perhaps (N. B.) LEAST OF
ALL excepted Essay on a Course of liberal Education.
. The Congregationalists in New England therefore, in the Opinion of this
Writer, must, with Regard to Establishments and the Exercise of Power, differ
from all other Denominations of Protestants, the Quakers excepted, and from the
Presbyterians perhaps most of all, if the Doctor's Account may be credited: And
how completely they have adopted the mild and tolerant Principles of the
Quakers, the Quakers and Baptists in New England know by Experience, and the
Public has been lately told. It is a Pity that Dr. Priestley had not heard of
this great Revolution in the religious System of New England; for then he would
not, on so fair an Occasion, have neglected to render it all due Honor.

DR. Chauncy still affects to be terrified with an Apprehension, that the
proposed Episcopate will establish the Church of England in the Colonies. I had
asked, Does this Plan propose the Establishment of the Church? He answers: It
undoubtedly does. I also asked: Will the Execution of it imply, or amount to,
any such Thing? His Answer is ready: Yes; or it can never be carried into
Execution (i. e. the Execution can never be carried into Execution.) To show
that no such Thing was intended or implied in the Plan, I held it up once more
to public View; asking, of the whole, and of all its material Parts, whether
there was any Appearance of an Establishment. An Answer is not wanting: Surely,
says he, the Doctor could not but know, before he asked these Questions, that
it was only asking, whether we thought there was any Weight, or Force, in the
produced Objection. p. 142. I still insist upon the Propriety of the Questions.
To decide whether the Plan mentioned or implied an Establishment or not, it was
proper to refer to the Plan itself; that the Reader might see with his own
Eyes, whether there was any such Thing: -- In the same Manner, that, if a
Person should affirm to me that the Sun was not risen, when I knew that it was
visiblely above the Horizon, I should point to the Body of the Sun, and ask if
he did not see it.

MY logical Opponent proceeds, expressing his Surprise: How unaccountable is
it, that he could imagine, that he had said any Thing to the Purpose, by BARELY
putting these Questions! They are really nothing more than so many strongly
expressed Affirmations; and will he call this arguing? The putting proper
Questions, may be saying something to the Purpose, especially when they have
the Force of strongly expressed Affirmations. Every Affirmation is a
Proposition; and Propositions that are pertinent to the Business in hand, and
duly methodized and arranged, may justly be called arguing. The Questions
appear to me to have been pertinent, and I conceive that I acted with no
Impropriety in the Case. At least, the Doctor has made none appear, nor has he
attempted to invalidate what was offered directly to the Point, any farther
than in the Words I have quoted. But were he able to prove, that an
Establishment would be the Consequence of executing our Plan, which he cannot
do in any Sense; yet, unless it were such an Establishment as would tend to
abridge the Liberties, or interfere with the Rights, of some of his Majesty's
Subjects in the Colonies, it would be unreasonable to make it an Objection. It
is possible, at least in Theory, that there may be an Establishment of one
Religion, without any ill Consequences to the Professors of other Religions.
Mr. Neal says: The King may create Dignitaries, and give sufficient
Encouragement to those of the public Religion, without invading the Liberties
of his dissenting Subjects. If religious Establishments were stripped of their
judicial Processes, and civil Jurisdiction, no Harm could be feared from them
Hist. of the Puritans. Vol. IV. Pref. x.
. Now the Bishops proposed, whether established or unestablished, are to carry
on no judicial Processes, but against the episcopal Clergy, and are not to have
the least Shadow of civil Jurisdiction; and therefore, according to Mr. Neal,
and according to common Sense, no Harm can justly be feared from them, by
Dissenters of any Denomination.

THE Doctor had affirmed that there is no Evidence, that Christ has entrusted
the State with a Right to make religious Establishments; and argued, that if
England had such a Right, so had China, Turkey, etc. the Consequence of which
he imagined, would, upon the whole, be more injurious than beneficial; and
therefore, that States had no such Right. To show the Weakness of this
Argument, I applied it to the Right of private Judgment; and made it evident,
that all he said against Establishments, might as properly be urged against
Men's Right to think and judge for themselves. To this he replies: Surely the
Doctor does not believe, that the Right of States to make religious
Establishments, is as clearly and indubitably a Grant from God, as the Right of
private Judgment. p. 144. But indeed I do believe, that God has given to States
the Right in Question, as clearly and indubitably, as he has given to Men the
Right of private Judgment. But be this as it may; the Doctor's Argument will
conclude as strongly against the Right of private Judgment, as against the
Right of States to make Establishments. For if the ill Consequences arising
from the Abuse of a Thing, invalidate the Right to make a proper Use of it,
then such ill Consequences may destroy all Rights whatever. Establishments,
without a Toleration of Dissenters, are entirely out of the Question: I never
contended for such Establishments, nor do I think that States have a Right to
make them. But that they are authorized to make Establishments, that do not
violate the private Rights of Conscience, is as clear to me, as any Proposition
relating to civil Society. For it means no more than this, that the Magistrate
has a Right to give some peculiar Countenance and Encouragement, to what he
esteems to be the true Religion; or, in other Words, that a Christian
Magistrate has a Right to show more Favor to the Christian Religion, than to
Mahometism or Heathenism. And I will venture to add, that he has a Right to
show as much Favor to his Religion, as is necessary to support it, and is
consistent with a full and free Toleration.

AND if only such a Right had been claimed, and exercised properly, in China,
Turkey, or in any, or all the Kingdoms of the Earth; there would have been but
little Reason to complain of any ill Consequences. It is better that almost any
Religion should be supported, than that there should be no Religion in a
Nation; and such a Support as is contended for, would still leave to those of
righter Judgment than the Magistrate, the Liberty of acting according to it.
The Doctor speaks of CHRIST's not having entrusted the State with a Right to
make Establishments; not adverting to the Impropriety of such Language. It was
never pretended that this Right was given by Christ. The Authority he exercised
was altogether of a spiritual Nature. He never interfered with the Rights of
States, either to abridge or enlarge them; and the Rights of Kingdoms and
States, before the Gospel, were exactly the same that they now are, under the
Gospel. He gave not the Right of private Judgment, for he found Men already in
Possession of it. He only directed them in the Use of it; and their being
liable to err in the Exercise of it, is no Argument against the Existence of
the Right. In like Manner, the Fallibility of the State, and its being liable,
in Consequence of Mistakes, to make wrong Establishments, proves not that it
has no just Authority to make right ones.

OBJECTION V. The Church of England in the Colonies, in its comparative low
State, instead of an Episcopate upon this or any other Plan, needs rather the
charitable Assistance of its Friends to support its present Ministers, and
others that are still wanted, p. 145. To this it was answered, that the Church
of England, in several of the Colonies, is not in that comparative low State
here spoken of; but is able to maintain its Clergy, and actually does maintain
them, as liberally, as they are maintained in any Part of the British
Dominions. This may properly be said of a considerable Majority of the
Episcopal Clergy in the Colonies; and therefore, with Regard to them, the
Objection is not only weak, but utterly impertinent.

THE Doctor replies, that he had no Reference to the southern Colonies, for
this very good Reason, because it did not appear, that the Church of England in
any of these Colonies had complained for Want of Bishops, or were disposed to
petition for them, p. 146. But the Petitions from hence, were in Behalf of the
Church in those Colonies, as well as in these; and although we were not
authorized by the southern Colonies to petition in their Names, nor did we
pretend to such a Commission, yet we had a Right to mention them, on the
Occasion, as equally suffering for Want of an Episcopate. The Appeal was made,
'in Behalf of the Church of England,' not only in the northern Colonies, but
'in America;' and this Objector had no Right to consider the proposed
Episcopate in a partial View, when the Design of it, and the Want of it, were
known to be general, extending to all the Colonies within the British American
Dominions.

IF the Clergy in some of the Colonies had not yet petitioned for an
Episcopate, yet as the Circumstances of those Colonies equally required it, it
was proper to include them in the Representation, that was intended to show the
general Want of an Episcopate. I hope Men may sometimes be considered as
needing Assistance, especially of a religious Kind, before they formally
request it. But since the Doctor looks upon the actual petitioning of the
Clergy in all the Colonies, as of so much Consequence to the Cause of a general
Episcopate; I can now give him the Pleasure of hearing, that the Clergy in
Maryland have, some Time since, generally united in petitioning the King, the
Bishops, etc. in Favor of the Episcopate proposed; and that their Petitions
have expressed as much Earnestness in the Cause, as those of our northern
Conventions. And in a short Time, I doubt not but I shall be able to give him
the farther Pleasure of hearing, that the Clergy of the few remaining Colonies
have petitioned to the same Purpose. I trust he will take due Notice of this,
and shape his future Objections accordingly.

I observed to him also, in Answer to the Objection, that supposing the Church
throughout the Colonies needed the charitable Assistance of its Friends to
support its Ministers, yet this would be no Proof that it does not need also an
Episcopate. His Reply is, that notwithstanding, it would fully prove, that the
episcopal Clergy, in the Colonies, are boundless in their Desires of Charity.
And he seems to be well satisfied, that, although his Argument fails of proving
what it was alleged for, yet it will luckily prove something else. I would not
rob him of any well-grounded Satisfaction; but I must take the Liberty to
observe, that what has been said by him does not yet prove, that the Desires of
the Clergy are more boundless than the Necessities of the Church.

THE Doctor had urged that the Money, by which an Episcopate must be supported,
might be much more usefully expended in supporting Missionaries in Carolina (I
suppose he meant North Carolina) where the religious State of Things, by all
Accounts, is deplorably sad. In Answer to this, I thought proper to observe as
follows: When other Ends are to be answered (alluding to an Expression of his
own) the Writers against the Church can tell us, that the Society have no Power
to apply their Funds to other Uses, than were intended by the Donors. -- But
now an Episcopate is in View, it is thought reasonable and just that the
Society should alienate a Fund, more strictly appropriated to a particular Use
than any other in their Power (for this may be truly said of the Fund for the
Support of American Bishops) and expend it upon Missionaries to be sent to
Carolina, and other Places, provided always, that such Places be at a due
Distance from New England Appeal defended, p. 215.
. The Doctor calls this a strange Remark; and he affirms, that not a Word was
said of the Fund appropriated for the Support of American Bishops, or of the
Society's expending one Farthing of this Fund to [for] other Uses than were
intended by the Donors, p. 147. But how can that Money, which is designed for
the Support of Bishops, be expended in maintaining Missionaries, without taking
it from the appropriated episcopal Fund, in which alone is deposited all that
is known to have been thus intended? This would be, to apply to one Use, what
was particularly given for another. The episcopal Fund consists of Legacies,
and the Moneys arising from them by Interest, given for the sole Purpose of
maintaining American Bishops; and the Trustees of these Legacies, I humbly
conceive, have no Right to apply them to any other Use, than that for which
they were intended, and to which they were limited, by the several Testators.

BUT the Doctor, who can best explain his own Meaning, now pleads, that he was
apprehensive the Society might take from the common Fund, to make up any
Deficiency in the episcopal Fund; and by that Means, the Support of an
Episcopate would lessen the Number of Missionaries, which the Reader knows, he
always wishes should be increased. If this, and this only, is what he had in
View, I mistook his Meaning; and the Answer I gave was founded on a Mistake.
But upon reviewing the Passage in his former Pamphlet, I find that the Mistake
was not my Fault but his; as I am still unable to make any other Inference from
his Expressions, as they there stand.

AND here he thinks proper to ask my Opinion, whether the Society might not
consistently with Fidelity to their Trust, make Use of such a Liberty, and
apply Part of their common Fund to the Support of an Episcopate. It is not my
Province to prescribe to that wise and venerable Body; but if I may express my
Opinion, it is clearly this -- that, as they are known to have a Fund that is
appropriated to the Purpose of an American Episcopate, whatever is not
particularly given to that Fund, is not intended for that Use, and the Society
have no Right to employ it in that Service. I can also declare, that I have
sufficient Reason to believe, that no Members of the Society have ever intended
or proposed, that Money should be taken from their common Fund for the Support
of an Episcopate in the Colonies.

THE Doctor says, that if I had looked within, he can scarce think that my
Conscience would have suffered me to insinuate, that he spoke of Missions in
Carolina, because at a due Distance from New England. p. 148. I confess it was
not by looking within, but without, that I was led to suspect, that he was
fonder of Missionaries at the Distance of Carolina, than in his own
Neighborhood. If he will declare to the contrary, I will acknowledge that I
have been mistaken. It has often struck me, in reading the various Productions
of the anti-episcopal Writers in New England, from the Letter of the Hampshire
Ministers to the Bishop of London in 1734, with Dr. Coleman's Letter that
accompanied it, down to Dr. Chauncy's last Publication By Doctor Chauncy 's
last Publication is here meant, his Reply to the Appeal defended, and not his
REVENGE SERMON, preached May 30th, 1770; which spared the Missionaries, as it
had a more important Object in View. The apparent Design of it was farther to
inflame the Minds, of an inflamed Populace AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT.
, that they were all very uneasy at the Neighborhood of the Missionaries, and
very ingenious at contriving Employment for them at a Distance. They speak of
the episcopal Clergy as their Enemies; and it is natural for every Man to
choose that his Enemies should be at a due Distance, rather than within Reach
of his Person. I think therefore, upon the whole, that it was no unnatural
Conclusion, that those Writers (not excluding Dr. Chauncy) were desirous that
the Missionaries should be employed as far from New England as possible.

IT is the real Truth of Fact, says the Doctor, to whatever Cause it may be
owing, that they (the Society) have employed few Missionaries, next to none, in
[North] Carolina, where they were most needed, and multiplied them where there
was little, if any Need at all of them; and in some Places they have supported,
and are still supporting them, where the Churches to whom [which] they
minister, are abundantly able, without any Assistance from them, to support the
Gospel. p 149. As to North Carolina, it is confessed that there never have been
so many Clergymen there as were needed; but it does not appear that this was
owing to any Inattention or Neglect of the Society. The Society's Fund is not
an inexhaustible Treasure, enabling them to supply the Wants of all People in
the Colonies. As they have never been able to gratify all the Petitioners for
their Favor, it has been their Study to give the Preference where it was due.
Those Congregations which discover the greatest Willingness to exert themselves
toward the Support of their Ministers, the greatest Desire to obtain the
Society's Favor, and the best Disposition to improve by it, provided they
appear at the same Time to be unable to raise a sufficient Support themselves,
must naturally be thought by the Society to be the properest Objects of their
Charity. A Fund that is insufficient to answer all Necessities for which it is
wanted, must be carefully husbanded, that it may go as far as possible. Now it
is evident that the Society may do all that is needful to support Two Missions,
where the People will be equal Contributors with them, at the same Expense that
would be necessary for the Support of one Mission, where the People are unable,
or unwilling, to contribute; to say nothing of the greater Prospect of Success,
in a Mission of one Sort than of the other. This accounts for the
Multiplication of Missions in the Northern Colonies, beyond the Proportion that
has obtained in North Carolina; where the People made no Offers, and used no
Importunities, that could stand in Competition with those that went home from
these Colonies. To this may be added, that proper Persons could seldom be
found, that were willing to enter upon Missions in North Carolina. The Climate
and the Circumstances of that Colony, are generally esteemed by Strangers to be
disagreeable; and for Want of an Opportunity for an academical Education, but
few of the Natives have offered themselves as Candidates for holy Orders. Yet
notwithstanding these Disadvantages, the Society have, for more than 30 Years
past, found out Methods of sending some Missionaries thither; and it appears by
the last Abstract, that they have now no less than Twelve Missionaries employed
in that Colony. And while Strangers may wonder that they have done so little,
those that are acquainted with their History and Circumstances, wonder that
they have been able to do so much, as in Reality they have done, in
North Carolina.

BUT the Misrepresentation goes still farther. It makes the Society to have
multiplied Missionaries, where there was little if any Need at all of them;
while they have neglected those Places where they were most needed. The Doctor
undoubtedly thinks that there can be but little, if any Need at all of
Missionaries, in those Places where there are Preachers of the presbyterian or
congregational Class: But it is happy for the Members of the Church of England
in these Colonies, that the Society govern themselves by their own Opinion, and
not by his. However, in one Sense at least, what he says but two Pages
afterward, is a full Justification of the Society's Conduct, with Regard to
New England. For he asserts that the Missions there, are, by far the greater
Part of them, in so weak and low a State, that there would be no Hope of their
continued Existence, if that Charity was withdrawn, which, at first, gave Being
to them, and has all along supported them in Being. p. 131. The Society, it is
hoped, will make a proper Use of this Information, which corresponds with the
Accounts from the Missionaries: And it is not doubted but their Affection for
the Churches to which they have given Being, and which are known still to
depend upon them for the necessary Support of it, will strongly plead in Favor
of them, and prevent their being deserted, in this dependent, feeble State. In
Time these Churches may become able to support themselves; and when this shall
be the Case, they will cease to be proper Objects of the Society's Charity.
Whenever the episcopal Congregations in New England shall appear to have
arrived to that State, we may judge what the Society will do, from what they
have done, in a like Case.

IN South Carolina, the Society were early in establishing Missions. About 30
Years ago they had ten Missions in this Colony, supported at the annual Expense
of L. 450 Sterling. But as the Church there has become able to stand upon its
own Legs, and without foreign Help to support itself See the Bishop of
Landaff's SERMON.
; the Bounty of the Society has been withdrawn, and at present they have but
one Missionary in the whole Colony, and he is employed altogether among the
poor Palatines. Let the Reader consider this Case which is directly in point,
and attend to what has been said of the Society's Conduct relating to the
adjoining Colony of North Carolina, together with what will be soon said of
Nova Scotia; and he will be able to form a satisfactory Judgment -- whether
they are disposed, or not, to multiply Missions where there is but little Need
of them, and to neglect those Places which have most Need of them, as Dr.
Chauncy very decently charges them.

HE censures them for supporting Ministers in Places, where the Congregations
are able to support them, without any Assistance. But according to his own
Account, there can be but very few such Places in New England. And it has never
been fairly proved that the Society have done this, in a single Instance. I
know that several such Instances have been pointed out by the Enemies of the
Church; but the Congregations themselves, which ought to be the best Judges of
their own Abilities, declare the Case to have been otherwise, and the Friends
of the Church believe their Declarations to be true. Whether it be so or not,
the Society must judge according to the Evidence they receive; and it can
hardly be expected, that the Testimony of their Enemies, in such a Case, will
weigh more with them, than the Testimony of their Friends, agreeing with the
Declarations of the Congregations more immediately concerned.

HE also accuses the Society of having strangely neglected Canada; and for
Proof of it, refers to a Passage which clearly proves, that they have made that
Colony the Object of their Attention. What he refers to, is an Abstract of a
Letter from Mr. Delisle, Chaplain to the Garrison at Montreal, dated Sept. 30,
1767. If the Society had been under no Concern for the religious State of
Canada, they never would have published to the World the Contents of such a
Letter. It is probable that the Letter was sent to them, in Consequence of
their Inquiry; as it contains partly a Notitia parochialis, such as the Society
require from their Missionaries. I know that they had the Subject under
Consideration, before the Time that the Letter was dated. Although the Doctor
speaks of me, as a Person not having that Christian Concern for the Propagation
of the Gospel, which might have been expected from a Missionary; yet so early
as in 1766, I joined with my worthy Brethren in CONVENTION, in representing the
religious State of Canada to the Society, and in recommending it to their
Attention. This was no great while after the Cession of that Colony, by Treaty,
to the British Crown.

AT that Time, although something was proper to be done in Favor of the
protestant Religion in Canada; yet the Circumstances of the Country did not
require, nor would they with any Propriety admit of, so much to be done, as
many People are apt to imagine. There were then but few Protestants in the
Colony, that were Natives of it; and but few English People, except the
Military; and those few seated chiefly in Quebec and Montreal, where divine
Service was regularly performed by the Chaplains of the Garrisons. If therefore
Missionaries at that time had been sent to other Places, it must have been in
Order to proselyte the Canadians who were Papists, and Strangers to the English
Language. But the Papists would have been alarmed at such an Attempt, when it
was peculiarly necessary to quiet and compose their Spirits; and they would
have construed it to be a Violation of the Treaty of Surrender, which provided
that they might continue to enjoy their Religion, without Molestation. It would
therefore have been a very hopeful Project in the Society, to multiply Missions
in such a Country, at such a Time, and under such Circumstances. Especially if
it be considered, that in Order to send Missionaries to Canada, as the
Society's whole Fund was already engaged, and no new Resources appeared, they
must have broken through their former Engagements, and have removed their
Missionaries from other Places, where they were thought to be usefully
employed; or have discharged some of them, that they might be able to support
others in Canada -- where there could be but little Prospect of their
Usefulness, and where there was much Danger of their increasing that
Discontent, which required all the Skill of Government to keep within Bounds.

BESIDES: Had the Society been ever so able, and the Prospect of Success much
greater than it was; it would not have been proper for them to crowd
Missionaries into Canada, as soon as its Subjection to the British Crown was
confirmed. It would have been decent at least, to wait some Time, to see
whether the Government, upon settling the Police of that new Colony, would not
make some suitable Provision for the Encouragement and Support of the
protestant Religion in that District, so far as it should appear to be
expedient and proper. Until the final Resolutions of Government were taken, and
it was known that no Provision of this Kind was to be expected from thence,
there are many Persons that would have charged the Society with intermeddling
in Matters out of their Province, and not treating their Superiors with proper
Respect, had they assumed the Management of the religious Affairs of Canada
into their own Hands. On similar Occasions, where there have been new
Acquisitions of Territory, the Society was actually told, that it was irregular
and improper for them to act, until the Designs of Government were known. I say
not this at random, but upon the best Authority.

SINCE the Society have thought the proper Time was come, for them to interpose
in Behalf of Canada, they have not been inactive. Government has been
solicited to send protestant Clergymen into that Country; in Consequence of
which, three are actually appointed, one for Quebec, one for Montreal, and a
third (I think) for Trois-Riveirs -- which are the only Places at present, in
which much Advantage can be expected from Protestant Clergymen. The Society
have also solicited for Schoolmasters; and have already sent considerable
Packets of Books, at their own Expense, into different Parts of the Province.
As Opportunity and Ability will admit of, more will be done; and indeed every
Thing that is practicable in Favor of the protestant Religion may be expected,
from the Vigilance and Activity of that charitable and venerable Body.

WE may fairly judge of their Disposition toward Canada, from the Care they
have taken of Nova Scotia. Not many Years ago, the religious State of that
Colony was nearly the same, with what the religious State of Canada now is. And
it appears from the Abstracts, that the Society, although their Progress at
first fell short of their own Wishes, as well as of some People's Expectations,
have in their Employment in Nova Scotia no less than thirteen Missionaries and
Schoolmasters, at the yearly Expense of L. 495 Sterling, to say nothing of the
large Sums annually expended in Books, etc. By this Time I hope the Doctor
begins to be ashamed of the unrighteous Abuse, with which he has treated a
Society, that deserves to be honored, applauded and admired by the whole
Christian World.

DR. Chauncy often speaks of the Church of England in the Northern Colonies as
inconsiderable, not worthy of Notice, and in a State little better than
Nonexistence. And yet if we were to judge from the mighty Efforts that have
been made to stop its Progress, and the Alarms it has occasioned to the Bigots,
we should imagine that it had, not only the Rage, but the Strength, of a Lion,
and threatened the speedy Destruction of every other Religion in the Country.
In his former Pamphlet he said, that it has grown but little in Comparison with
the other Denominations in New England. This I disputed, and this he thinks
proper still to maintain. But among the other Denominations, that have thus
increased in New England, especially in the Massachusetts, he must not reckon
his own, the Congregationalist. For Time was, when they not only claimed, but
actually kept Possession of that whole Dominion, to themselves; and as other
Denominations since have obtained Footing, the Congregationalists must have
proportionably lost Ground.

AND here again I am obliged to uncover the Nakedness of my Ancestors, for
which the Doctor is answerable. In Order to maintain their exclusive Right to
the Country, the Congregationalists transported, as Criminals, such as were
found to retain an Affection for the Church; and the Quakers, that had the Luck
to escape hanging, were banished by them, on Pain of Death. I need say nothing
of the latter, as their History is well known: But I beg Leave to lay before
the Reader, a Passage relating to the former, extracted from a valuable Book
New-England's Memorial, by Mr. Morton; who styles himself "Secretary to the
Court for the Jurisdiction of New-"Plymouth."
which is now scarce, in which there appears to be no Partiality in Favor of
the Church. Some of the Passengers, says he, that came over at the same Time
(1629), observing that the Ministers did not at all use the Book of Common
Prayer, and that they did administer Baptism and the Lord's Supper without the
Ceremonies, and that they professed also to use Discipline in the Congregation
against scandalous Persons, etc. they began to raise some Trouble: Of these Mr.
Samuel Brown and his Brother were the Chief, the one being a Lawyer, the other
a Merchant, both of them amongst the Number of the first Patentees, Men of
Estates, and Men of Parts and Port in the Place. These two Brothers gathered a
Company together in a Place distinct from the public Assembly, and there sundry
Times the Book of Common Prayer was read unto such as resorted thither. The
Governor Mr. Endicot taking Notice of the Disturbance that began to grow
amongst the People by this Means, he convented the two Brothers before him.
They accused the Ministers as departing from the Orders of the Church of
England, that they were Separatists, etc. but for themselves, they would hold
to the Orders of the Church of England. -- The Governor and Council -- finding
these two Brothers to be of high Spirits, and their Speeches and Practices
tending to Mutiny and Faction, the Governor told them that New England was no
Place for such as they; and therefore, he sent them both back to England at the
Return of the Ships the same Year See the abovementioned Book. p. 104.
. We see the Crime of these Men, and we see their Punishment. Their Speeches,
because they were in Favor of the Church of England, and their Practices,
because they made Use of the Liturgy, were interpreted as tending to Mutiny and
Faction. It was solemnly decreed, that New England was no Place for such
People, i. e. for Churchmen; and then, neither their Right as original
Patentees, nor their Abilities, nor Wealth, could screen them from the
Punishment of Transportation.

BY these Methods, the Congregationalists kept the Country entirely to
themselves, for a considerable while; and had not a general Toleration been
introduced by the Authority of Government at home, it is impossible to say, how
long it would have been, before any other Denominations of Christians had been
suffered to live among them. There may be still some few of their Descendants,
that have inherited the same Sentiments and the same Spirit; but, in general,
the Times are now greatly altered for the better, in this Respect. Men of
different Persuasions can live together in the same Neighborhood, and maintain
a friendly Intercourse with one another, in a Country where none but
Congregationalists were suffered to exist; and were it not for some hotheaded
Leaders of the People, and some scribbling Incendiaries (I have no particular
Reference to the Doctor) the Peace and Harmony of Society would not be
disturbed by Difference of Principle. Episcopalians, Baptists, Quakers and
others, have ventured to come into the Colony; many of the Congregationalists
have adopted their Principles; and the rest commonly entertain more favorable
Sentiments of those they differ from, than they received from their Ancestors.
Although they have a Veneration for their Forefathers, yet they are not so
blind as to be unable to distinguish the Defects in their Character; which
Defects they think themselves under no Obligations to vindicate. This candid
Temper has been, as such a Temper always will be, favorable to the Church; and
there are, at this Time, not less than 20 Churches actually built, and a still
larger Number of episcopal Congregations, in this anti-episcopal Province.

AS to Connecticut, the Doctor allows the Church to have increased there,
beyond the Proportion of other Denominations; but he affects to be of Opinion,
that what I said upon the Subject was hyperbolical, and beyond the Bounds of
literal Truth. My Words were these: I cannot, at present, recollect an Example,
in any Age or Country, wherein so great a Proportion of Proselytes has been
made to any Religion in so short a Time, as has been made to the Church of
England in the Western Division of that populous Colony; unless where the Power
of Miracles, or the Arm of the Magistrate, was exerted to produce that Effect
Appeal defended. p. 217.
. This was literally true at that Time; and as I could then recollect no such
Example, so none has occured to me since. If the Doctor knows of any, let it be
pointed out.

HE was pleased to represent the Church of England in the Colonies as being in
her Infancy, and so far from a State of Maturity, as to make it not worth while
for a Bishop to come here. And it was answered: Infant and feeble as She is, he
has allowed that She may be 270,000 strong in the Colonies, exclusively of the
Islands, after reducing her Numbers as low as possible. Now can he possibly
think, when he gives himself Time for Consideration, that the Church of England
in America, containing 270,000 Members, (besides many Thousands more in the
Islands) in which are included most of the Governors and principal Persons in
the Colonies, is so inconsiderable, that it is not worth while for a Bishop to
take Charge of it? Would he look upon an equal Number of any People upon Earth,
however low in their Circumstances, or however light when weighed in the
political Balance, in so contemptible a Light Appeal defended. p. 218.
?

HE replies, that when he spoke in this Manner, he had Reference only to her
Existence in the Seven Colonies, extending from Pennsylvania to the Northward.
p. 152. I have again examined the Passage as it stands in his Pamphlet, and I
see nothing that shows that he confined his View within this limited Compass.
Besides, he had no Right to answer a general Representation of the Church in
all the Colonies, by a partial Account of it as existing only in some of the
Colonies. He might as properly have confined his View to the Province of
Massachusetts, or to the Town of Boston only. The Plea for an Episcopate was
made in Behalf, at least, of 270,000 People in the Colonies, besides many
Thousands in the Islands; and to show the Invalidity of it, he urges that it is
not necessary on Account of 26 or 27 Thousands of that Number, according to the
Calculations of his own Arithmetic -- throwing more than nine Tenths of the
whole entirely out of the Question. This he may call reasoning, but there is a
more proper Name by which others will call it.

HE acknowledges that the Governor, in most of these Colonies, is commonly in
Name an Episcopalian; but he respectfully says, that they are sometimes
destitute of every Thing that looks like Religion. p. 153. Some Men can seize
upon the slightest Occasions, to "speak evil of Dignities." I do not believe
there is at this Time a Governor on the Continent, who pretends to be an
Episcopalian, that has given any just Ground for this Reflection. Their
Characters in general are irreproachable. Some of them are as eminent for their
Virtues, as their Stations; the Examples, as well as Patrons, of whatever is
amiable and excellent in private Life; the Ornaments, as well as Friends and
Protectors of Religion, But were it otherwise, their Rank renders them
important, and gives a Weight to that religious Society, of which they profess
themselves Members.

THE Doctor proceeds, in IAMBICS: It is quite remote from Truth to say, that
most of the principal Persons in the Colonies, are of this Persuasion, unless
by principal Persons are meant, those who are appointed to their civil Posts
from home. What was said is most unquestionably true of the Colonies to the
Southward of New England, and probably true of the Colonies in general,
exclusively of those Persons that are appointed to civil Posts under the
Government. But why, in the Name of common Sense, should these be excluded?
Does the Doctor imagine, that a civil Employment, held under the Government,
degrades a Man from his former Rank and Character in Life? Such Ebullitions of
an anti-monarchical Spirit ought, in Prudence, to have been suppressed.

HE continues: In general there are 50 principal Persons to one, in the
non-episcopal Colonies, who are not Members of the Church of England, but of
Churches of other Denominations. By the non-episcopal Colonies he means here, I
suppose, as he explains himself elsewhere, New England, New York, New Jersey
and Pennsylvania. In the three last-mentioned Colonies, the Gentlemen of
Fortune and Character belonging to the Church of England, are, I believe, as
numerous, as those of all other Denominations, excepting the Quakers in
Pennsylvania. And as to New England, there are as many Persons of Distinction
belonging to the Church, (some say many more) in Proportion to the Number of
Episcopalians, as of any other Profession. But if we suppose the Proportion to
be but equal throughout these Northern Colonies in general; then, in Order to
make the Number of principal Persons of other Persuasions 50 Times greater than
of those belonging to the Church, those different Denominations must be 50
Times as numerous as the Members of the Church. Now the Doctor allows, that in
these seven Colonies, there may be 27,000 Episcopalians: Consequently,
according to his Representation, there must be, within the same Compass,
1,377,000 Inhabitants. But if the Number of Episcopalians is much larger, as it
undoubtedly is, then the Inhabitants, from Pennsylvania to the Northward,
without including Canada and Nova Scotia, can be but little less than
2,000,000. The notorious Falsehood of the Conclusion, argues a Defect in the
Doctor's Premises.

IN answering the Appeal, Dr. Chauncy had introduced a long Extract from one of
Dr. Mayhew's Pamphlets, to which Mr. Apthorp had given a direct and particular
Answer, whereof not the least Notice was taken. This Conduct appeared to me to
be extraordinary; and in speaking of it I used the following Words: Was it
treating his Readers generously, or fairly, or honestly, to present them with
Dr. Mayhew's Objections, broadly hinting, although not directly affirming, that
they had not been answered; when he must have known, that they had not only
been answered, but that no Reply had been made to the Answer? He now says, that
there was no Need of any Excuse for such Conduct. In Compliance with the
Invitation given in the Appeal, my Business was, not to answer Objections, but
to bring them that they might be answered by the Doctor. There is something
very curious in this Account of the Matter. He offered Objections that had been
publicly refuted, without any Intimation that a Refutation had been attempted,
because it was not his Business to answer Objections. Would then his taking
Notice that Mr. Apthorp had replied, have been an Answer to Dr. Mayhew's
Objections? If so, although I never thought there would be much Difficulty in
answering them, the Work is more easy than I imagined. If it was not his
Business to answer Objections; neither was it his proper Business to bring
Objections, in that Manner, that had been answered. The Invitation in the
Appeal, can be no Justification of such Conduct, as it proposed only a fair and
candid Debate. An Objection that has been shown to be weak, is no better than a
Fact that has been proved to be false. If the Weakness of an Objection has been
only attempted to be shown; it is still upon the same Footing with a Fact that
has been contradicted: And it is not 'fair and candid,' in such a Case, to
offer the Objection as sound, without clearing it of the Imputation of being
defective; any more than to assume the Truth of a Fact that is contradicted or
denied, without clearing it of the Imputation of Falsehood. He thinks it was
his Business to bring Objections to be answered by me: But the bringing such
Objections as he has often exhibited, looks more like an Amusement of Idleness,
than the proper Business of any Man, especially of the Doctor's Character and
Station. The Truth, I believe, is, that he hoped Mr. Apthorp's Review had
escaped me, and that I was unable to answer those Objections of Dr. Mayhew as
effectually as Mr. Apthorp had done. Indeed he seems to have a strong Desire,
that nothing which that Gentleman had written, in Vindication of the Church,
should be repeated or remembered. Such a careful and studied Neglect of Mr.
Apthorp, is the greatest Honor that the Enemies of the Church can pay him.

BEFORE the Doctor retired to make Room for Dr. Mayhew, he proposed an
Expedient to compromise Matters between the Episcopalians and their
Adversaries. It was, that the King should grant a Commission to some of the
Clergy here, to perform the Office of a Bishop. I told him his Expedient wanted
even Plausibility. It can neither answer the Ends of Episcopalians, nor those
of the Projector and his Adherents. The Powers wanted by the American Church
are purely of a spiritual Nature, which therefore the King cannot give: Such
Authority as can be given by the King, is altogether temporal, which is the
very Thing that the Dissenters dread: -- So that neither Episcopalians nor
Dissenters can possibly acquiesce in the Expedient Appeal defended, p. 220.
. In Reply to this, he only says, that if the Reader will examine what he said
relating to the Subject, he will be convinced, that under pretense of saying
Something, I had really said nothing. To so feeble a Reply, I shall not pretend
to say any Thing. Therefore

I SHALL pass on to consider the Reasons assigned, for Dr. Mayhew's not
replying to Mr. Apthorp. Neither he (Dr. Mayhew) or [nor] his Friends thought
it (Mr. Apthorp's Review) worthy of such Notice. This is but a poor
Justification of any Man, from a Charge that lies against him. Others think,
perhaps as justly, that he made no Reply, because he was afraid of the
Consequence. He had Sense enough to know that it was Time to stop; I wish that
some others may improve by his Example. Another Reason assigned for his not
making a Reply is, that it was imagined that Mr. Apthorp, wrote principally
with a View to recommend himself to a certain great Man, whose Favor might be
advantageous to him. Were there no other Motives then, that could induce Mr.
Apthorp to review a Controversy that he himself had occasioned, and in which he
had been so often mentioned on both Sides, than to recommend himself to the
Favor of a certain Superior? Or is there the least Evidence that he was at all
influenced by the Consideration, whereby it is insinuated that he was
principally governed? How ungenerous then, how low and illiberal is it, to
ascribe to a Gentleman of his Character such a mercenary Motive? If any one
should charge Dr. Chauncy with having written Two huge Pamphlets against
American Bishops, principally with a View to recommend himself to the Favor of
some great Demagogue in the Town of Boston, would he not think such a
Reflection unworthy of a Gentleman? And yet, I believe, the Evidence of this,
both internal and external, is as clear and authentic, as can be produced
against Mr. Apthorp. But whatever Object this latter Gentleman might have had
more immediately in View, it is nothing to the Purpose. His Review bore hard
upon Dr. Mayhew's Performance; the Reputation of the latter, and of his Cause,
was at Stake; and it concerned him to vindicate both himself and his Cause, as
well as he could.

BUT this he neglected to do, and Dr. Chauncy attempts it. And as I have
occasioned Mr. Apthorp to be brought into this Debate, in his Absence; I esteem
it my Duty to repair, as well as I can, the Injuries he has suffered on my
Account.

THE Answerer to Dr. Mayhew' s Observations had explained the Plan, on which
only it had been proposed to send Bishops to America. Dr. Mayhew allowed that
the Proposal was set in a more unexceptionable Point of Light, than he had seen
it in before; but he objected to the Information, as not coming from sufficient
Authority. Yet at the same Time he appeared to believe, what is now universally
known, that his Informer was no less a Person than the late Archbishop of
Canterbury. To show that the Plan there presented to the Public, was no
peculiar Scheme of the Answerer, Mr. Apthorp declared that the same Plan had
been agreed upon by many Persons of high Rank in the Church, and that all who
appeared to have considered it, heartily approved of it -- the Evidence of
which he was ready to produce. Among others, Bishop Butler had drawn up a
Scheme for an American Episcopate, in 1750: this was published as a Specimen,
and it exactly agreed with the Plan contained in the Answer; and enough was
said, in all Reason, to silence Dr. Mayhew's affected Suspicions. Nor does Dr.
Chauncy offer any Thing, that shows the Impropriety of Mr. Apthorp's
Representation.

INDEED he says of these Plans, that they are not to be looked on as Schemes
set forth on the Foot of proper Authority. p. 157. All the Authority wanted, is
sufficient Evidence that such an Episcopate as was specified, and no other, had
been proposed for the Colonies. But if by proper Authority he means that of the
King and Parliament, what he says is true, but not to the Purpose. For the
Question was not, what Kind of an Episcopate was intended, or whether any was
intended, by the King and Parliament; but what Kind of an Episcopate had been
proposed by those that had taken the Subject into Consideration, and were
desirous that Bishops might be sent to America. Now the Bishops at home, and
many of the principal Friends of the Church, both there and here, had agreed
upon a Plan of an Episcopate for the Colonies, which was formed with a View of
relieving the spiritual Necessities of the Church, without affecting the
Liberties of others, or interfering with the civil Government; upon which Plan
it always appeared probable that an Episcopate would be granted. That some Plan
had been concerted, was commonly known; the Nature of the Plan, the Answerer
explained; and his Explanation Mr. Apthorp confirmed, proving it to have been
fair and just. This is all that could be required or expected, as the Plan had
not been presented and recommended to the Government, and consequently could
not be set forth on the Foot of the Authority of Government. If the only Plan
that had been proposed was unexceptionable, Men ought to have been satisfied;
for nothing can be more absurd than to oppose it, because reasonable Objections
may be offered against some other Plan, that never has been proposed for the
Colonies.

BUT the Doctor says: Whatever the Planners might intend or pretend, if ever an
Episcopate is authoritatively settled in America, it may be, for aught any of
them all can say, upon a Plan very different from what they have proposed. If
the Antiepiscopalians had the Wisdom to signify their Approbation of this,
which in their own Consciences they know can never hurt them, or the Discretion
not to oppose it; there could be no Room to doubt, that whenever an Episcopate
should be authoritatively settled in the Colonies, it would be according to a
Plan, that had been offered on one Side, and admited on the other, as
unexceptionable. But what Alterations unreasonable Opposition, attended with
the vilest Abuses of the national Church, may occasion, is more difficult to
say: Although we still hope, that Allowance may be made for Prejudices, and
that no Resentment of such Treatment may be shown, when the Design for an
American Episcopate shall come to be put in Execution. We wish to give no
Offense to others; we hope no just Offense will be ever given. We are willing
to forget the Injuries we have received. We would avoid every Appearance that
might excite Jealousy; and we should think ourselves happy in the Friendship
and Confidence of every religious Denomination in the Colonies. As one Proof of
this Disposition, our cordial Consent to, and our earnest Desire of, an
Episcopate upon the Plan under Consideration, are offered to the Public.

OF this Mr. Apthorp spoke, as such a simple and beautiful Plan of the most
ancient and moderate Episcopacy, that it ought to remove the Apprehensions and
Scruples of the most Suspicious. The Doctor says it can be no just Plan of the
ancient Episcopacy, because the Bishops are to have no Authority over the
Laity. But as this Subject has been considered already, I have no Occasion to
repeat what has been said.

DR. Mayhew had ridiculed, "with burlesque "Gravity," some Expressions in the
Society's Abstract of 1715, wherein Confirmation was spoken of. Mr. Apthorp
remarked, that he well knows, or easily may, that we ascribe no more Efficacy
to the laying on Bishop's Hands, than his Brethren do to the laying on of
Presbyter's Hands. Dr. Chauncy replies, that Mr. Apthorp is mistaken with
Regard to this Point. For, says he: Do Episcopalians never speak of an
INDELIBLE CHARACTER as impressed by the Bishop's Hand in Ordination? --
implying, that the Congregationalists pretend to no such Thing. I imagine the
Doctor here spoke without Attention or Recollection; for I am not willing to
suppose, that he does not understand the Principles of his Brethren. They
believe, or used to believe, that an indelible Character is, in some Cases,
conveyed by themselves, as firmly as we do that such a Character is ever given
by our Bishops. By an indelible Character is meant, a Character that continues
through Life, and of which a Man cannot divest himself. Such, for Instance, is
the baptismal Character; which, in the Opinion of all that administer or
receive it, can never be laid aside. He that is once baptized, is always
considered, in all Circumstances, as a baptized Person. Should he disregard the
sacred Character himself, should he apostatize from Christianity, or be
excommunicated from the Church, yet his Baptism still remains. For should he
return to his Duty, and give sufficient Proofs of his Repentance, so that it
would be thought proper to restore him to the Privileges of a Christian, a new
Baptism would not be required: The Reason of which is this, and can be this
only, that the baptismal Character is considered as indelible. This, I believe,
is the Opinion of Congregationalists, as well as of others. The Case of
Ordination, in this Respect, is much the same with that of Baptism. According
to good Information, there have been Instances in New England, of ordained
Ministers, that after a while have given up their sacred Employment, and become
perfectly secularized -- pursuing, like other Persons some of the common
Occupations of Life -- and afterward have resumed their ecclesiastical
Functions; to which they have been admited, without Reordination. This is a
Proof that, in New England, the sacerdotal Character is also thought to be
indelible. And indeed when that Character is once communicated, why should it
be more circumscribed, with Regard to Time, than to Place? Why should it not
continue with a Man as long as he lives, as well as accompany him wherever he
goes?

MR. Apthorp fairly concluded from Dr. Mayhew's Performances, that he was not
willing that Episcopalians in the Colonies should have that Liberty, without
which he and his Brethren would not be satisfied themselves. In controverting
this Point, Dr. Chauncy builds upon this rotten Foundation, that the American
Episcopalians have, in Reality, the same Liberty with other Denominations, in
all Respects; of which nothing farther is needful to be here said.

IT had been mentioned as one Advantage expected from an American Episcopate,
that the Clergy here would be under a proper Government. Dr. Mayhew treated
this with his usual Candor and Charity, insinuating that the Episcopal Clergy
in America peculiarly required to be "reduced to "Order." Mr. Apthorp answered,
that the contrary was rather to be infered, from their unanimous Desire of such
an Episcopate. Dr. Chauncy does not deny the Justness of this Inference, nor
dispute but that the Clergy, who have petitioned for Bishops, are unanimous, at
least in Appearance, in their Wishes to have them; but he still comforts
himself, that the Clergy in the Episcopal Colonies have not petitioned for, nor
shown themselves to be desirous of American Bishops; and consequently, that
they have not given this Proof of their not being a disorderly Set of People.
How long this Consolation is like to continue, the Reader may judge from what
has been said; and how much, in the Doctor's Opinion, the Reputation of the
Clergy depends upon their petitioning for Bishops, is worthy of Notice, as he
undertakes to express the Sentiments of his Brethren in general.

THE Task of answering all the Objections and Cavils in the Pamphlet before me,
is like that of teaching Children to read in their Primers; it requires much
Time and Patience, and after all, the Profit is but inconsiderable. This
Observation was naturally suggested by other Parts of the Doctor's Performance;
but here, where a Reply to Mr. Apthorp is attempted, it forces itself so
irresistably upon me, that I am unable to suppress it. The Exceptions of our
Author in general, appear to me to be so very weak and trifling, not to mention
the almost perpetual Repetitions of what had been before said, that I know not
how to reconcile them with his reputed Judgment and good Sense. However, amidst
these, there are a few Particulars that deserve not to be entirely slighted.

DR. Mayhew had objected against an American Episcopate, because Bishops had
sometimes proved to be ambitious and troublesome. Mr. Apthorp answered, that
"so are Presbyters -- too often;" and therefore Presbyters might as well be
excluded from the Colonies as Bishops, on that Account. Dr. Chauncy replies:
This proves nothing, unless he could have said farther, that their Sphere of
Influence was equally extensive, in Consequence of which there was equal
Danger, from their intriguing with great Men at home, or with Governors or
principal Men here, of carrying into Execution such Schemes as might be greatly
hurtful, both in a civil and religious Sense, p. 163. Presbyters must always be
supposed to have some influence; and in Proportion to the Degree and Extent of
it, this Objection is equally conclusive against them, as against Bishops,
according to Mr. Apthorp's Argument: Nay, it will equally conclude against the
Toleration of any Episcopalians at all, in Proportion to their Influence. For
the Principle is this -- that wherever Men of other Persuasions are supposed to
have an Influence, that may be used against the Congregationalists, the latter
are to oppose their Existence, at least, in the same Country with themselves,
and to refuse them the common Rights of Christians: On which Principle alone
the Opposition to the Bishops of our Plan can be justified. The Influence of a
Bishop is undoubtedly greater than that of a Presbyter; but the Influence of a
Bishop without any temporal Power, like those in Question, has never been
esteemed formidable in any Country. To object against such, is like objecting
against a Man's natural or acquired Abilities; and it may as justly be
contended, that no Clergyman should be tolerated in America, whose Capacity
exceeded a certain Size, or whose Learning exceeded such a limited Standard.
Supposing the Influence of an American Bishop to be equal to that of Twenty
Presbyters; yet if there will be a Hundred Presbyters in America to one Bishop,
then this Objection will have Five Times the Force against the Order of
Presbyters, as against the Order of Bishops. If the Doctor would be ashamed of
the Objection in one Case, he ought not to urge it in the other.

THE Unreasonableness of the Objection farther appears, from what Mr. Apthorp
justly observes, viz. That the Temper of the English Bishops is now, and has
been for a long Time, such, as affords no Room for Jealousy, but intitles them
to Confidence. The Doctor is not willing to acknowledge this; especially if it
be true, as Dr. Mayhew had been informed, that High-Church Tory Principles are
[have been] lately revived in England, p. 164. This Information may have been
not true; and such Principles may have been revived in England, and not
countenanced by the Bishops. The Bishops at home may have embraced them, and
yet Bishops of other Principles may be sent to America. Besides, High-Church
Principles (to use the Doctor's Cant) are not necessarily intolerant; and no
Principles but those of Intolerance are justly to be dreaded. That the Bishops
at home are Friends to religious Liberty, and disposed, not to oppress, but to
oblige the Dissenters, the most considerable of the latter have heartily
confessed. The late excellent Archbishop Secker was, in the Doctor's
Phraseology, a High-Flyer in his Principles; and yet he was as forward to do
kind Offices to Protestants of other Principles, as they themselves could
reasonably wish. An Instance of this Kind, and of the Christian Temper and
Generosity of the whole Bench of Bishops, that ought never to be forgotten, is
published in his Life. In 1743 his Lordship (then Bishop of Oxford) received a
Letter from Dr. Wishart, Provost of Edinburgh College, recommending to him his
Brother and Mr. Wallace, Deputies from the established Clergy of Scotland, to
promote a Bill in Parliament for providing a Maintenance for their Widows and
Children, which many of them imagined the Bishops would oppose. Dr. Secker paid
them all the Civility, and did them all the Service he could. None of the Bench
opposed their Bill either publicly or privately, and it was moved for by a
Bishop at each of its three Readings in the House of Lords The Life of
Archbishop Secker, by the Doctors, Porteus and Stinton, p. 25.
. The late Dr. S. Chandler, who was intimate with his Grace and several of the
Bishops, and knew them all, thought there could be no Danger from their
Disposition, nor from any other Quarter, that would justify an Opposition to
the Episcopate of our Plan; and therefore, like a wise and honest Man, and a
real Friend to religious Liberty, he freely signified his Approbation of it.

DR. Mayhew objected, that supposing Bishops should be at first sent in the
Manner proposed, yet there was no Certainty that they and their Successors
would remain contented, very long, under such Limitations. Mr. Apthorp replied:
Who knows whether the New-Englanders will not hang Quakers -- again, as, in one
of their Colonies, they did formerly? This was a sufficient Answer to so
unreasonable an Objection; especially as Dr. Mayhew himself had administered an
Antidote against the Poison of his own Argument, in these Words: It is readily
owned, that our Apprehensions of what may possibly or probably be the
Consequences of Bishops being sent hither, ought not to put us on infringing
the religious Liberty of our Fellow Subjects, and Christian Brethren Dr.
Mayhew's Second Defense, p. 69.
. But Mr. Apthorp proceeds: The Clergy of England are in general Friends to
religious Freedom: The People of England, Whigs and Tories, are unfavourable to
clerical Power; and a far greater Danger than the Doctor's imaginary one, is,
that of their laying aside all Regard to the Christian Ministry, in every
Shape, and to Christianity itself.

THE Reader will observe, that the preceding Objection does, in Effect, admit
of an Episcopate on the present Plan; for it is made only on the Supposition
that this Plan may be altered; and the possible or probable Alteration is its
only Object. But of any material Alteration of the Plan we see no Probability.
In this Country, we do not desire it; at home, there appears no Disposition to
make it: And after a Plan of such a Nature has been once put in Execution,
especially if Men on all Sides shall appear to have been satisfied with it,
every Day will render an Alteration more difficult. The general Disposition, as
Mr. Apthorp observed, is friendly to religious Liberty: It is far more likely
to increase than diminish; and therefore it is most probable, that no
Alterations will be made, in this or any other Plan, that are unfavourable to
the religious Rights of any Denomination of Christians. Upon this general
Disposition of our Superiors, which is a Security to others, we also depend --
for the full Enjoyment of the Institutions of the Church in the Colonies; in
Order to which, an Episcopate is absolutely necessary. An Episcopate therefore
we claim, as one of the common Rights of Christians, and as Subjects of a free
Government. Every Opposition to our Claim is an Infringement of religious
Liberty; we cannot but look upon it in this Light ourselves, and we doubt not
but the Government, when the Subject shall be taken into Consideration, will
look upon it in the same Light.

TO the foregoing Representation of Mr. Apthorp, the Doctor replies: All this
being taken for granted, yet MAY not Times alter, and Administrations change?
p. 165. This is bringing the Argument back, from Probability to Possibility. If
the general Disposition is more favorable to religious Liberty than it ever
has been, Appearances are on the side of religious Liberty. Times do not easily
alter in such Respects. A national Character is not soon lost; Changes of
Administration, unless it falls into the Hands of Foreigners, seldom affect it.
There can be no greater Security to any Privilege or Right, than that the
Sentiments and Disposition of the Public are known to favor it. To object
therefore the Possibility that the best Security may fail, shows the Situation
and Temper of our Adversaries. Their Situation is such, that, for Want of
plausible Objections, they are obliged to use those that are monstrous and
shocking: And their Temper is such, that they are determined, at any Rate, to
oppose our Enjoyment of equal Privileges with themselves. They clearly
discover, that they will never consent to our having an Episcopate in any Form,
by opposing one in the most unexceptionable Form that can be mentioned. Indeed
the Doctor has consented that we may have Bishops from the Moravians; but he
may as well retract this, as his other Concessions. And if our Plan had been to
have Moravian Bishops, he would probably have contended as furiously against
them, as against those that have been requested.

HE urges, in the Words of Dr. Mayhew: We are certainly more sure against
Oppression (by Bishops) in the Absence of Bishops, than we should be if they
were once fixed here. It appears then, as I have just observed, that no other
Security will satisfy some People, than our having no Bishops at all. However,
as there is no Probability, hardly a Possibility, that such an unreasonable
Opposition should prevent it, it concerns them to consider the following Words
of Mr. Apthorp: They (Bishops) may soon be sent, and with much greater
Authority than is asked for them now; and perhaps with some RESENTMENT of the
Opposition made to them before. Should this be the Case, which I hope it may
not be, the blind and impetuous Zeal of these Sticklers against Bishops, may in
some Measure excuse, but it can never atone for, the Mischief they will have
occasioned to their own Party.

MR. Apthorp proceeds: English Dissenters, who have Six and Twenty Bishops
established among them, fear no Harm from them. Why then should the New England
Dissenters fear any, if one or two should be established, with much less Power,
in one or two neighboring Provinces? The Doctor replies, that if the
Dissenters at home fear no Harm from the Bishops, yet they suffer it. They are,
and ever will be, in suffering Circumstances; unless the Establishment of the
Church of England is dissolved, or greatly altered. p. 166. Whatever they
suffer from the national Establishment, is here charged to the Account of the
present Bishops. But did they make the Establishment? Is it in their Power to
alter it? Or if it was, would it be right in them to give up the legal
Advantages of that Church, with the Interests of which they are entrusted,
before they find it to be agreeable to the Generality of its Members? Indeed
were those Advantages founded in the Oppression of other People, the Bishops
ought in Duty to use their Influence that the Oppression might be removed. But
the English Dissenters feel themselves to be not oppressed; and many of them
are sensible of the peculiar Mildness and Moderation, not only of the Bishops,
but of the national Establishment. No Dissenters from the established Religion
in any Country on Earth, have less Reason to complain of their suffering
Circumstances, than those in England. If the Doctor has Reference to what they
contribute for the Support of the parochial Clergy, exclusively of Tithes, it
amounts to but a Trifle; and what they pay in Tithes, is not, nor has it ever
been, any Part of their own Property, as was shown in the Appeal. If he refers
to their Exclusion, from civil Offices under the Government; many of them find
Ways to evade the Law, so that the Exclusion, in Effect, is far from being
general. But were it universal, their Suffering would consist only in not being
admitted to certain political Favors; Favors which are not granted them, on
Account only of their known Disposition to abuse them, to the Injury of the
national Establishment. In the mean Time, they have every Indulgence that is
requisite to the full Enjoyment of religious Liberty. They are allowed to
exercise their own Form of ecclesiastical Government -- they are allowed to
ordain their own Ministers (Privileges which the Episcopalians in America still
want, and may for ever want, with the good Will of some People) -- they are
allowed to worship God in their own Way without Control -- they are allowed to
make Proselytes, if they can, from the national Church -- and, notwithstanding
certain Statutes and Canons, they are not restrained by the Government from
publicly abusing the national Establishment, to the Mildness of which they are
indebted for these Indulgences. After all this, they can have no great Reason
to complain of their suffering Circumstances.

DR. Mayhew pretended to be apprehensive, that the Bishops proposed might be
supported by a Tax upon the Colonies. Mr. Apthorp answered, that until a proper
Maintenance could be otherwise provided, none would be sent; as was evident
from Bishop Butler's Plan, with which all the others agreed. Here Dr. Chauncy
seems to have been exhausted; and he says in Reply, or rather instead of a
Reply: It is not possible any one should have a Conception of the Pertinency,
Force, and ELEGANCE of the Doctor's Objection, as set forth at large in his
reasoning upon it, by reading only this cursory, slighty, and, I may say,
triflng Answer to it. p. 167. Here is a new Quality ascribed to Objections. I
have heard of elegant Expressions, and elegant Compositions; but of elegant
Objections I have never before heard. It seems then, that as an Objection may
be pertinent and not forcible, or forcible and not pertinent, so an Objection,
that is neither forcible nor pertinent, may still be elegant; and on that
Account be worthy of Attention. Mr. Apthorp, I believe, confined himself to the
Consideration of the Pertinency and Force, without thinking it worth while to
attend to the ELEGANCE, of the Objections before him. But enough of this.

THE Doctor goes on for three or four Pages more, in his Controversy with Mr.
Apthorp -- nibling at here and there a Sentence which he is pleased to pick
out; but he says nothing of any Consequence, nor does he introduce Dr. Mayhew
as saying any Thing of Consequence, that has not been fairly obviated in the
Course of the preceding Pages. Although I am tired of the Drudgery I have
undergone, yet I beg Leave to assure the Reader that my Resolution continues,
to pass by nothing that can deserve his Notice: But after his Kindness, in
accompanying me thus far through a disagreeable Road, I think it would be
ungenerous to detain him with Trifles, especially when he is so near to the End
of his Journey. I shall therefore pass over what has been farther offered in
Reply to Mr. Apthorp; and examine what remains, relating more immediately to
myself; which consists almost entirely of Repetitions, and partly of double
Repetitions, of what has been said before.

AND nothing worthy of Attention appears, before we come to p. 173. I had said:
Our Claim is, that we may be upon an equal Footing with the other religious
Denominations in America. In Order to this, it is necessary that we be allowed
the Enjoyment of our ecclesiastical Constitution, in the same complete Manner
as it is enjoyed by them. The Doctor replies, that such a complete Enjoyment of
it, is not agreeable to the proposed Plan; for that it must be attended with
spiritual Courts, and the Exercise of episcopal Authority in the same precise
Way and Manner that has been established by King and Parliament. But this is a
manifest Perversion of very plain Language. The Word ecclesiastical has two
Meanings: In a strict Sense it means what belongs to the Church originally, as
a spiritual Society, without any Relation to the State. It also means, in a
larger or laxer Sense, whatever belongs to the Church; and includes all those
external Circumstances and Regulations, which the Church may receive from the
civil Authority. These two Senses are materially different; and when the Word
is evidently used in one of them only, it is unfair and sophistical to
interpret it in the other. The Plea for the Episcopate in Question, from the
very Beginning, considered the Episcopalians in America as a religious Society;
and what was asked or proposed in Favor of it, was purely of a spiritual or
ecclesiastical Nature, in the first and strict Sense of the Word. The
Appendages added by the Government to the same Church in England, were never
considered as any Part of its real Substance, or as essential to its internal
Constitution, even there. The Church has a Constitution of its own, given it by
its divine Founder, which continues the same, both in Prosperity and Adversity,
whether favored or persecuted by the Powers of the World; and the Doctor knows,
that it was the complete Enjoyment of this Constitution only that was spoken
of. To talk therefore of such spiritual Courts as have been erected in England,
and such Modes as have been established by the civil Authority, as Parts of our
ecclesiastical Constitution, is a poor quibbling with Words, and utterly
unworthy of a fair Disputant.

ALL that was claimed as a Right, in Behalf of the Episcopalians in America,
amounted only to a Toleration -- such a Toleration as suffers the Church to
exist here 'in all its Parts.' The like Perversion is made of this Expression;
for the whole Tenor of the Appeal, and the Defense of it, showed my Meaning to
be, all its essential Parts, or all its Parts considered barely as an
ecclesiastical Society, unallied with the State. To countenance the Abuse, the
Doctor has added, in Capitals, IN ALL RESPECTS; as if I had insisted, that the
Church should not only be allowed to exist here in all its Parts, but in all
Respects as it does in England. But as I did not use the Expression myself; so
I said nothing that could justify the Doctor's Use of it, in such a Manner.

HE next introduces, once more, a State-Establishment, which has been already
considered; and on which therefore I shall not enlarge in this Place. He
contends that the Episcopate proposed necessarily implies such an
Establishment; and his Method of arguing is recommended to the Attention of
such Readers as are fond of 'Curiosities.' American Bishops, says he, shall
have no Authority over the Laity; -- their spiritual Courts must not be held in
this Part of the World; -- and they themselves are to be confined in their
Power within certain prescribed Boundaries. How is all this to be accomplished?
Must there not be the Interposition of the State? Can it be affected in any
other Way? -- And what is this, in real Meaning, but an Establishment? p. 176.
I know not that the Interposition of the State is at all necessary, in Order to
the complete Execution of our whole Plan. If it be necessary, it is only to
limit and circumscribe the Authority of the intended Bishops. Such an
Interposition is properly a Restraint, and not an Establishment; and the Act of
Toleration may, with much greater Propriety, be called an Establishment of the
various tolerated Sects, in England. I cannot conclude this Remark without
observing, that if the Doctor will have a Language peculiar to himself; if he
will use Words in such a Sense as no Mortal ever used them before him; he ought
to publish a Glossary, wherein the Singularities of his Phraseology are
carefully explained.

I HAVE now considered every Thing in Dr. Chauncy's Pamphlet, that could with
any Propriety, be brought before the Public, as worthy of Notice. I have
attended to the Pertinency and Force, although not to the ELEGANCE, of all his
Objections against an American Episcopate, on the Plan of the Appeal, as well
as against the Church of England, and the truly venerable Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel. I am not conscious that I have misrepresented his
Sentiments or his Arguments in any Instance. I have passed over nothing,
because I found it difficult to be answered. And if I may be allowed to express
my own Opinion, it is clearly this, that all he has offered relating to these
several Subjects, is either weak or impertinent; and if this has not been
shown, to the Satisfaction of the impartial Reader, I am greatly mistaken.
Indeed the Doctor speaks of his own Performance with high Confidence, and with
still higher Confidence, of his own Abilities. He says that I have not written
in such a Manner, as to give him an Opportunity for the TRIAL OF STRENGTH. p.
178. Such a Bragger I have not met with, since I was a Schoolboy. He may
conceit himself to be an Hercules; but in this Pamphlet however, he appears,
like the real Hercules at the Court of Omphale, to have acted unworthily of
such a Character.

HE intended, it seems, to have come to a Conclusion HERE (by not concluding
here, but) by presenting to the Reader, in one View, the Sum of what has been
said on both Sides, that he might the more easily make a Judgment in the Case.
But he was diverted by what he calls a Matter of much greater Importance, the
Treatment of the Presbyterian Church at New York, in Relation to the Charter
they petitioned for. This he thinks sufficient to spread an Alarm through all
the Colonies on the Continent, giving them solemn Notice what they may expect,
should Episcopalians ever come to have the Superiority in their Influence. And
he gives a partial History of the Affair, contrasted with the Proceedings of
the Boston Assembly in passing an Act, in Consequence of which, the Church of
England in the Massachusetts receives Benefit.

THE Disappointment of the Presbyterians in New York, with Regard to a Charter,
he had mentioned in his former Pamphlet; and enough was said in Answer, to show
that they have, upon the whole, no great Reasons for Complaint. Among other
Things, it was observed, in the Appeal defended, that it was the Belief at
home, that the Church of England had been treated with peculiar Malevolence, by
some of those very Persons whose Names were annexed to the Petition. It was
therefore not unnatural to suspect, that any additional Power put into the
Hands of such Persons, would, as Opportunity should offer, be exerted against
the Church. If nothing farther could be said, yet so long as this was believed
to be the Case, whether justly or not: it was of itself a sufficient Reason --
not for abridging the religious Liberty -- but for not enlarging the Power, of
the Presbyterians in New York. And yet Dr. Chauncy takes not the least Notice
of this Observation, nor of any Thing I said relating to the Subject; but
sounds a false Alarm to all the Colonies, to prepare for a Defense, against the
oppressive Designs of the Church of England.

BUT the Refusal of Favors by the Government, to particular Persons who had
made themselves obnoxious to Government, by a supposed scurrilous Abuse of the
national Establishment, which ought always to be treated with Decency, is no
Proof of the ill Temper of Episcopalians, nor an Argument of the Unwillingness
of Government to grant Favors to other Persons, although of the same religious
Denomination, that have not discovered the same Disposition: -- Much less does
it prove any Design, to deprive such Persons of any Privileges, of which they
are in fair and legal Possession. If the Conduct of the Presbyterians in
New York has been mistaken, or misrepresented, let it be made to appear. If
they, or their Friends, can prove, or make it probable, that they have not
publicly vilified and abused the national Church, and that they have been free
from all secret Intrigues and Combinations against it; in my Opinion, they, as
well as other Protestants, are entitled to all Favors from the Patrons of the
Church, that are consistent with Safety, or the Constitution. But on the other
Hand, if they are conscious of their own evil Intentions and Practices against
the Church of England, and know that some of them have been actually
discovered; it is surprising that they can expect, much more that they can have
the Assurance to ask, particular Favors, to the granting of which, the Consent
of those, who regard the Interest and Honor of the Church, is necessary. I will
not enter farther into the Conduct or the Case of the Presbyterians in
New York. Let them but clear themselves of the Charges and Suspicions with
which they are loaded; and then, if any reasonable Favors are refused them,
barely on Account of their religious Principles, the Dissenters throughout the
Colonies will have just Reason to expect the same Treatment, and not before.

AS to the abovementioned Act of the Boston Assembly, it shows, according to
the Doctor's Account of it, a Generosity that is highly commendable and worthy
of Imitation. As I am unwilling to entertain any unfavorable Suspicions in such
a Case, I should not question the Fairness of the Representation; were it not
that the Doctor triumphs so unmercifully in the Act, and takes occasion from it
to vilify and abuse the Church of England. I shall therefore take the Liberty
to observe, that the chief Object in View, was evidently to favor certain
Pastors and Deacons, and not the Church -- and that, although the Church was
benefited, yet if the Clauses in its Favor were inserted, as some suppose, in
Order to secure to the Bill a Passage through all the Branches of the
provincial Legislature, or a Confirmation in England, the Favor was granted on
mercenary Principles, and the Merit of the Act, in Point of Generosity to the
Church, is nothing at all. Whether this, or any other private Advantage, was
the prevailing Motive, with the Boston Assembly, for favoring the Church of
England, the Doctor probably knows; and if it was, others know, that the Act
deserves not the Praise that he ascribes to it.

AS the Doctor was diverted from his Intention of suming up what had been said
on both Sides; in Order partly to supply his Omission, I will conclude, with a
short Account of the Rise, Progress, and present State of this Controversy.

IT began with the Appeal to the Public, which was made in Behalf of the
Episcopalians in America, amounting, in the Colonies and Islands, as was
believed, to near a Million of People. While every other Denomination of
Protestants in the British Dominions had an unrestrained Enjoyment of their
respective Systems of ecclesiastical Government, and could perform within
themselves all those religious Offices and Acts which their Principles
required; it was thought to be a great and very extraordinary Hardship, that
the American Episcopalians, in Communion with, and Members of, the national
established Church, should continue to suffer for Want of the like Privileges
-- which they could not enjoy without resident Bishops.

THE Disadvantages they were under, were considered under the three Heads, of
Ordination, Government, and Confirmation. As to Ordination, they were unable to
obtain it for their Candidates without sending them to England, with great
Expense, and Danger to their Persons, to say nothing of the Loss of Time. The
Expense of such a Voyage, was known to be often more, and seldom less, than L.
100 Sterling to each Candidate. The Danger of it was such as had actually
produced a double Decimation of the Candidates, Ten out of Fifty-Two, who at
that Time had gone home from the northern Colonies, having perished in and by
the Voyage; not to mention several others, that have been deprived of their
Liberty, and dragged into miserable Captivity, where, for a long while, they
suffered all that could be suffered, in Prisons and Dungeons. Under the next
Head, it was shown, that the Clergy of an episcopal Church cannot be properly
and regularly governed, without Bishops; and that the Influence of an
Episcopate, at the Distance of England from America, can be but little better,
in this Respect, than none at all. It was also made abundantly evident, that
the general Reputation of the Church in the Colonies, and the Prosperity and
Happiness of particular Congregations, greatly depend upon an American
Episcopate. As to Confirmation, which is an ecclesiastical Institution,
authorized by the Practice of the Apostles, and the Performance of which has
always been appropriated to Bishops; the Church of England esteems the Benefits
arising from it to be great and important, and the Want of them must be
proportionably affecting to its Members.

IN Order that these peculiar Disadvantages of the Church of England in the
Colonies might be removed, it was requested that Bishops might be allowed to
reside in America. But as in most of the Colonies, the Episcopalians were
intermixed with a larger Number of People of different religious Principles,
the Impropriety of such an Episcopate here as was established in England, was
obvious on all Sides. It would naturally abridge some of the religious
Liberties, of which the various Denominations in the Colonies had been long and
fairly in Possession; and this probably would be attended with Discontent and
Clamor, and might be productive of unhappy Consequences.

TO guard against these Inconveniences, a Plan for an Episcopate had been
formed, that was peculiarly adapted to the Circumstances of such a Country; and
by the Execution of which it was imagined that the spiritual Necessities of the
Church of England in the Colonies might be relieved, while no Harm could be
done to other Christians; and no just Cause of Offense would be given. The
Bishops proposed were to have no temporal Power, and consequently to hold no
Courts for the Exercise of it -- they were to have no Jurisdiction at all over
any of the Dissenters, but to govern the episcopal Clergy only -- they were to
have no Maintenance from the Colonies in any Form -- they were not to interfere
in any Matters of civil Government, but to be confined to the Exercise of their
spiritual Functions only. This general Plan had been honored, at home, with the
Approbation of all the Patrons of an American Episcopate, for a long Course of
Years; it had been cordially adopted by all the Clergy in the Colonies, and
their Friends, that had attended to the Subject; and many Petitions in Favor of
it had been transmited to our Superiors in England.

WHILE the Matter was thus in Agitation, and before it should proceed farther,
it was thought by the Clergy of the united Convention of New York and
New Jersey, that it would be received as a Proof of their upright and candid
Intentions, if an Account should be published, by their Direction; seting forth
the Necessity of an American Episcopate, explaining the Nature of the
Episcopate proposed, and assuring the Public that nothing was designed against
the Liberty or Property of any Kind of People whatever: -- And the Author was
appointed to perform this Service. He executed the Trust reposed in him with
such Abilities as he had; and he was certainly faithful in the Discharge of it.
At the same Time he studied to give no Offense to any Denomination of
Christians; and, as he had Occasion to mention any of them, he treated them
always respectfully. The Nature of his Work led him to consider such Objections
against an American Episcopate, as he had heard of, or supposed might be
naturally made, by People of different Views and Interests; and all such as
occurred to him were carefully considered, and, as he thought, shown to be
groundless. However, as he knew that others might be of a different Opinion, if
any were dissatisfied with what had been said, or had any new Objections to
offer, they were invited to signify it, and to propose them in such a Manner,
that they might be fairly and heartily debated, before the Tribunal of the
Public.

THE Appeal was published: And what shortly after ensued on the Occasion, what
inflammatory periodical Papers and Pamphlets The abovesaid periodical Papers,
with the periodical Answers to them, have been collected and reprinted by Mr.
Holt, in 3 Vols. 8vo. and are to be sold at his Printing-Office in New York;
the abovesaid Pamphlets never will be reprinted.
from different Quarters, were issued in Answer to it, is well known. An Alarm
was sounded throughout the Colonies, that a general Invasion of their religious
Liberty was projected -- the Minds of the Populace were inflamed, by Arts that
were wicked and infamous -- the Church of England, the whole Order of Bishops,
and the Clergy of our Convention, were shamefully abused in the common
Newspapers -- and a double Portion of the Abuse naturally fell upon the Author
of the Appeal. However unexpected and undeserved a Reception his Publication
met with from some People, he was resolved notwithstanding to take it
patiently, and carefully to observe whatever might be said by his Adversaries,
that might deserve Attention, and in due Time to reply to it.

BEFORE the Publication of the Appeal, the principal Objections against an
Episcopate here, and the chief Source of Men's Disaffection toward it, were
these Two; that in Consequence of such an Appointment, they should become
subject to the Payment of Tithes, and to spiritual Courts; of which they had
met with tremendous Descriptions.

THE Case of Tithes, which was generally misunderstood, was therefore carefully
explained; and it was proved, that Tithes in England which are not paid to the
Bishops, but to the parochial Clergy, are claimed by Virtue of an ancient Gift,
whereby they were made the Property of the Church -- that in this Country, as
no Tithes had been given to the Church, none could be demanded; and were it
otherwise, that they would belong to the Clergy, and be as recoverable without
an Episcopate as with -- and as to the proposed Bishops, that a Fund in England
was raised for their Support, and that no Part of their Maintenance was ever
intended to be drawn from the Americans. The Subject was placed in so clear and
convincing a Light, that none of my Opponents have insisted upon the Objection.
The Point has been given up on all Hands; and People in general are entirely
easy on this Account, being abundantly satisfied, that they shall be subject to
no Inconvenience for the Support of such an Episcopate, as has been requested.

AS to spiritual Courts, the Plan absolutely excludes all Foundation or
Pretense for them. For if the Bishops are to exercise no Authority over any but
the episcopal Clergy, none but the Clergy themselves can be brought into their
Courts; and neither the Laity of our own Communion, nor any People of other
Communions, can be injured in this Respect. All that has been said in
Opposition to this Evidence, has been either trifling or impertinent.

WHEN it was found that nothing of Consequence could be objected against the
Plan itself, it was insisted that such a Plan was never intended to be put in
Execution, but that a different Episcopate was really designed; and Dr. Chauncy
intimated, that he had discovered some Secrets that would justify the Charge.
He was called upon to produce Evidence of any Kind, that the Friends of an
American Episcopate acted deceitfully, and to lay before the Public his
pretended Secrets; but in his Reply, he very sagaciously takes Care to say
nothing at all of the Matter: And, considering his Disposition and Situation as
a Disputant, it is from thence as certain as any Demonstration in Euclid, that
he could say nothing to the Purpose. And here it may be proper to repeat, what
was said relating to this Objection, in my former Defense. p. 265. Important as
it is, it has nothing more solid to depend upon than malevolent Conjecture; for
whatever may be their (our Opponents) Pretenses, every Reader knows that they
have hitherto entirely failed in the Article of Proof. On our Side, the
strongest Evidence that the Nature of such a Case will admit of, has been laid
before the Public. We have produced, as Witnesses, the Society's anniversary
Sermons, their Abstracts, and indeed all that has been published on the
Subject, by such as could be supposed to understand the Case, for half a
Century past; all which, without one Exception, testify in our Favor. We have
added our solemn Declarations, which must have a Weight proportionable to what
is allowed to our Characters. The Testimony of our Vouchers is clear and
express, uniform and consistent, and directly to the Point; while not one
counter Evidence has appeared, on the other Side, to weaken it. To the Weight
of our Declarations nothing has been opposed, but ungenerous Reflections and
pretended Suspicions.

IT has also been contended, that in Case the present Plan should at first be
actually put in Execution; yet the Danger is great, that, in Time, it may
degenerate into an Episcopate that is burdensome and oppressive. But nothing
has been said, that proves more than the Possibility of this, and which might
not as fairly be objected against the most harmless or useful Institution, that
was ever proposed. If it could be made probable that such an Alteration would
ensue, as would be injurious to others; we would give up the Prosecution of our
general Design. For we mean nothing that is unfriendly to any human Creature:
-- We desire nothing more for ourselves than that harmless Liberty, which we
wish all others to enjoy, and which all the other Protestant Subjects, and many
Popish ones, of the British Empire, actually do enjoy. But we see not the least
Probability of this (prognosticated Alteration) and we absolutely deny that any
such Thing is intended: So far from it, that the Friends of the Church would
even join with its Enemies, were that necessary, in guarding against it. All
the Assurances, all the Evidences, all the Securities, which we have in our
Power to give to prevent Uneasiness, we are willing to offer; and all that is
not beneath the Dignity of Government to give, we are willing to solicit. We
want not an Episcopate on the Footing of a State-Establishment; we desire no
more than a complete Toleration, which we have not at present; and thereby to
be raised to an Equality with other religious Denominations in the Colonies
Appeal defended, p. 266.
.

UNDER these several Heads, all the Objections that have been offered directly
against the Episcopate in Dispute, may be fairly reduced. The Church of
England, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, have been violently
forced into this Controversy, and violently treated; but every Thing that has
been said against either one or the other, in Case it could have been
supported, has no more than an oblique and remote Relation to the Bishops in
Question. All the Objections of this Kind, that have not been given up, have
been brought before the Public in the present Defense, and mostly in the Words
of my Opponent, and distinct Answers have been given; so that what real
Strength they contain, the Reader is now able to judge.

AND here I beg Leave to observe, that, whatever may have been attempted in
Opposition to our Plan, nothing that is plausible has been offered, and but
little has been attempted against our Plea for an Episcopate of some Kind. It
has not been shown, nor can it be shown, that going to England for Ordination
is not as expensive, and has not been productive of as many Deaths, as was
urged in the Appeal. It has not been shown, nor can it be shown, that such a
Burden and such Losses are not Grievances, which all other Denominations of
Christians in the Colonies, were it their own Case, would think intolerable. It
has not been shown, nor can it be shown, that the Episcopalians in America
should everlastingly be doomed to bear Burdens, from which all others are
exempted. In a Word, it has not been shown, nor can it be shown, that they
ought not to be admitted to an equal Enjoyment of religious Privileges with
other Christians, although many of those Privileges are inseparable from an
Episcopate.

ON the other hand, it wants not to be shown, that they have never done any
Thing, whereby the common Rights of Christians are forfeited. Their general
Principles and Conduct are such, and have been such, with Regard to the Public,
as can justly occasion no Distinction to their Disadvantage. They are, at
least, as friendly to Liberty, both civil and religious, as any of their
Opposers. They are 'equal to the foremost,' in Loyalty to the King, and
Submission to the Government.

AND while their Pretensions and Claims are as fair, in all Respects, as those
of their Neighbors, there are some Circumstances in their Favor, which, in
Addition to their common Right, render it impossible, in their Opinion, that
they should be finally disappointed. They consider themselves as Members of
that Church, the Constitution of which peculiarly harmonises with the civil
Government of the Nation, and which is therefore entitled to the peculiar
Affection of Government. They consider our gracious Sovereign as their Defender
and Patron, by Duty as well as by Inclination. They consider that the Nation in
general has given to the Religion they profess, peculiar Proofs of Esteem and
Preference at home; and therefore cannot consistently treat it worse than all
other Religions abroad. And they consider, that there never was an Instance, in
any Age of the World, or any Nation on Earth, in which such a reasonable and
moderate Request would have been refused, to such a Body of People, in such a
Situation, and in such a Relation to the national Establishment.

THEY cannot therefore but flatter themselves, that, notwithstanding the
unreasonable and malicious Opposition they have met with, an Episcopate will be
granted them on the Plan that is proposed, which they think much the fitest for
this Country; and that, so far as the Interposition of Government may be
requisite, it will not be refused. If any distinguishing Favors were
requested, if any Dominion or Superiority over others were aimed at, it would
entirely alter the Case. But, as was said in the Appeal: The Church of England
in America -- only requests, that proper Remedies may be provided for her
present Sufferings. -- She wishes for nothing, which shall be thought
inconsistent with the Rights and Safety of others. She asks nothing but what
has been granted to others, without any ill Consequences; and she relies on the
common Affection and Justice of the Nation, to raise her to this Equality. And
whether there be any Thing presumptuous or unreasonable in these Expectations,
let Heaven and Earth judge!

THE END.

