A COMPLETE VIEW OF EPISCOPACY. As exhibited from the FATHERS of the CHRISTIAN
CHURCH, until the Close of the Second Century: CONTAINING An IMPARTIAL Account
of them, of their Writings, and of what they say concerning BISHOPS and
PRESBYTERS; WITH OBSERVATIONS, AND REMARKS, Tending to show, that they esteemed
these ONE and the SAME ORDER of Ecclesiastical Officers.

IN ANSWER To those, who have represented it as a CERTAIN FACT, universally
handed down, even from the Apostles Days, that GOVERNING and ORDAINING
AUTHORITY was exercised by such Bishops only, as were of an ORDER SUPERIOR to
Presbyters.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. Pastor of the First Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

I hope my Reader will see what weak Proofs are brought for this Distinction
and Superiority of Order [i. e. between Bishops and Presbyters]. No Scripture,
no primitive general Council, no general Consent of primitive Doctors and
Fathers, no, not one primitive Father of Note, speaking particularly, and home,
to our purpose. Bishop Croft's Naked Truth, P. 47.

BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND, in Queen Street, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in
Cornhill. M,DCC,LXXI.

PREFACE.
THE materials for the following work were collected more than twenty years
ago, and would then have been put together for public use, had it not been
thought unseasonable; as the Colonies were not, at that time, disposed to
attend to the episcopal-dispute: nor would this have been their inclination at
present, had it not been excited in them, more especially by the clergy of the
church of England, who, not being satisfied with having transmitted petitions
to their superiors at home, begging their influence in favor of the settlement
of an Episcopate in America, deputised one of their number to write "an appeal
to the Public," citing objectors to their impartial tribunal for trial of the
weight of their objections, if any they had to offer, against the
reasonableness of their request. This conduct of their's has constrained those
of a different persuasion to speak in their own behalf; and the rather, as it
was, in a formal manner, given out, that, "if nothing was said against an
American Episcopate, it would be taken for granted, all parties acquiesced, and
were satisfied."

IN consequence of this extraordinary challenge, that has been said, which, I
believe, the episcopalians will not find themselves easily able to answer. But
there is still room for such a work as that professes to be, which is emitted
herewith: and it was judged by many to be seasonable at this day; more
especially, as it has been openly and repeatedly declared, 'that it is a FACT
certainly and universally handed down by the Christian Fathers, even from the
earliest days, that GOVERNING and ORDAINING AUTHORITY was exercised ONLY BY
BISHOPS OF AN ORDER, IN THE CHURCH, DISTINCT FROM, AND SUPERIOR TO PRESBYTERS.'

HOW far the above affirmation is agreeable to truth, or whether it will at all
consist with it, every man of common understanding, who will be at the pains to
read the subsequent pages, will be able, from what he may see with his own
eyes, to judge. Those, most certainly, may be thought well qualified to form a
judgment in this matter, who are men of capacity and learning, though they have
had neither opportunity, nor leisure, to acquaint themselves with the writings
of the ancient Fathers. It was principally for the sake of persons in each of
these kinds, whether episcopalians, or Christians of any other denomination,
that the present work was engaged in, and made public. And for this reason it
was thought proper to be more particular, than would otherwise have been
necessary, in giving an account, not only of these Fathers, but of their
writings; distinguishing between those that have been falsely attributed to
them, and those that may he esteemed truly genuine; as also between those that
are pure, and those that have been adulterated with corrupt mixtures. In the
doing of this, which has enlarged the work, and increased my labor, I pretend
to be little more than a collector; though, instead of transcribing from
others, I have used my own words, unless when I give notice to the contrary:
and this I chose to do, that I might be more concise, and have it in my power
to convey only that to others, which I believe contains the exact truth.

THE passages from the Fathers, called apostolical, that is, the Fathers who
may be supposed to have conversed with one, or more, of the apostles, I have
given in the version of Archbishop Wake; not so much to save myself the
trouble of a translation, as to prevent all suspicion of too high, or too low,
a turn to any modes of expression, in order to favor my own sense of the fact
in dispute. I should have been glad, could I have done the like in regard of
what is offered from the other Fathers. I am myself accountable for the
translation of the extracts from them; in which I have not so much studied
elegance, as an exact representation of their real meaning. I can truly say, I
have, to the best of my capacity, given the WHOLE that is contained in the
writings of the Fathers, within the time specified. Sure I am, I have willingly
omitted no passage, or word, that may be found in any of their works; but have
been as free to insert those, episcopalians would desire might have a place
here, as others they might wish had been kept out of sight. It is possible,
after all, there may be omissions, or mistakes, through inattention,
forgetfulness, or some other cause more or less faulty; though I am not
conscious of any, and believe there are none that are material. If any such
there should be, I should esteem it a favor to see them corrected. As to those
of small importance, the learned and judicious, should they observe any such,
will heartily overlook and excuse them.

HAD there been a sufficiency of Greek types in town, and dexterity to use
them, more of the language in which many passages were wrote would have been
printed: but this defect may be thought pardonable, as I have all along
inserted such original words, though in English letters, as may be thought to
be of importance in the present debate. I could easily have crowded the margin
with references to the books, and particular pages in them, I have had occasion
to consult; but this, to save room, and a vain show of learning, I have
omitted: at the same time, taking care to name my authors, and particular
places in their writings, in all instances that have an argumentative
connection with any considerable part of the grand subject in dispute.

IT is hoped, the following work will not be altogether useless. Much indeed
has been already, and repeatedly, published relative to the Fathers, and their
writings; and nothing more frequently to be met with than quotations from them,
in support of the episcopal cause, by those who have appeared in its defense.
But no one, within the compass of my knowledge, has collected together, and
brought to view, ALL that they have said expressive of their sentiments upon
this head. This, if I mistake not, was a work much needed, and may be improved
to good purpose. The truth of the FACT in debate may herefrom be brought to a
clear and full determination.

IF any should complain of it as a fault, that I have confined myself within
too narrow limits, not going beyond the close of the second century; -- I would
briefly say, when we have passed these bounds we have got into times, in which
there was very visibly a departure from the purity and simplicity of the
gospel. The MAN OF SIN now began to make his appearance, A Gentleman of
learning beyond the Atlantic, to whom I had mentioned my confinement of the
present view of Episcopacy within the two first centuries, expresses himself
upon it in these words, "The third and following centuries are deservedly to be
rejected with a kind of pious indignation in an enquiry of this nature. For
when Constantine had deformed and corrupted christianity; and from being "all
glorious within," had dressed up the church of Christ in robes of external
pomp, and made it all gaudy without, and decked and adorned it like the
kingdoms of this world; no wonder that its native modesty soon became tainted;
that it yielded to the solicitations, and had criminal conversation with the
princes of the earth; and by degrees sunk into that MOTHER OF HARLOTS, which it
at present shows itself to be, in almost every part of the world, where it is
pretended to be established by their power, and enriched with their wealth."
though it was in a gradual way that he attained to that exaltation in dignity
and power, as to be "above all that is called god." Besides, if there are no
witnesses for the first two hundred years, or insufficient ones only, to
certify the truth of the fact in question, the great argument in favor of
episcopacy, fetched from the UNIVERSAL CONSENT OF ALL AGES FROM THE BEGINNING
OF CHRISTIANITY, must inevitably lose its force. And this is acknowledged by
the celebrated Bishop Hoadly, who has wrote, as I judge, in the most masterly
way, upon this side of the controversy, of any who have handled it. Says he,
Reasonableness of conformity to the church of England, p. 249.
We do not argue merely from the testimony of so late writers as these [Jerom
and St. Austin] that episcopacy is of apostolical institution. We grant it does
not follow, St. Jerome thought so, therefore it is so. But writers of ALL AGES
in the church witness that this was the government in their days, that it was
instituted by the apostles, and delivered down as such. All that we produce St.
Jerome for in this case is, that it was in his time, and that he believed it to
be apostolical, and received it as such: but without the testimony of THE AGES
BEFORE HIM, I should not esteem this a sufficient argument that it was really
so.

I SHALL only add, that I have endeavored to exhibit the following account of
the ancient episcopacy, not only with honest impartiality, but meekness and
candor, so as to give no just occasion for complaint, that I have wrote with
bitterness, and under the influence of that "wrath of man which works not the
rightousness of God." All I desire is, that those into whose hands this work
may fall, would read it with like impartiality and candor; in which case, I may
venture to say, they will be at no loss to determine on which side the truth
lies, with respect to the fact, that is the subject in debate.

INTRODUCTION.
IN all disputes relative to gospel truth, the demand is just, "what says the
scripture? To the law, and to the testimony." Such a demand is eminently
proper, when the point in dispute is said to be nearly and closely connected
with the very being of christianity itself. The sacred books of the
new testament, if at all the rule of christian truth, must be allowed to be so
in instances that are thus highly interesting and important.

IT were to be wished, these inspired books had been more generally honored, as
the only sufficient rule of judgment, by those who have wrote in favor of
EPISCOPACY, upon the plan of a DIVINE RIGHT; and the rather, as they speak of
it, not merely as an institution of the gospel, but an essentially necessary
one; insomuch, that gospel ordinances will be invalid, unless administered by
those, who have been episcopally vested with holy orders.

IN a matter of such momentous concern, they would not have acted an unworthy
part, if they had confined their pleas to the sacred writings; producing such
passages from them as speak to the point, not implicitly and darkly; but in
peremptory and express terms, so as to leave no reasonable room for hesitation
or doubt. It would be dishonorary to the BIBLE, and a gross reflection on the
penmen of it, to call that an "appointment of Christ," and an "essentially
necessary" one, which is not contained in this sacred volume, and with such
clearness and precision, that sober and impartial inquirers may readily
perceive it to be there, without foreign help to assist their sight. And yet,
such help is made necessary by episcopal-writers. They scarce ever fail of
turning us to the FATHERS in vindication of their cause; hereby virtually
reflecting disgrace on the scriptures, as though they were insufficient, simply
of themselves, to bring this controversy to an issue.

WE object not against paying all due respect to the primitive worthies, who
were called after the name of Christ, and honored that name by their faithful
labors in the service of the gospel. But we remember, our Savior has bid us
"call no man master on earth," as we have "a master in heaven," the only one he
will allow us to own by that name. We cannot therefore but judge it
unwarrantable to take our sentiments, relative to any christian truth, from
mere men, however pious, learned, or ancient; or however assembled in councils
or synods. This, we imagine, would be a dishonor to Christ, the founder and
revealer of our holy religion. He has given us the writings of the evangelists
and apostles to be the rule of our faith and practice; and it is, as we think,
so perfect and sufficient an one, that we have no need to have recourse to
human, and therefore fallible, writers, either ancient or modern; yea, it is
our firm persuasion, that all that is delivered for "the truth as it is in
Jesus" by the FATHERS of whatever age, station, country, or character, ought to
be judged of by this sacred and unerring rule: and if what they say does not
agree herewith, there is, so far, no light nor truth in them.

IN order to reconcile the appeal that is so often made to the FATHERS with
that honor which is due to the scriptures, the episcopalian-plea is, that they
consider these fathers, not as judges, but witnesses only in their cause. But
what are they brought to witness? Is it, that episcopacy is an institution of
Jesus Christ? If this is witnessed to in the sacred books, of which we, having
these in our hands, are as good judges as they, it is sufficient. There is no
need of any foreign testimony. If it is not, no other testimony can supply this
defect. Are these fathers cited as witnesses to what was the PRACTICE in their
day? This is now generally the pretense. They may, say the episcopalians, be
properly appealed to, in order to know the truth of FACT in the ages in which
they lived. And if, from their unanimous testimony, even from the first days of
christianity, it appears, that GOVERNING and ORDAINING AUTHORITY was exercised
by BISHOPS ONLY, in distinction from Presbyters, and as an order in the the
church above them, it would argue great arrogance, if not obstinate
perverseness, to dispute the divine original of episcopacy. But we must be
excused, however perverse we may be accounted, if we cannot bring our selves to
think, that the practice of the church, since the apostles days, however
universal, will justify our receiving that as an institution of Christ, and an
essentially important one, which he himself has not clearly and evidently made
so, either in his own person, or by those inspired writers, whom he
commissioned and instructed to declare his will: nor can we believe, the great
author of christianity would have put the professors of it to the difficult, I
may say, as to most of them, the impossible task of collecting any thing
essential to their salvation from the voluminous records of antiquity. We are
rather persuaded, he has ordered every article that is necessary, either in
point of faith or practice, to be so fairly and legibly wrote by the sacred
penmen, as that there should be no need of having recourse to the ancient
Fathers as WITNESSES, any more than judges, to ascertain his mind. To suppose
the contrary, would, in reality of construction, substitue TRADITION the rule
of essential truth, in the room of the SCRIPTURES, which were "given by
inspiration of God;" or, at least, make the former so much a part of this rule,
as that the latter, without it, would not be sufficiently complete. Such
dishonor ought not to be cast on the one only standard of the real mind of
Christ.

NOT that we should be under any fearful apprehension, was the
episcopal-dispute to be decided SOLELY by what can be proved to be FACT,
respecting the practice of the church before the coming on of those ages, in
which it is known that superstition and corruption had unhappily got mixed with
most, if not all the appointments of Jesus Christ. It has indeed been long
given out, and of late with more positive assurance than common, that within
the two first centuries, those purest and truly primitive ones, and all along
through them, as well as in after ages, UNIVERSAL CONSENT is justly pleadable
in favor of episcopacy. The design of the ensuing work is to put it in the
power of all intelligent readers, whether learned or unlearned, to judge for
themselves in this matter; and that they might be able to do it upon just and
solid grounds, not here and there a detached testimony, from this and the other
selected father, is brought to view, but the WHOLE, until toward the close of
the second century, they have ALL said relative to the affair of Bishops. If
the consent of the church, through this long and important period, without
which it is impossible it should be UNIVERSAL, can be known at all, it may be
known in this way; and it is the only one in which it can be known with any
degree of certainty. The dispute about episcopacy, so far as it depends upon
UNIVERSAL CONSENT, may be fairly and fully determined by every one for himself,
by what is herewith offered to his perusal.

THE method, according to which I propose to proceed, is this easy and plain
one. The fathers will be distinctly mentioned one by one, their characters
given, their writings specified, and what they say relative to EPISCOPACY
faithfully set down, with such observations and remarks as may be thought
needful. And they will severally be brought to view in the order in which they
are commonly placed, by the learned in subjects of this nature; or, in other
words, according to the time, in which it is supposed they wrote. It may be
proper to give notice to the reader, that, in specifying the date of the
respective writings, from which I have extracted, I have only referred in
general to the opinion of others, versed in this kind of learning. It would
have required a volume of itself, to have fixed the most probable date of each
writing, and to have assigned the reasons, why this date, rather than any other
was pitched upon; which would have been a needless labor to me, and of no
benefit to the reader, in the present case.


ONLY, before I proceed, I would make the following reasonable request. It is,
that every one would keep critically in view, as he goes along, the SPECIFIED
FACT in dispute. And that he may be able to do this without mistake, I shall,
in a few words, distinctly point it out.

THE Bishop, in whose defense an appeal is made to antiquity, is not related,
by his office, to a single congregation of christians only, with one or more
Presbyters belonging to it; but his charge is a DIOCESE, consisting of a number
of congregations, greater or less, with their respective Presbyters. The
inquiry therefore is, whether it be an UNIVERSALLY ATTESTED FACT, that
episcopacy, in this sense, took place in, and through, the two first ages? A
Bishop, at the head of a number of congregations, greater or less, is an
officer in the church of Christ quite different from the pastor of a single
congregation; though he should be called Bishop, as being the HEAD-PRESBYTER,
or vested with the character of PRIMUS INTER PARES. It should be particularly
noted, which of these kinds of episcopacy has the voice of the specified
antiquity in its favor. It is willingly left with every man of common
understanding, after he has gone over the following testimonies, to say,
whether he thinks, that Bishops, after the DIOCESANMODE, were known in the
first ages of the church?

THE Bishop, for whom the fathers are called in as WITNESSES, is an officer in
the church of an ORDER SUPERIOR to that of Presbyters, and as distinct from it
as the order of Presbyters is for that of Deacons; the pretense being this,
that Presbyters were thought to have, in primitive times, no more right to
meddle with the peculiar work of Bishops, than Deacons have to concern
themselves with the peculiar work of Presbyters. The question therefore is,
Whether it will appear, from the following evidence, to be at all a FACT, much
less an UNIVERSALLY known, and certainly attested one, that there were Bishops,
in this sense, in any church, in any part of the christian world, within the
two first centuries?

THE Bishop, in whose favor the ancient Fathers are said universally to speak,
is one to whom the EXCLUSIVE RIGHT OF GOVERNMENT has been committed by the
appointment of Jesus Christ, or his apostles as commissioned by him. Says the
famous Bishop Hoadly, treating of the government of the church, as belonging to
Bishops only, in the above appropriated sense, Reasonableness of conformity to
the church of England, p. 326, 327.
And here -- I think I may say, that we have as universal and as unanimous a
testimony of all writers, and historians from the apostles days, as could
reasonably be expected or desired: every one, who speaks of the government of
the church, in any place, witnessing, that episcopacy was the settled form; and
every one, who has occasion to speak of the original of it, tracing it up to
the apostles days, and fixing it upon their decree. -- Were there only
testimonies to be produced, that this was the government of the church in all
ages, it would be but reasonable to conclude it of apostolical institution; --
but when we find the same persons witnessing, not only that it was episcopal,
but that it was of apostolical institution, and delivered down from the
beginning as such, this adds weight to the matter, and makes it more undoubted.
So that here are two points to which they bear witness, that this was the
government of the church in their days, and that it was of apostolical
institution. And in these there is such a constancy and unanimity, that even
St. Jerome himself traces up episcopacy to the very apostles, and makes it of
their institution. -- He adds, All churches and christians, as far as we know,
seem to have been agreed, in this point, amidst all their other differences, as
universally as can well be imagined. One would suppose, from the peremptory
manner in which this citation is expressed, that the FACT it affirms was so
evidently clear, as to leave no room for the least doubt. Those, who may think
it worth while to look over the testimonies brought to view, in the following
pages, will perhaps, by critically observing their real and just import, be
surprised, that any man of learning, who professes a regard to truth, should
speak of it, and with such a degree of assurance, as the UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
OF ALL AGES from the apostles, that episcopacy, in the impleaded sense, was the
"form of government in the church in their day," and that it was by
"apostolical institution;" especially, if they should not be able to find, as
it is certain they will not, so much as a single witness, for two hundred
years, whose evidence is clear, direct, express, and full, in affirming, either
that this was the form of government in the church, or that it was ever
instituted by Christ, or his aostles: so far is it from the truth, that this is
a FACT UNANIMOUSLY and CONSTANTLY TESTIFIED TO, even from the beginning, and
through all ages.

THE Bishop, for the support of whose claims antiquity is repaired to, is one
with whom the SOLE POWER of ORDINATION is lodged; insomuch, that he only can
convey holy orders conformably to the appointment of Jesus Christ; and should
Presbyters presume to do this, they would take that upon them which they have
no more a right to, than Deacons have to baptize, or administer the Lord's
supper. This part of the UNANIMOUS report of ALL AGES concerning the EXCLUSIVE
RIGHT of Bishops deserves most of all the special notice of the reader; and he
is particularly desired, as he goes along, to point out to himself, for his own
satisfaction; or to others, for their information, any one among all the
testimonies he will have placed before his view, that plainly and directly
affirms the RIGHT OF ORDINATION to be peculiar to Bishops as a distinct order
from Presbyters, and superior to them; or that this right was ever thus
exercised by them. If he should not be able to do this, as unquestionably he
will not, how strange must that affirmation appear, which says, in the most
positive terms, not only that this is FACT, but a fact CONSTANTLY and
UNANIMOUSLY witnessed to by the fathers, in ALL AGES from the days of the
apostles.

THE Bishop, in whose defense antiquity is pleaded, is vested with the power of
CONFIRMATION, according to the mode of the church of England; and it is
appropriated to him as his right in distinction from all others. But I need not
assure the reader, he will in vain look to find it a FACT, within the two first
ages, that Bishops were either vested with, or ever exercised this power. For
he must come down below these ages, before a word is said, by any one of the
fathers, relative to this superstitious practice. Tertullian is the first that
mentions it; and he mentions likewise some other corruptions, which had got
mingled with christianity in that day.

IN short, the question in debate, so far as it relates to FACT, is, not
whether there were officers in the christian church, known by the name of
Bishops in the apostolic age, and down along through the two first centuries?
We join with the episcopalians in affirming this to be a truth universally
testified to in those times: but the proper question is, what is FACT with
reference to the ORDER of these Bishops, and the POWERS PECULIAR TO THEIR
OFFICE, and as EXERCISED by them in it? The name of Bishop is one thing, and
the POWER claimed for, or exercised by him, is another. The dispute is, not
about the name, but the POWER appropriated to it. This therefore should be
heedfully attended to by all, in their examination of the evidences that will
be produced; and they may, in this way, clearly and satisfactorily determine,
each one for himself, whether it be at all an attested FACT, much less a
CONSTANT and UNANIMOUSLY ATTESTED ONE, from the apostles days, and down along
through the two first ages, as well as after ones, that Bishops were vested
with, and did actually exercise, the above specified powers, which are at this
day claimed for them, as the appropriate work of their office by divine
appointment?

HAVING thus prepared the way, I now go on to introduce the FATHERS, and point
out what they say upon the head of EPISCOPACY; and shall do it in the order
that has been mentioned.

BARNABAS.
WE read, in the sacred books, of an eminent convert to the christian faith,
under the name of Barnabas. If our Barnabas was this venerable person, he is
justly placed first among the writers in our proposed collection. For he lived
in the days of the apostles, was then a preacher of the gospel, and a
fellow-laborer with Paul in a special mission to the gentile nations, to which
they were both separated by express direction of the Holy Ghost. But whether he
was this Barnabas, or some other person, in or near the apostolic age, who was
called by this name, or chose, for certain ends, to borrow it, is a point in
which neither ancient nor modern writers are agreed; as we shall presently have
occasion to make evident. If he was the scripture-Barnabas, the best account of
him is contained in the new-testament-books, which every one is at liberty to
consult at his leisure. If he was not this Barnabas, we can know nothing about
him, with any degree of certainty, but what may be collected from the epistle
that goes under this name.

I SHALL not amuse the reader with the history of his supposed sufferings, as a
martyr for the cause of Christ; much less with the MIRABILIA that are told of
him, and with an air of too much faith, even by Archbishop Wake, as well as
Dr. Cave. For, to speak the truth, I pay no regard to the idle legandary
stories, invented by monks, and other ecclesiastics, in the Roman church, after
the visible rise of antichrist, to impose upon the people to serve their own
base and wicked designs.

LEAVING therefore these extraordinaries, as not worthy of notice, I go on to
speak of his works. Tertullian seems to have been of the opinion, that he was
the author of the epistle to the Hebrews; for he plainly quotes it as his: but
it is, with Jerome, a matter of doubt, whether it ought to be ascribed to him,
or Luke, or Clement, or Paul. It does not appear, that Barnabas wrote any thing
more than an epistle that is still extant, at least in part, both in greek and
latin. The latin is thought to be a very ancient version from the greek;
though, when, in what country, or by what hand, it was translated, none, so far
as I can learn, pretend so much as to conjecture. Neither the greek or latin
copies are perfect. The beginning is wanting in the greek, and the end in the
Latin. Dr. Lardener says of this epistle, "It is entire in the latin version."
Cotelerius declares the contrary. His words are these, "Vetus antem
interpretatio est imperfecta et mutila, tum pass^m, tum precipue ad finem, ubi
posteriora capita resecantur." The exact truth is, neither the greek or old
latin copies are complete; but as the latin contains what was wanting in the
greek, and the greek what was wanting in the latin, between them both the
epistle is made entire.
Dr. Cave, who was apt to entertain as high an opinion of ancient writings as
they deserve, describes the epistle of Barnabas in the following words. The
frame and contexture of it is intricate and obscure, made up of uncouth
allegories, forced and improbable interpretations of scripture; though the main
design of it is to show, that the christian religion has superseded the rites
and ceremonies of the Mosaic law. The latter part of it contains an useful and
excellent exhortation, managed under the notion of two ways; the one of light,
the other of darkness; the one under the guidance of the angels of God, the
other under the conduct of the angels of satan, the prince of the iniquity of
the age.

THE chief difficulty, relative to this epistle, is to know, whether the
scripture-Barnabas was its author, or some other person, really of this name,
or by arbitrary assumption.

SOME of the ancient Fathers seem to have been of the mind, that the Barnabas,
who was Paul's companion, was the writer of it. Clement of Alexandria quotes it
in that form, "says the apostle Barnabas." Origin, in his answer to Celsus,
gives this epistle the title of catholic, "the catholic epistle of Barnabas;"
which it is supposed he would not have done, had he not esteemed its author to
have been the Barnabas, whose memory is celebrated in the inspired writings.
Others, among the fathers, to say the least, were in doubt, whether this
epistle was wrote by Barnabas, who, with Paul, was "separated to the work,
whereunto the Holy Ghost had called them." Eusebius and Jerome both reckon it
among the "apocryphal books;" and doubtless for the same reason. What this is,
we may learn from the epistle of the latter of these fathers to Laeta, in which
he says, "Those books are apocryphal that do not belong to the authors whose
name they bear."

THE moderns differ likewise in their judgment. Pearson, Cave, Du-pin, Wake,
and others, suppose the scripture-Barnabas to have been the writer of this
epistle. Cotelerius rather thinks it was some other person " -- magis inclino
ut censeam, non esse apostoli." And again, "Certe vix credi potest, quod adeo
eximius apostolus -- ea scripserit quae in opusculo presenti continentur;
coactas dico allegorias, enarrationes scripturarum minus verisimiles, fabulas
de animalibus, aliaque." --
of this name, or that appeared under it. It may seem strange to many, that
writers, in the first ages of christianity, should appear, not under their own,
but the names of those who were in high reputation in their day. But the fact
is incontestibly true. Says the learned Dr. Cave, "If it shall be inquired, why
a man, after much pains, should choose to publish his labors rather under
another man's name than his own; there needs no other answer, than that this
has been an old trade, which some men have taken up, either because it was
their humor to lay their own children at other men's doors, or to decline the
censure which the notions they published were likely to expose them to, or
principally to conciliate the greater esteem and value for them, by thrusting
them forth under the name of those for whom the world have a just regard and
veneration." Lives of the fathers, p. 75, vol. 1st.
Others are of opinion, it is utterly unworthy of so excellent a man as the
Barnabas celebrated in the inspired books. Basnage and Jones have largely
offered their objections against this epistle as the genuine work of Barnabas,
the companion of Paul. And they appear to me, I truly confess, to be
unanswerable. It would carry me too far out of my way to give so much as an
abstract of these objections. I shall content myself with only transcribing a
few passages in this epistle, as translated by Archbishop Wake; leaving it
with every judicious reader to say, whether he can think it at all probable,
that such a man as the scripture-Barnabas is known to have been, could have
been the author of them; a convert to the faith in the days of Christ; one
personally acquainted with the apostles; a fellow-laborer with them, by the
express appointment of heaven, in spreading the name and religion of Christ;
and, in a word, one that is characterised by an inspired pen as "a good man,
full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith." Acts xi. 24.

THE passages, I would bring to view, are these that follow.

SECT. V. -- "And when he chose his apostles, which were afterward to publish
his gospel, he took men that had been VERY GREAT SINNERS; that thereby he might
plainly show, "he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

THIS passage, in the Archbishop's translation, may not appear very strikingly
exceptionable; but it really is so, both in the original greek, and old latin
version. What he translates, "men that had been very great sinners," is in the
greek, uper pasan amartian anomoterous; justly translated by Cotelerius, "omni
peccato iniquiores." The old lattin version has it, "super omne peccatum,
peccatores;" in literal english, "sinners beyond all sin." It is readily
allowed, the mode of diction is hyperbolical. But the thought intended to be
conveyed could be nothing short of this, that the apostles of our Lord had been
"the worst of men, the vilest of all sinners." Is this the truth of fact? Will
any thing, in the new-testament-books, justify this account of them? It is a
false slanderous report, Cotelerius, in his note upon this passage, cites the
following words, from Origen's first book against Celsus, toward the end,
'extat sane in Barnabae Catholica epistola scriptum. Inde fortasse Celsus
occasionem arripuit, ut apostolos infames et nequissimos diceret. Jesum ad
apostolicam functionem elegisse homines omni iniqui^^te nequissimos."
highly injurious to them: nor is the reason assigned for our Lord's choosing
such wicked men any other than an abuse of the sacred text mentioned in its
support. No such reason was ever given by our Lord, or any of his inspired
apostles.

SECT. IX. -- "Understand therefore, children, these things more fully, that
Abraham, who was the first that brought in circumcision, looking forward in the
spirit to Jesus, circumcised, having received the mystery of THREE LETTERS. For
the scripture says, "Abraham circumcised THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN men of his
house." But what therefore was the mystery that was made known to him? Mark,
first the EIGHTEEN; and next the THREE HUNDRED. For the numeral letters of TEN
and EIGHT are I.H; and these denote JESUS. And because the CROSS was that by
which we were to find grace, therefore he adds, three hundred, the note of
which is T [the figure of his cross]. Wherefore, by two letters, he signified
JESUS, and by the third his CROSS. He who has put the engrafted gift of his
doctrine within us knows, that I never taught to any one a more certain truth:
but I trust that ye are worthy of it."

SECT. X. "But why did Moses say, "Ye shall not eat of the swine, neither the
eagle, nor the hawk, nor the crow, nor any fish that has not a scale upon him?"
I answer, that, in the spiritual sense, he comprehended three doctrines that
were to be gathered from thence. Besides which he says to them in the book of
Deuteronomy, "and I will give my statutes unto this people." Wherefore, it is
not the command of God that they should not eat these things; but Moses in the
spirit spoke to them. Now, "the sow he forbad them to eat"; meaning thus much,
thou shall not join thyself to such persons as are like unto swine. -- "Neither
shall thou eat of the hare." To what end? To signify this to us, thou shall not
be an adulterer, nor liken thyself to such persons. For the hare every year
multiplies the places of its conception; and as many years as it lives, so many
it has. "Neither shall thou eat of the hyaena;" that is, again, be not an
adulterer, nor a corrupter of others, neither be like unto such. And wherefore
so? Because that creature every year changes its kind, and is sometimes male,
and sometimes female. For which cause also he justly hated the weesel; to the
end they should not be like such persons, who with their mouths commit
wickedness, by reason of their uncleanness; nor join themselves with those
impure women, who with their mouths commit wickedness; because that animal
conceives with its mouth." Moses therefore speaking as concerning meats,
delivered indeed three great precepts to them in the spiritual signification of
those commands. But they, according to the desires of the flesh, understood him
as if he had only meant it of meats. And therefore David took aright the
knowledge of his threefold command, saying in like manner; "blessed is the man
that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly;" as the fishes before
mentioned in the bottom of the deep in darkness: "nor stood in the way of
sinners;" as they who seem to fear the Lord, but yet sin as the sow. "And has
not sat in the seat of the scorners;" as those birds who sit and watch that
they may devour. Here you have the law concerning meat perfectly set forth, and
according to the true knowledge of it.

THESE passages are only a very small part of those, in which the scriptures
are placed, in this epistle, in a most ludicrous point of light. It is, as I
imagine, beyond the power of man to reconcile such trifling, uncouth, romantic
explications of the holy word of God, with the excellent character it has given
us of the apostolic-Barnabas.

I SHALL only add, no mention is made, in this epistle, of Bishops, or
Presbyters; nor the least hint given, from whence it may be collected, what was
this writer's opinion about either of them. Both the greek and latin copies are
absolutely silent with reference to every thing controverted between the
episcopalians and presbyterians: for which reason I have said less of this
primitive writer, than might otherwise have been proper. I shall observe the
same rule, respecting those other fathers, whose writings have not reached us,
or contain nothing in them to the purpose of the argument we are upon.

DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA.
THIS Dionysius is styled the areopagite, partly to distinguish him from
several others of the same name; but principally because he is thus pointed out
by the inspired writer of the book of the acts.

THE areopagite-senate, so denominated from the famous areopagus, a
courthouse, built upon a hill in Athens, was the most sacred and venerable
tribunal in Greece. All the greater and more capital causes were brought before
it; especially matters of religion, blasphemy against the gods, and contempt of
the holy mysteries. Dionysius is supposed to have been one of the judges, when
Paul was arraigned before this senate, as "a setter forth of strange gods" for
"preaching Jesus and anastasis," or the resurrection. It is said, and upon just
grounds, that he was converted by this apostle, while, in the midst of
mars-hall, he made the address to the men of Athens, recorded in the 17th
Chapter of the Acts. For though we are told, that "some mocked" at this
preaching; it is also affirmed, that "certain men believed, among the which was
Dionysius the areopagite." Acts xvii. 32, 34.

NOTHING more is recorded, in the sacred books, concerning this truly primitive
father. Eusebius says, "he was the first Bishop of Athens; and introduces
Dionysius of Corinth mentioning the same thing. H. E. Lib. 3. cap. 4. lib. 4.
cap. 22.
No further notice is taken of him, until we come to ages remote from that in
which he lived; on which account no great regard is to be paid to the
commendations that are there bestowed on him, in the highest strains of
hyperbolical language.

NUMEROUS are the writings said to be left by this Dionysius; for which reason
only I have given him, among the other fathers, a place in this work. Some
there are who strenuously plead for these writings as genuine; though it is
universally thought by protestants, and by some of fame even in the roman
communion, that they are falsely attributed to him. None have wrote more
largely, or with greater learning, in proof of their being spurious, than
Monsieur D'aille; who has said enough to convince all, that are capable of
conviction, that this is their true character. The learned Dupin not only
entertained this opinion of them, but has said that which is abundantly
sufficient to lead others into the same judgment about them. I shall here
transcribe one of the many arguments, he has used to evidence their being
supposititious; and I have selected this for a reason that will obviously be
suggested to the reader, when he sees what may be offered relative to the
writings of another father, held in great reputation, at least among some.

HIS argument is this; The manner of the first appearing of these books ought
to be suspected. For it is certain, that, being unknown to all antiquity, they
were first quoted by the severian heretics, in a conference holden between
them, and the orthodox Bishops at Constantinople, in the palace of the emperor
Justinian, 532 years after the nativity of Jesus Christ. The silence of all the
ancient ecclesiastical writers is, without doubt, a very great prejudice to
them; for who can imagine, that so considerable an author as St. Denis (if
these books had been really composed by him) should have been unknown to
Eusebius and St. Jerome? And who can believe, that, if they had known them, they
should take no notice of them, when they composed an exact catalogue of all the
authors, of whom they had any knowledge; not omitting even those that had (...)
little reputation, that they were scarcely heard of in the world? Is it
possible that Eusebius, in making mention of Dionysius the aropagite, in tw^
several places, should not have observed, according to his usual method, that
he had written several books? St. Jerome, in his epistle to Magnus, does not
omit the testimony of one single author to prove, that it is lawful to make use
of profane books; whereas the writings of St. Denis might have served as a
notable proof. Why then does he not speak so much as one word concerning them?
He gives us an account, in his catalogue, of Quadratus Bishop of Athens, and of
Aristides the athenian philosopher: is it possible, that St. Denis should be
more obscure than these two writers, or less esteemed by St. Jerome? How could
it happen, that all the ancient writers mention St. Dionysius the areopagite,
as Dionysius Corinthius, St. Chysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and the
author of the dialogues ascribed to St. Caesarius, the brother of St. Gregory
Nazianzen, should give us no intimation of these books? In short, why were
these books, which contain many things relating to the doctrine and discipline
of the christian church, and that would have been of great authority, as
proceeding from so ancient and considerable an author as St. Dionysius the
areopagite, never cited either for, or against any heretic, or for the
illustration of any point of discipline before the sixth age of the church? --

THE writings falsely atributed to Dionysius the areopagite are as follow. A
book "concerning the celestial hierarchy;" another of "the divine names,"
another of "mystical divinity;" ten epistles; four to "Caius," one to
"Dorotheus," another to "Sosipater," another to "Polycarp," another to
"Demophilus," another to "Titus," another to "John the evangelist." These have
been printed, and reprinted, both in greek and latin, in many parts of Europe.
Du-pin says, several other books were composed by this author, and quoted by
himself; such as a book concerning "symbolical knowledge;" another of "the
soul;" another of "divine hymns;" another of the "just judgment of God; another
of "those things that are understood by the mind, and that may be perceived by
the senses." -- But these are all lost.

THESE books, as Johannes Scotus, the first translator of them into latin,
tells us, are infinitely intricate and perplexed, far beyond the reach of
modern apprehension, and which few are able to pierce into, by reason of the
sublimity of the mysteries whereof they treat. And, as Dr. Cave justly and
judiciously observes, Whoever was their genuine parent, or upon what account
soever he wrote them, it is plain, that he laid the foundation of a mystical
and unintelligible divinity among christians, and that hence proceeded all
those wild rosicrusean notions, which some men are so fond of, and the life and
practice whereof they cry up as the very soul and perfection of the christian
religion. And that this author does immediately minister to this design, let
the reader judge by one instance, and I assure him none of the most obscure and
intricate passages in these books. This instance he gives us, as he himself
declares, expressed word for word. It is as follows; God is known in all
things, and without all things. He is known by knowledge, and by ignorance.
There is both a cogitation of him, and a word, and a science, and a touch, and
a sense, and an opinion, and a name, and all other things; and yet, he is
neither thought, nor spoken, nor named. He is not any thing of those things
that are, nor is he known in any of the things that are; he is both all things
in all, and nothing in nothing; out of all things he is known to all, and out
of nothing to nothing. These are the things which we rightly discourse
concerning God. And this again is the most divine knowledge of God, that which
is known by ignorance, according to the union that is above understanding; when
the mind getting at a distance from all things that are, and having dismissed
itself, is united to those superillustrious beams from whence, and where, it is
enlightened in the unfathomable depths of wisdom.

MORE of this, (say the Doctor,) and the like stuff is plentifully scattered up
and down these books. And if this be not mystical and profound enough, I know
not what is; and which certainly any man, but one well versed in this sort of
theology, would look upon as strange jargon of nonsense and contradiction. And
yet, this is the height of devotion and piety, which some men earnestly press
after, and wherein they glory: as if a man could not truly understand the
mysteries of religion, until he had resigned his reason; nor be a christian,
without first becoming an enthusiast, nor be able to speak sense, unless in a
language which none can understand.

HERMAS.
His character, writings, testimonies from them with observations, and remarks.
THIS Hermas has sometimes been mistaken for Hermes, brother to Pius I. an
ecclesiastic beyond the middle of the second century. The author of the
"pontifical" fathered upon Damasus, the pretended "decretals of the Bishops of
Rome," together with some other ancient, as well as modern writers, have fallen
into this error, as Du-pin calls it, and has, in common with many other learned
men, proved it to be, from all the primitive fathers, Clement of Alexandria,
Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, and Jerome; who always call him Hermas never
Hermes.

IT is unquestionable, that there was, in the first age, a person of this name;
as the apostle Paul, among other christians at Rome, salutes Hermas by name.
Romans 16.14.
It is certain also, that several of the fathers thought the scripture-Hermas
to be the same with him, of whom we are speaking. This was the opinion of
Origin, Eusebius, and Jerome. But that he was really this person, is not
certain: nor have we any particular account of his just character; where he
lived; what he did in promoting the cause of Christ; when, how, and in what
place, he died. Archbishop Wake, from some passages in his "Pastor," mentions
several things, by way of conjecture, descriptive of him; but, as the more
ancient records are silent about him, I shall pass from his person to his

WRITINGS.
AND we have no account of any thing he ever wrote, but only the book
entitled, "Pastor;" than which, perhaps, no piece is more frequently mentioned
in antiquity. And yet, it is not easy to say, what its authority was in those
days. Irenaeus seems to quote it under "Been ergo pronunciavit scriptura."
"the name of scripture." Clement of Alexandria introduces a citation from it
in that language, "Theios to Erma meta apokalupsin lalousa."
"the power which spoke divinely to Hermas by revelation." Tertullian, before
his professing himself a montanist, speaks of it, if not with any high
encomium, yet without intimating a suspicion as if it was of no good authority.
Origin calls it "Valde mihi utilis videtur et, ut puto, divinitus inspirata."
"a very useful writing, and in his opinion divinely inspired. Eusebius brings
it in doubted of, as to its "canonical authority;" but allows that it was
received as a "justifiable book, publicly read in the churches, and quoted by
ancient authors." Jerome styles it, "a truly profitable book, cited by the greek
fathers."

BUT notwithstanding all this, it is sometimes even despised as a work of no
value; and this, by some of the very persons abovenamed. Tertullian, after his
being infected with the monastical errors, speaks of it in language denoting
the highest contempt. It was says he, "Ab omni^ concilio ecclesiarum inter
apocrypha and falsa judicaretur."
"rejected by all the churches as a false and spurious writing." Origin
sometimes makes the supposition, "Si cui tamen libellus ille recipiendus
videtur."
"if it be a book to be received;" and mentions it moreover, "as despised by
some." Jerome calls it "Liber ille apocryphus stultitiae condemnandus est."
"an apocryphal book, to be condemned for the folly contained in it." Such
difficulty is there in ascertaining the true estimate put upon this writing in
ancient times.

NOR are the moderns united in the judgment they pass on it. They are indeed
unanimously agreed to renounce it as "a canonical book;" yet, they differ
widely in the value they express for it. Some receive it with respect, as "a
venerable ancient piece;" while others look upon it as of "little worth." The
learned Du-pin gives that account of it, It has not been so much valued by
modern authors; and there are very few, at present, that commend it, or that
have the same regard to it as those that lived in the primitive ages of the
church. And indeed, if we may judge by the method according to which it is
wrote, and by the things therein contained, it does not seem to deserve much
esteem. The first part, entitled, "the visions," is full of many revelations
that are explained to Hermas by "a woman" representing the church. They all
relate to the state of the church, and the manners of christians. The second
part, which is most useful, is called "the ordinances," wherein are comprised
diverse precepts of morality, and pious instructions, which the pastor," or
"angel of Hermas" prescribes to him. The third part is called, the
"similitudes," because it begins with several "similies," or comparisons, and
concludes with visions. These three books comprehend very many moral
instructions concerning the practice of christian virtues; but the great number
of visions, allegories, and similitudes, make them tedious. And all these moral
truths would, in my opinion, have been more useful, if the author had
propounded them simply, as the apostles had done in their epistles.

THIS work was penned in greek; though we have now extant only an old latin
version. Barthius supposes it not to have been translated until the days of
Jerome, because that writer speaks of it as "much used among the greeks, but
scarce known to the latins" But Cotelerius herein opposes him, proving it to
have been read, by several of the latins before the age of Jerome; and probably
they read it in the present translation: though it is not known, at this day,
by whom it was made: nor can the time of writing this "pastor" be brought, with
certainty, to an exact period. Archbishop Wake places it the last piece but
one in his "apostolical fathers." He might probably think it was wrote after
the epistles of Ignatius and Polycarp. But it is most commonly supposed to have
been wrote much sooner. Some place its date about the year 90, a little before
the dioclesian persecution which he is thought to refer to in his "fourth
vision." Others are persuaded, it was wrote sooner yet, before the destruction
of Jerusalem, and not many years after some of the epistles of the apostle
Paul. Of this opinion was the learned Dodwell; and he says that in defense of
it, which is well worthy of consideration.

TESTIMONIES from HERMAS.
VIS. II. Sect. II. -- "Thou shall therefore say to those who are over the
church, Qui praesunt ecclesiae.
that they order their ways in righteousness, that they may fully receive the
promise with much glory."

VIS. ibid. Sect. IV. -- "After this I saw a vision at home in my own house,
and the old woman, whom I had seen before, came to me, and asked me, whether I
had yet delivered In the common copies it is, "Si jam libellum dedis^em
senioribus." But Archbishop Wake says, the word "suum" is added in the Lambeth
M. S. according to which he has here given the translation.
her book to the elders of the church. The words, "of the church," are not in
the original, and therefore printed by the Archbishop in italic to give notice
of it."
And I answered, I had not yet. She replied, thou have well done; for I have
certain words more to tell thee. And when I shall have finished all the words,
they shall be clearly understood by the elect. And thou shall write "Scribes
ergo duos libellos, et mittes ^num Clementi, et unum Greptae. Mittet autem
Clemens in exteras civitates; illi enim permissum est. Grapte autem commonebit
viduas, et orphanos. Tu autem leges in hac civitate cum senioribus qui praesunt
ecclesiae."
two books, and send one to Clement, and one to Grapte. For Clement shall send
it to the foreign cities, because it is permitted to him to do so. But Grapte
shall admonish the widows and orphans. But thou shall read in this city with
the elders of The reader is desired to take notice, that the original words,
"qui praesunt," are totally disregarded by the Archbishop in his translation
here. Could he have left out the import of these words, without design? And
could he have any other design, than to keep it out of sight, that, according
to Hermas, Elders or Presbyters were the persons who PRESIDED, or were SET OVER
the church.
the church."

VIS. III. Sect. V. "Hear now concerning the stones that are in the building.
The square and white stones, "Lapides quidem illi quad^ati, et alli,
convenientes in commissuris suis, ii sunt apostoli, et episopi, et doctores et
ministri, qui ingressi sunt in clementia Dei, et episcopatum gesserunt, et
edocuerunt, et ministraverunt sancte."
which agree exactly in their joints, are the apostles, and bishops, and
doctors, and ministers, who, through the mercy of God, have come in, and
governed, and taught, and ministered holily and modestly, to the elect of God,
both that are fallen asleep, and which yet remain, and have always agreed with
them, and have had peace within themselves, and have heard each other."

VIS. ib. Sect. IX. -- "Ye that are more eminent, search out those that are
hungry, whilst the tower is yet unfinished. For when the tower shall be
finished, ye shall be willing to do good, and shall not find any place in it.
Beware therefore, ye that glory in your riches, lest perhaps they groan who are
in want, and their sighing come up unto God, and ye be shut out with your goods
without the gate of the tower. Behold I Nunc itaque vo^is dico qui praesunt
ecclesiae, et amatis primos consessus; nolite --.
now warn you who are set over the church, and love the highest seats; be not
like unto those that work mischief. -- Take heed, my children, that your
dissentions deprive you not of your lives. How will ye instruct the elect of
God, when ye yourselves want correction? Wherefore admonish one another, and be
at peace among yourselves, that I, standing before your father, may give an
account for you unto the Lord."

COMMAND. XI. Sect. III. "Hear now concerning the earthly spirit, which is
empty, and foolish, and without virtue. And first of all, the man who is
supposed to have this spirit "Exaltat enim se, et vult primam cathredram
habere."
exalts himself, and desires to have the first seat, and is wicked, and full
of words; and spends his time in pleasure, and in all manner of voluptuousness,
and receives the reward of his divination."

SIMIL. VIII. Sect. VII. -- "As for those who had their rods green, but yet
cleft; they are such as were always faithful and good, but they "Habentes inter
se quandam invidiam et contenti onem de principatu, et dignitate. Verum omnes
hujusmodi insipientes sunt et fatui, qui habent inter se emulationem de
principatu."
had some envy and strife among yourselves concerning dignity and pre-eminence.
Now all such are vain, and without understanding, as contend with one another
about these things. Nevertheless, seeing they are otherwise good, if, when they
shall hear these commands, they shall amend themselves, and shall, at my
persuasion, suddenly repent; they shall at last dwell in the tower, as they who
have truly and worthily repented. But, if any one shall again return to his
dissentions, he shall be shut out of the tower, and lose his life. For the life
of those, who keep the commandments of the Lord, consists in doing what they
are commanded; Non in principatu, aut aliqua dignitate."
not in principality, or in any other dignity."

SIMIL. IX. Sect. XV. -- "But, sir, what were taken out of the deep, and fitted
into the building? The ten, said he, which were placed at the foundation, are
the first age; the following five and twenty, the second, of righteous men. The
next thirty-five are "Prophetae domini et ministri sunt: quadraginta vero,
apostoli et doctores sunt praedicationis filii Dei."
the prophets and ministers of the Lord. And the forty are the apostles and
doctors of the preaching of the son of God.

SIMIL. ib. Sect. XVI. -- "And I said; why then, sir, did these forty stones
also ascend with them out of the deep, having already received that seal? He
answered, because "Apostoli et doctores, qui praedicaverunt nomen filii Dei."
these apostles and teachers, who preached the name of the son of God, dying
after they had received his faith and power, preached to them who were dead
before, and they gave this seal to them."

SIMIL. ib. Sect. XXV. As concerning the eighth mountain, in which were many
springs, by which every kind of all the creatures of God was watered, "Tales
sunt qui crediderunt apostolis, quos misit dominus in totum orbem praedicare;
et quidam doctores, qui cast et sincere praedicaverunt, et docuerunt."
they are such as have believed the apostles which the Lord sent into all the
world to preach; and some of them, being teachers, have preached and taught
purely and sincerely, and have not in the least yielded to any evil designs,
but have constantly walked in righteousness and truth. These therefore have
their conversation among the angels."

SIMIL. ib. Sect. XXVII. For what concerns the tenth mountain, in which were
the trees covering the cattle, they are such as Tales sunt qui crediderunt,
quidam Episcopi, id est, praesides ecclesiarum."
have believed, and some of them been Bishops, that is, Governors of the
churches. It is observable, the Archbishop translates, in this place,
"praesides ecclesiarum," GOVERNORS OF THE CHURCHES, because connected with the
word "Episcopi," Bishops; though in Vis. II. Sect. IV. the words, "qui paesunt
ecclesiae," are passed over without any translation at all; and for no
conceivable reason, but because they were there connected with the word, ELDERS
or PRESBYTERS. If in either of these passages, "Governors of the churches," is
the proper translation, it is equally proper in both; for the original words no
otherwise differ, than as a substantive differs from a verb. It is left with
the reader to judge, whether the Archbishop has approved himself so fair and
impartial a translator, as might justly have been expected.
Others are such stones as have not feignedly, but with a cheerful mind,
entertained the servants of God. Then Et deinde qui praesides sunt
ministeriorum, qui et inopes et viduas protexerunt.
such as have been set over inferior ministries, and have protected the poor,
and the widows, and have always kept a chaste conversation. These men therefore
are protected of the Lord."

OBSERVATIONS and REMARKS upon the foregoing testimonies.
FROM these passages in Hermas, which are all I can find to the purpose of the
present controversy, the reader may, in some measure, perceive the obscurity,
with which his writings are perplexed. It appears that he has, here and there,
droped a few words that bear relation to the point we are upon; but what he has
said is generally so blended with visionary or parabolical matter, that it is
not easy, by any rational connection in his discourse, to determine his
meaning; and if we would understand him, we must ordinarily confine ourselves
to the words barely as they lie; unless, by comparing them with others of the
like import, in other parts of his writing, we may be helped in fixing their
true sense.

BUT dark as he is, there are some plain intimations, that the world, in his
day, were not acquainted with Bishops, as officers superior in their ORDER to
Presbyters; yea, that the churches were so far from being modelled after the
present episcopal form, that the management of their religious affairs was in
the hands, not of SINGLE PERSONS, but a PLURALITY; and this, of EQUAL RANK. It
is a common phrase in these writings, "qui praesunt ecclesiae," that is, "who
are set over the church." And lest it should be pretended, the word, church, is
used to signify the church-catholic, in which sense it might be true, that it
had a plurality set over it, though particular churches had only a single
Bishop at their head: I say, to take away all ground for such a pretense, we
have such an observable passage as that, Vis. II. Sect. IV.
"And thou (Hermas) shall read in THIS CITY with the elders who are set over
the church." A more express testimony could not well be given to this FACT,
that the church of Rome, at least, was, in this age, governed, not by any
single pastor but a plurality, which plurality were Presbyters, or if you
please Bishops; meaning hereby the SAME ORDER of officers in the church. For it
is remarkable, the word, Bishops, (Episcopi) is explained by Hermas himself to
signify, "Praesides ecclesiarum;" Sim. IX. Sect. XXVII.
that is to say, he describes Bishops by their being "those who are set over
the church;" and those who are "set over the church" he expressly calls Vis.
II. Sect. IV.
("Seniores") Elders, or Presbyters; so that, as it happily falls out, Bishops
and Presbyters, according to Hermas's own explanation of himself, are one and
the same officers in the church, spoken of promiscuously, as in the
new-testament-writings, under the names of Bishops or Presbyters.

BUT that this matter may be set in a yet stronger point of light, I shall
bring to view, and consider, what is brought from Hermas in favor of the
distinction, he is supposed, by episcopalian writers, to make between Bishops
and Presbyters. And,

THE first passage to this purpose, we have in Vis. II. Sect. IV, in which it
is said, "Thou shall write two books, and send one to Clement, and one to
Grapte. And Clement shall send it to the foreign cities; for to him it is
permitted." In these words, some are so sharp-sighted as to perceive plain
evidence of episcopal superiority. For, say they, Clement was now Bishop of
Rome, and the care of "sending this book," or letter, to the "foreign cities,"
was devolved on him, without all doubt, in virtue of his office, as head of the
church; to whom, upon this account, this business most properly belonged.

THE answer is easy. That Clement was now Bishop of Rome, meaning hereby the
single head, or governor of this church, is so far from being probable, that
the direct contrary hereto is most evidently signified by Hermas's "pastor," in
the latter part of this very paragraph; where he speaks of the church of Rome
as under the government, not of any single person. And thou "shall read in THIS
CITY with the ELDERS who are set over the church:" which words, I am persuaded,
can never be made to consist with Clement's being now the episcopal head of
this church. He might, at this time, be related to the church of Rome, as one
of their Bishops, or Elders; and he might also be the most accomplished and
distinguished among them; the most known, valued, and respected: to whom, upon
these accounts, it might be given in charge, rather than to any of the other
Elders or Bishops, to send this book, or epistle; but not because it so
belonged to him of right, and in virtue of his office, as that it could not
have been devolved upon any other. It does not appear, either from Hermas, or
any other ancient writer, that the care of sending letters to the churches was
the work of Bishops, as a peculiar badge of their office. The most capable, or
most universally known officer, in any church, might ordinarily be pitched upon
to do this; and nothing more can be argued from it, than that he was thought
the best qualified person for such a work. Most certainly, it is too trifling a
matter on which to found a distinction of order between the officers of a
church.

THE next passage recurred to we have, in Vis. III. Sect. V. in which are these
words; "The square and the white stones are the Apostles, and Bishops, and
Doctors, and Ministers, who, through the mercy of God, have come in, and
exercised episcopacy, and taught, and ministered." Cotelerius's note here is.
"Hic habes. -- In English thus, "You have here the distinct orders of the
hierarchy, in apostles, in Bishops exercising episcopacy, in Doctors or
Presbyters teaching, and in Deacons ministering." And the common plea of
prelatical writers, from this passage, is, that the three officers of the
church, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, are here directly mentioned; and the
distinction of their offices plainly insinuated by distinct work assigned them;
the Bishops being described by their "exercising episcopacy," the Doctors or
Presbyters by their "teaching," and the Deacons by their "ministering."

THIS turn given to the words, may, to those who have not read the "pastor of
Hermas," carry the appearance of plausibility; but, when fairly and impartially
examined, they will be found to make nothing against the affirmation, that
Bishops and Presbyters are one and the same order of officers in the church of
Christ. Two things are here pleaded.

THE first is, that direct mention is here made of three sorts of officers in
the church, viz. Bishops, Doctors or Presbyters, and Ministers or Deacons." But
if the word, Doctors, is here used exegetically; not specifying distinct
officers from Bishops, but meaning only a difference in the work of one and the
same officers, there is plainly no force in the argument from this enumeration.
And that this is really the truth of the matter, I shall now make evident,
beyond all reasonable dispute, even from Hermas himself. In order whereto,

LET us turn to Simil. IX. Sect. XXVII. where we have these words, "As
concerning the tenth mountain, in which were trees that covered the cattle,
they are such as have believed, certain Bishops, that is, persons set over the
churches, -- and then such as are set over the services, who have protected the
poor and widows," In this passage two or three things are very observable. (1)
That the word, Bishops, is particularly explained, and its sense, as used in
the writings of Hermas, punctually ascertained: which I thus notice, presuming
it will be acknowledged reasonable to stand to that sense of a word, in an
author, which he himself has given of it. (2) It is plain, the words,
"Episcopi," and "Praesides ecclesiarum," do, in Hermas, signify precisely one
and the same thing. That is to say, "Bishops," and "such as are set over the
church," do intend one and the same order of church officers. For the
explanation, given by Hermas, of the word "Bishops," is, their being persons
that are "set over the church." (3) Here are evidently TWO, and ONLY TWO ORDERS
of church officers specified; namely, Bishops and Deacons: Bishops, under that
style, "Praesides ecclesiarum," persons "set over the church;" and DEACONS,
characterised by the phrase, "Praesides ministeriorum," such as were "set over
the services;" that is, that had the care of "the poor, and the widows," as
follows in the next words; which perfectly coincide with the original reason of
the institution of the Deacon's office, and describe its proper work.

THESE things considered, I fear not to say, that there is good reason, why,
when Hermas speaks of "Bishops, and Doctors, and Ministers," we should
understand the words, "Doctors," exegetically, or explicative of the word,
"Bishops;" not intending a distinct order of officers, but rather pointing our
thoughts to different work of the same officers. And, in truth, unless we
interpret the word after this, or some such sense, we shall set Hermas at odds
with himself. For he has most punctually ascertained the meaning of the word,
"Bishops," making it to signify precisely the same thing with "praesides
ecclesiarum," persons "set over the church." Now the phrase, "Praesides
ecclesiarum," is perfectly the same with, "qui praesunt ecclesiae;" which, in
Vis. II. Sect. IV, is, in the most express manner, applied to Presbyters or
Elders. "Thou shall read [cum Senioribus, qui praesunt ecclesiae] with the
Elders, or Presbyters, that are set over the church." So that, by the most easy
and natural deduction, Bishops and Presbyters, according to Hermas, are the
SAME ORDER of officers in the church: Nor can Hermas be ever made consistent
with himself, unless, when he speaks of "Bishops and Doctors," we take him to
use the word, "Doctors," as exegetical of the word, "Bishops," or a synonimous
expletive; meaning only the same order of persons by both these terms. And,
this interpretation will appear more easy, if it be considered, that the words,
"Bishops" and "Doctors," are commonly used in the writings of all antiquity, as
synonimous terms. Nor is the term, "Doctor," ever appropriated to Presbyters in
distinction from Bishops. Far from this, even after the distinction between
Bishops obtained in the church, the word, "Doctors", is commonly applied to
Bishops: nor was it ever an appropriated term to point out Presbyters in
distinction from Bishops.

MOREOVER, it ought to be considered, Hermas never makes the like enumeration,
"Apostles, and Bishops, and Doctors, and Ministers;" but several times makes
another, by which this ought, in all reason, to be explained. In Simil IV.
Sect. XV. it is said, "the forty stones are the Apostles and Doctors of the
preaching of the son of God. Again, in Sim. ib. Sect. XVI. These same "forty
stones" are explained to mean, "the Apostles and Doctors of the preaching of
the name of the Son of God." Yet again Sim. ib. Sect. XXV. We read of such as
"believed the Apostles and certain Doctors, who sincerely preached the word."
In all these places, mention is made only of "Apostles" and "Doctors." But, if
Doctors did not mean the same thing with Bishops, it is very extraordinary, and
no episcopalian can account for it, that Bishops should always be omitted in
these enumerations, and "Doctors" always mentioned. And truly, by this frequent
coupling of Apostles and Doctors, it is quite natural to think, that Doctors
were, in the opinion of Hermas, the next officers in the church to Apostles,
and by no means an order INFERIOR to Bishops.

IT may be properly added, as Hermas had been speaking of "four-cornered
stones," it is highly probable, if not certain, that he mentions the four
names, "apostles, Bishops, Doctors, and Ministers," only to make out something
that might look like an analogy. In other places, where he had not to do with
"square stones," he gives us no such enumeration. For myself, I am fully
persuaded, we should not have had it here, had it not been for this trifling
circumstance. Put if any should insist upon the necessity of a strict and
proper analogy, and that it was Hermas's design to exhibit one, the consequence
would be as fatal to the cause of episcopacy, as to that of presbyterianism.
For, upon this supposition, there must be FOUR ORDERS in the church, not THREE,
answering to the "four corners" of these "square-stones;" and the "Apostles,"
here mentioned, must be officers as distinct from the "Bishops," as the
"Bishops" are from the "Doctors:" but how consistent this will be with the
pretense, that Bishops are vested with the apostolic office, as their proper
and only successors; I must leave those to determine, whose concern it is to do
so.

THE other branch of the plea is, that Hermas not only mentions "Bishops, and
Doctors or Presbyters, and Ministers or Deacons;" but plainly insinuates a
distinction of order between them, by distinct works assigned them: for, he
represents the Bishops, as "exercising episcopacy;" the Doctors, as "teaching;"
and the ministers, as "ministering."

AND it is confessed, if, in the age of Hermas, the work of "exercising
episcopacy," and the work of "preaching," were separated from each other, as
they too commonly are now a days, the argument would carry with it some force.
It is in fact true, at present, that those "exercise episcopacy," who seldom or
never exercise themselves in "preaching." And, indeed, it rarely happens, that
the persons vested with the episcopal office concern themselves much with this
other business. But it was not thus from the beginning. Preaching was not then
looked upon as the distinguishing mark of officers inferior to Bishops: but,
for many ages, the work of "exercising episcopacy," and the work of
"preaching," were both united in one and the same officer of the church; and
"laboring in the word and doctrine" was the most known, and distinguishing
character of all that were Bishops: insomuch, that a single instance cannot be
produced (I speak it with great positiveness) of a person "exercising
episcopacy," that did not, at the same time, make it his chief business to
"preach;" until we come into those ages, in which the grossest corruptions were
prevalent among all orders and degrees of men in the church. So that, it is no
argument, that the "Doctors" in Hermas were distinct officers from Bishops,
because they are spoken of as "preaching," and the Bishops as "exercising
episcopacy." For these are both parts of one and the same office; and were
always joined together, until, by corruption, they were separated. A Bishop
that was not a "Doctor," or "teacher," was not known in the world in primitive
times. It is therefore impossible, the "Doctors", in this passage, could be
distinct officers from the "Bishops," for this reason; as it had no existence
until hundreds of years after its being penned. It is far more reasonable to
suppose, the same order of officers are here called both "Bishops" and
"Doctors," as pointing us to both parts of their office, "exercising
episcopacy" and "preaching," or "teaching."

THE only remaining places in Hermas, in which episcopacy is sought for, are
Vis. III. Sect. IX. "I say unto you who are set over the church, and love the
first seats." Mand. XII. Sect. VII. "The earthly spirit exalts itself, and
will have the first chair." Simil. VI. Sect. VII. "They are such -- as had some
envy and strife among themselves for principality and dignity." The plea here
is, though Hermas blames all contention about "precedence;" yet he plainly
supposes, at the same time, a first or chief seat; some superior place in the
church, proper to persons of a superior rank or order; such as Bishops in that,
and succeeding ages.

TO which I would say, it is very plain, from these passages in Hermas, that
there was an assuming ambitious spirit then prevailing among those, who were
"set over the church," which "earthly spirit," as he terms it, he cautions
against, as what ought not to be encouraged. But that he supposes, when he
warns against "pride, envy, and a love of the first seats," there were any
officers in the church of a rank or order superior to that of Presbyters, there
is no just ground to think. When Hermas dehorts from "loving the first seats,
desiring the first chair, contending for principality and dignity;" he
undoubtedly intends, by all these phrases, one and the same thing: that is to
say, he had it in view to discountenance that proud, ambitious spirit, which
reigned in some; unreasonably pushing them on to aspire after superiority and
precedence. It does not appear to have been his aim to insinuate a superiority
of order between Bishops and Presbyters; but to check the growing vanity of
those, who, being of one and the same rank, yet sought for pre-eminence, and
strove to get exalted above their brethren. The temper of the persons Hermas
here finds fault with, seems to have been much the same with that, which the
Apostles discovered when they contended, "who among them should be greatest:"
or, rather, like that of Diotrephes, of whom it is said, "that he loved to have
the pre-eminence;" or (as the word Philoproteuein signifies) "loved to hold the
first place." But, as it is no argument, that there was among the Apostles any
superiority of order, because they affected some to be greatest; or, that there
was a like superior office in the church, to which a chief seat was
appropriated, because Diotrephes was of an aspiring haughty spirit: so neither
is it any argument of the same thing, that Hermas blames the same spirit, and
warns against it.

NOR if, in the days of Hermas, there had been a known first seat, or chief
chair, appropriated to some special person, would it at once follow from hence,
that there was a SUPERIORITY OF ORDER between Bishops and Presbyters. Hermas,
to be sure, neither plainly mentions, or tacitly suggests, such a thing; nor
makes any application of these seats to this purpose. And as a chief seat, or
first chair, is commonly assigned to the moderators of all ecclesiastical
consistories, whether greater or less, who yet have no PRIMACY OF POWER, no
SUPERIORITY OF OFFICE, but merely for the sake of decency and order, this might
be the case here: though I am rather inclined to think, that nothing more is
intended by these phrases, than an indication of that pride and vanity, which
too much prevailed, even in those early days, among the officers of the
christian church; which Hermas therefore endeavors, by proper considerations,
to restrain and curb.

CLEMENT OF ROME.
His character, writings, and testimonies from them, with observations and
remarks.
THE account we have in the "Recognitions" falsely ascribed to this Clement, of
his noble birth and parentage; his being sent by his father Faustinus to be a
student at Athens; the manner and circumstances of his conversion; his
instruction under Barnabas; his baptism by the Apostle Peter, together with the
various adventures of some of his nearest relatives I shall pass over in
silence: not looking upon that supposititious piece of authority sufficient to
encourage a belief of these things.

NOR is it absolutely certain, that this is that Clement, of whom we read in
the fourth chapter to the Philippians; though, as we know of no one under this
name, to whom this text may be so well applied, the conjecture in which the
generality of learned writers are agreed, seems no ways improbable, that he is
the person there intended: especially, considering the ancient fathers do
either expressly call him the scripture-Clement, or so describe him as
naturally to point our thoughts to this father, rather than any other of the
same name. Irenaeus speaks of him as one that "had seen the Apostles, conversed
with them, and attended on their preaching." Origin, Eusebius, and Jerome do all
of them directly take notice of him, as the Clement "spoken of in scripture."
And if this was he, the honorable mention an inspired pen makes of him, as "an
Apostle's fellow-laborer in the gospel, and one whose name was in the book of
life," is a very recommending circumstance, and cannot well fail of giving us a
favorable opinion of any genuine writing, we may meet with under his name.

BUT however this be, he was a person anciently had in great veneration. Scarce
any of the first fathers are more frequently mentioned in antiquity, or their
names remembered in higher expressions of respect and honor. Clement of
Alexandria speaks of him in the style of "an Apostle"; Origin (or Ruffin his
translator) calls him "the faithful Clement"; the author of "the questions and
answers" ascribed to Justin Martyr, "the blessed Clement;" Jerome, "an
apostolical man."

HE is said to have been Bishop of Rome: though It must be observed here, we
shall be much mistaken, if, from his being spoken of in the style of Bishop, we
should imagine him like one of our English diocesans. It is indeed probable
enough, the ancients, that call him Bishop, after the episcopal power and
grandeur had arose to some height, might, by this appellation, mean such a kind
of ecclesiastic as the Bishop was in their day. But this is no argument that he
was so, either in reality, or in the esteem of the more primitive fathers. We
shall afterward see it to be the truth, that, until toward the close of the
second century, Bishops and Presbyters were only different names for one and
the same order of officers in the christian church, and promiscuously used just
in the same manner, as in the Apostles days: upon which account, when Clement
is spoken of as Bishop of Rome, it amounts to no more than if he had been
called the Pastor, or one of the Presbyters of that church. Agreably Irenaeus,
in mentioning the persons that succeeded in the roman church, sometimes does it
under the name of Bishops, and sometimes under the names of Presbyters;
evidently using these names promiscuously, as signifying one and the same order
of church officers. This will be fully shown in its proper place.

BUT though he was Bishop, or Pastor, of the church of Rome, yet the particular
time of his entering upon this charge is matter of great difficulty; as is also
the exact place he bears in the order of succession: the ancient fathers being
so strangely divided in their accounts upon this head. Tertullian derives the
succession from Peter; and makes Clement his immediate successor. The author of
the "apostolical constitutions" places at the head of the succession the
Apostle Paul, as well as Peter; and make Linus to succeed Paul, and Clement
Peter; but not until after the death of Linus. Irenaeus and Eusebius, besides
Linus, name Anacletus before Clement; giving the order thus, Linus, Anacletus,
Clement. And, after the days of Eusebius, still greater confusion is to be seen
in the catalogues of this succession. In some Anacletus is expunged, and Cletus
placed in his room; while others retain both Cletus and Anacletus. And the
order in which these are placed, is much varied. In some the line is seen
running thus, Linus, Clement, Cletus, Anacletus. In others, Linus, Cletus,
Clement, Anacletus. And again in others, Linus, Cletus, Anacletus, Clement. And
agreably the later Greeks (as Bishop Pearson observes from Cotelerius) do call
Clement, sometimes the second, and sometimes the third Bishop of Rome.

IN such confusion is the line, in one of the greatest and most celebrated
churches in primitive antiquity: upon which the learned Stillingfleet
pleasantly observes, "The succession here is as muddy as Tyber itself." Nor
would the remark Dr. Cave makes upon the writers of the Romish church, be less
pertinent, if we should apply it to those of the English: "They are (says he)
involved in an inextricable labyrinth about the first four Bishops of this (the
Roman) see; scarce two of them, of any note, bringing in the same account." And
after all that has been, or can be said, perhaps, there is no way of
accommodating this matter, but by supposing Linus, Cletus, and Clement to be
Bishops of Rome, not successively, but at the same time: which, though it
breaks in upon the unity of the Episcopate, gives no just occasion for terror,
since the old maxim, "one Bishop one altar," does not appear to be sacred and
inviolable, either from reason, scripture, or antiquity.

I CANNOT help digressing so far here, as to insert a few words from the
judicious Dr. Calamy. If (says he) such confusion reigns here, (in the
succession at Rome) where one would apprehend the matter to be clearest, how
weak is it to place our whole dependence on these sort of tables? How poor a
foundation do those Gentlemen choose to build upon, who lay their main stress on
their derivation from the Roman table, in proof of their ministerial authority?
Were it not a thousand times more candid, and ingenuous, to confess we are in
the dark, and left at uncertainty, than to make pompous boasts, the ground of
which examined, vanish from under us? These sort of pretenses to apostolical
right, and apostolical tradition, backed with the tables of succession, in the
several churches, make, I confess, a mighty noise, and may dazzle the eyes of
the weak, and pass for a justification with those that have the civil authority
on their side, which may seem to give them validity: but they disappear,
whenever they are examined in cold blood, and viewed naked as they are
themselves. When we make the best of them we can, Eusebius is the main author
that we have to depend on for the credit of these tables. And his account of
the succession, in the several churches, is made up mostly of conjectures at
three hundred years distance from apostolical times, vouched by uncertain
authors. And where he has left vacancies, Nicephorus Callistus, and Simeon the
Metaphrast, and other such historical tinkers, as Bishop Stillingfleet
pleasantly calls them, have taken effectual care to fill them up. -- He that
from the blind, broken, and uncertain tables of succession, that are
transmitted to us in the records of antiquity, can infer the necessity of
episcopal, and the invalidity of presbyterian ordination, must either have a
strong faith, or a predominant fancy. If they cannot be cleared, it is vain to
argue from them: but if they can, they will serve us as much as they will them.
But to return.

BEING Bishop of Rome, he was a constant, laborious preacher of the word, and
dispenser of gospel ordinances to that church. For this is the most just and
true idea of a faithful Bishop or Pastor in primitive times. The name Bishop
was not then looked upon so much a title of honor, as implying in it great
watchfulness, labor and pains: and this, not in "inspecting and governing
inferior clergymen," but in "feeding the flock of Christ" with the word and
sacraments. Nor is there a fact more unquestionably clear, from the whole
strain of primitive antiquity, than that it was the stated, known, perpetual
employment of all that were Bishops, to exercise themselves chiefly in this
work. And this true scripture notion of the work of a Bishop, was so generally
prevalent, even after the distinction between Bishop and Presbyter took place,
that the fourth council of Carthage came into such a decree as that, "the
Bishop shall wholly occupy himself in reading, and praying, and preaching the
word." But the reader that has a mind to see this matter indisputably cleared
up, has it done ready to his hand by that wonder of learning, the great
Jameson, in his "Nazianzeni Querela" and his "Cyprianus Isotimus".

It is common in modern authors to read of this Clement as banished from his
church, and at last dying a martyr for the cause of Christ: though these
things, to say the least, are matters of great uncertainty. None of the fathers
of the three first centuries, that I can find, make mention of him as an exile,
or martyr. And what is pretty extraordinary, Eusebius, who is commonly very
particular in these cases, is wholly silent upon this head. If we may depend on
the credit of Cotelerius, Ruffin, who lived in latter end of the fourth
century, is the first that speaks of him as honored with martyrdom. After him
indeed Simeon Metaphrastes has exhibited to the world a most particular and
formal account of his "banishment to Cherson to dig in the marble quarries and
labor in the mines; and afterward of his being carried and thrown into the
bottom of the sea." St. Ephraem also, Bishop of Cherson, relates several very
extraordinary miracles, that followed upon his being then put to death: but
these are authors too much given to the romantic strain to place any dependence
on; especially in matters so distant from their own times, about which the
first fathers are wholly silent. Nor is it much to the honor of the learned,
and otherwise valuable, Dr. Cave, that he takes so much notice, with seeming
faith, of these and such like plainly fabulous relations: though I could wish,
he he had not, upon this account, been quite so severely censured by my Lord
Barrington, when he says of him, "that he has little that is not common and
obvious, besides some idle and legendary stories, with which he abounds.

BUT whatever was the manner of his death, Eusebius places it in the third of
Trajan, that is, in the year of our Lord one hundred, after he had been Bishop
of Rome nine years: which, whether it be the true account, I leave to others to
determine.

THE writings that go under the name of this Clement are many, and may be
distinguished into GENUINE, DOUBTFUL, and SUPPOSITITIOUS.

GENUINE.
IN this rank is placed that excellent epistle to the Corinthians, concerning
which the great Du-pin has dropped that remark, "next to the holy scripture, it
is, in my opinion, one of the most eminent records of antiquity." It was
certainly so accounted by the primitive fathers; who scarce mention it without
some epithet of honor. It is called by Irenaeus (as Dr. Cave translates the
phrase) "the most excellent and absolute writing;" by Eusebius "the truly great
and admirable epistle:" and what the same author adds, may further assure us of
its high value in ancient times."; this epistle we have known to have been
publicly read in many churches, both of old, and among ourselves also." Nor is
it unworthy observation, that the only copy of this epistle, known in the
world, was found written in the same volume with the sacred books of the
new testament: to which happy circumstance we may ascribe it, that we are
favored with it, after it had been bewailed as lost for many ages.

THE manner of its discovery and publication was thus. -- When Cyrill,
Patriarch of Constantinople, returned from his Alexandrian seat in Egypt, he
brought with him a large collection of books; among which was an ancient copy
of the old and new testament, wrote by the hand of Thecla, a noble Egyptian
virgin, about the time of the first nicene council. This he sent as a present
to King Charles the first, by Sir Thomas Roe, his Majesty's then Ambassador at
the Ottoman court, upon his return into England. At the end of this copy was
added this epistle of Clement, wrote by the same hand; though something broken
and defaced: which, when the learned Patrick Young, his Majesty's
library keeper, had discovered, he was commanded by the King, to make it
public; which he accordingly did at Oxford, in the year 1633, with a latin
translation, and learned notes.

THE occasion of Clement's writing this epistle, we may learn from Irenaeus,
who says, "In the days of Clement, the church of Rome wrote a very pathetical
letter [they are said to have wrote it, though it was penned by Clement,
because it was wrote and sent in their name] to restore them to peace."
Eusebius exhibits the like testimony, when he tells us, "that Clement wrote
this epistle from Rome to Corinth, when sedition was raised among the
Corinthians." He adds a few words after, "that there was, at that time, a
sedition among the Corinthians, Hegesippus is a witness. Nor can any one that
reads this epistle be at a loss as to the truth of this. It is plain, through
the whole of it, there was a shameful disturbance in the church; and this
chiefly against its Presbyters: some of the people being vainly conceited of
their spiritual gifts, and therefore rising up against their guides and
teachers. Now, to heal this difference, and restore peace and good order, this
epistle was principally designed; and to this end it is admirably well adapted:
being wrote in a plain and unaffected style; yet with great strength and
perspicuity, and evidently breathing the true spirit and genius of the
apostolic age.

THE epistle is wrote in the name of the church of Rome to the church of
Corinth: upon which a noted author pertinently remarks, "Had he (Clement) known
himself to be the infallible judge of controversies, to whose sentence the
whole christian world was bound to stand, invested with a supreme,
unaccountable power, from which there lay no appeal, we might have expected to
hear him argue at another rate." And as there is no mention in this epistle of
any single person, as the head and Governor of the Corinthian church, I cannot
forbear adding another remark, which seems full as natural; namely, That if
there had been, at that time, at the head of this church, an ecclesiastical
officer, in any measure, resembling one of our modern Bishops, it is altogether
unaccountable, how both Clement and the church of Rome should treat him with
such neglect, as to be totally silent about him. It would certainly look
strange, and be resented ill, if one of our present Bishops should be so
shamefully overlooked; his church complained of, rebuked, exhorted, and
directed to a proper method of peace: and all, without referring the matter to
the Bishop, or indeed taking the least notice of him. -- But of this we may
hear more afterward.

THE exact time, when this epistle was wrote, is not easy to be stated; as we
may be fully satisfied from the disagreement of the most learned writers on
this head. Mr. Young's thought is, that it was wrote about two years before his
death, in the time that he supposes him to be under banishment. Dr. Cave fixes
the period a few years sooner, a little after the Dioclesian persecution.
Vendelinus places it in the year 95, when he apprehends this persecution was at
its height. Cotelerius agrees with him as to the year, but rather thinks the
persecution was drawing to an end. But the conjecture of Grotius, Dodwell,
Archbishop Wake, and some others, makes it to have been wrote much sooner;
between the latter end of Nero's reign, and the destruction of Jerusalem, that
is, between the years 64 and 70; which they very much ground on that passage in
the epistle, where they suppose the Jewish priesthood and Levitical
ministrations are spoken of as yet continuing. -- But as it would be a going
too far out of my way to consider the particular reasons, on which these
conjectures are built, I have barely referred to them, without pretending to
say which are most probable: but leaving it to the reader to examine the
matter, and determine as he sees fit:

THE only color of an objection against the genuiness of this epistle, is
taken from the "fable of the phaenix," which Clement particularly relates, and
then uses to represent the credibility of the doctrine of the resurrection. But
it is not worthy of much notice. This was a story, however ridiculous,
generally believed in that day, by the learned as well as unlearned, both Jews
and Gentiles. And as the account of that "bird's reviving out of the ashes of
the body consumed by fire," was capable of being improved as an illustration of
the doctrine of the resurrection, where is the great absurdity of its being
applied to this purpose? And if Clement had himself really believed this story,
being too far carried away with the prevailing opinion, what greater infirmity
would it argue, than the best and most valuable men always have been, and now
are, subject to. The learned reader, that is curious, may be gratified by
reading what is said upon the "fable of the phaenix," to silence the objections
against this epistle of Clement, on account of his making use of it, in the
notes in the body of the epistle, and in the prefixed judgment of some of the
greatest antiquaries, as they may be seen in Le Clere's edition of Cotelerius's
"apostolical Fathers."


GROTIUS's thoughts concerning this epistle, in his letter to Bignorius, are
worth transcribing here. "I have (says he) read it over and over again, with
the utmost care and diligence, and cannot think any other, than that it is the
same epistle which Photius read: in whose day, since it was in being, it is not
wonderful, it has been preserved to our's, among the sacred writings. Neither
see I any reason, either why the epistle which Photius read, should not be the
same which Jerome had, and before him Clement of Alexandria, and Irenaeus, yet
nearer to the time of Clement of Rome: or why we should ascribe it to any
other, than Clement of Rome himself; since this has been handed down to us,
with so great and universal consent." To which I would only add, there is no
one ancient piece, we have greater reason, both from its internal character,
and external evidence, to depend upon as genuine. It is perhaps the most
frequently quoted, by the more primitive Fathers, of any uninspired book;
between all which quotations, and the present copy of this epistle, there is a
wonderful agreement. And it carries in it none of those marks of impostor that
are to be met with, in some other pieces, and these too, palmed upon even this
very Clement: but every thing is delivered both as to matter, and manner, as
might be expected from one that lived in the apostolic age, and was a worthy
faithful laborer in the vineyard of Christ.

DOUBTFUL.
IN this class I place the "second epistle to the Corinthians," ascribed to
this Clement. It is unquestionably an ancient piece; and as it contains a pious
exhortation to an holy life, without the mixture of any thing, that I at
present remember, unbecoming the character of Clement, or dissonant from the
age in which he lived, I see no reason absolutely to condemn it as
supposititious.

AS the known ecclesiastical historian speaks of the first epistle as the only
undoubted one, and declares concerning the second, what appears, even to this
day, to be fact, that it was "neither used, nor alleged, by the ancient
writers;" if we may not, with Jerome and Photius, plainly reject it, we may, at
least, put it up on the foot of uncertain authority. -- But I need not say any
more, there being extant only a fragment of this epistle; in which we meet with
nothing that bears relation to the present controversy.

SPURIOUS.
THE pieces of this sort, ascribed to Clement, as their author, or the penman
of others, are the "apostolical constitutions," the "apostolical canons," the
"recognitions," the "Clementines" with the "prefixed epistle of Clement to
James," and the "epitome of the acts of Peter."

AS to the constitutions; Mr. Whiston, the latest patron of them, has given
them the most sacred character; pretending, that they are the work of even the
whole body of the Apostles, and penned by Clement as their amanuensis: than
which, perhaps, there never was an opinion attended with more, or greater
absurdities. It is obvious to all, in any measure, versed in the ancient
writings, that there is a total silence of all primitive antiquity about these
constitutions. And however Mr. Whiston's authorities out of the fathers have
swelled even into a volume, yet that they are only a vast heap of
misapplications is so evident, that no one, so far as I can learn, has ever
thought it worth while to be at the pains to take them out of that strangly
false light, in which he has placed them: nor is there any need of it, there
being enough in the books themselves to make it clearly evident, that no one of
the apostles had any hand in writing them; yea, that they never were in being,
at least as we now have them, until the church of Christ was gone far into
corruption and degeneracy. A few of those many things, which are open to every
one's observation, upon the bare reading of them, and that are sufficient
indications of this, I shall here insert.

THE manner in which they speak of Bishops is very extraordinary. They
represent them as "bearing the character of God among men;" as "set over all
men, Priests, Kings, Princes, fathers, sons, masters, and all that are subject
to them." They command them to "judge with like authority as God himself." They
call the Bishop, "the minister of the word, the keeper of knowledge, the
mediator between God and his people in religious worship, the master of piety,
next unto God, the christian's father, his Prince, Governor, King, Potentate;"
and declare, that he is to be "honored next to God as an earthly God." They
speak of Bishops, as those that are to be "venerated and honored with all kind
of honor;" as those who have "received from God the power of life and death, in
judging sinners, and condemning them to eternal flames, and absolving those who
are converted." They exhort the people to "reverence their Bishops as Kings,
and to honor them as their Lord."

THIS is a taste of the spirit, and style, in which Bishops are here spoken of;
between which, and the style and spirit of the truly apostolical writings, upon
the same subject, there cannot be a greater contrariety. Let a man read, over
and over again, the genuine writings of the apostles, and he shall ever find
what they say concerning Bishops, to be delivered in plain simple language,
perfectly suited to the spiritual nature of that kingdom of Christ, in which
they are officers: whereas, these "constitutions" so strangely differ from the
apostolic genius, that, if the writings of the most corrupt ages be looked
into, we shall not be able to find in them any expressions, more unboundedly
aggrandising Bishops, and claiming for them higher degrees of honor and
reverence.

AND if we turn to the epistle of Clement, the pretended amanuensis of the
Apostles, we shall find as great a dissonancy between that, and these
constitutions: which is truly wonderful, if he had such an intimate
acquaintance with them, as he must have had, if he was the penman of them. Nor
can it, in any rational way, be accounted for, that, in writing to the
Corinthians, he should wholly pass by this most valuable and canonical part of
sacred scripture, (as it must certainly be, if, as is said, it was composed by
the whole body of Apostles) which yet he does; and this, when it was far better
adapted to answer the design of his "epistle," than all the other books of the
new testament put together. For here, the boundaries, not only between Bishops
and Presbyters, but between Presbyters and Laics, are most punctually fixed;
their duty to them prescribed; their obedience secured; and, in a word, the
whole controversy among the Corinthians, the occasion of Clement's writing to
them, entirely settled. And yet, he takes not the least notice of these
"constitutions," though, from the mouth of the Apostles, he had penned them;
while* at the same time, he makes great use of the books both of the old and
new testament, to fetch in arguments to his purpose. But to proceed.

IN these "constitutions," we have forms of prayer prescribed for a great
variety of occasions: particularly for both sacraments, "baptism and the Lord's
supper;" for the "ordination of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Readers,
Singers," and so on. But that these were, any of them, ever used in the
primitive church, there are no footsteps in antiquity: nor is there the least
reference made to them, by any truly ancient Father, upon any occasion: which
is altogether unaccountable, if, as is pretended, they were composed, even by
the whole body of Apostles; and this, purposely for the use of the christian
church.

WE here read of the use of "oil in baptism;" nor is it allowed to be valid
without a prayer for the efficacy of it on the baptized person: and he is
represented, without this prayer, as "descending into the water to no better
purpose than a mere Jew;" and as "washing off the defilements of his body, but
not of his soul."

WE have here prescribed an "office for the dead;" in which supplication is
made for the deceased, that God would "pardon his sins, both involuntary and
voluntary, and receive his soul to be with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob."

WE are here commanded to attend "prayer at church," not only daily, but no
less than "six times a day;" the particular seasons for which, together with
the trifling reasons on which they are grounded, are all particularly specified.

PARTICULAR care is here taken about the "form and situation of churches;" an
appointment made, that they shall be "oblong and facing the east." Magnificence
in churches is also commanded, the "Bishops throne" adjusted, the place where
he is to stand appointed, namely, "the altar;" where he must appear clothed
with a "shining splendid vestment;" and before he begins prayer, he is ordered,
in the sight of all the people, "to make upon his forehead the sign of the
cross." The Deacons are commanded to wait on each side of the altar, with a
"fan in their hands made of thin membranes, or the feathers of a peacock, or of
fine cloth, to drive away the small animals from the sacramental cups." A very
minute account is also exhibited of "places to sit in" in churches, and the
"junior ordered to be turned of his place," if he does not yield it to a "more
honorable stranger;" together with other like instances of ceremony and good
manners.

WE are here directed to "observe days in honor to deceased saints;" to
accompany "their funerals with singing," and to "assemble in the dormitories of
the martyrs, and there to celebrate the holy eucharist."

PARTICULAR mention is here made of "Subdeacons, Readers, Singers, Confessors,
Porters, Ministers, Virgins, Exercists," as BEARING OFFICE in the church. We
read also of "Energumens, Catechumens," together with a great number of "fasts
and feasts," and a deal more such trumpery, which was absosolutely unknown in
the apostolic age; but visible enough in the church, in after days, when she
had become superstitious and corrupt. And this I should now particularly and
largely have shown, but that I must have taken considerable pains, in my own
apprehension, to little purpose; not doubting, but the bare narrative of the
above articles will be thought by most, a full justification of those, who
discard all pretense to these books, as apostolically composed.

THIS opinion then being thrown aside, it is not easy to conceive of these
"constitutions" in their present form, as any other, than the work of some very
bold and impudent impostor; since he personates the Apostles with all freedom;
speaking in the name, sometimes of one, sometimes of another, and sometimes of
them all; with the greatest solemnity and formality commanding this thing, and
prohibiting another. Instances of this are so frequently to be met with, that
it is needless to adduce any. And it demonstrably argues, that the author was a
vile cheat, and ought accordingly to be so thought of.

AS to the time in which these books may be supposed to come abroad in the
world, I know of none (those few excepted who plead for them as penned by
Clement) who pretend to fix the period higher than the latter end of the
second, or the beginning of the third century. Bishop Beveridge has expended no
small labor to give date to these "constitutions," about the close of the
second, or the beginning of the third century: but to no valuable purpose. For,
should it be even allowed, that they were then in being, it is absolutely
certain, they are not NOW, as they must have been THEN. And, unless some way
could be pointed out (which has never yet been done) to distinguish the
ORIGINAL CONTENTS, from the MULTIPLICITY OF CORRUPTIONS that have crept into
them, they can be of no real service; as there is no knowing what is GENUINE,
and what the WORK of senseless and knavish INTERPOLAORTS.
But whether those, who thus fix the time, are in the right; or others, who
bring it down to the fourth or fifth century, I shall not dispute. Probably,
they were not complete, as we now have them, at once; but have been, from time
to time, corrected, altered, augmented, according to the various customs of
different ages and countries.

MR. Whiston pretends the same of the "canons" that he does of the
constitutions; that they were wrote by Clement, as the work of the whole
apostolic body: but there does not appear any reason, why the same judgment
should not be passed upon them, that we have given of the constitutions, in
point of their being apostolically composed. As for myself, nothing more was
needful to convince me of this, after I had once read them: so many of them
being either trifling in themselves, or inconsistent with the truly apostolical
writings, or containing such things as were not known in the church until ages
after the apostles. I shall not think it beyond my design, to present here to
the reader's view a few of them.

CAN. II. "If any Bishop or Presbyter, besides what our Lord has appointed for
sacrifice, shall offer upon the altar other things; as honey, or milk, or cider
instead of wine, or things made by the confectioner, or birds, or animals, or
pulse: let him be deposed. Excepting ears of corn, or grapes, it is not lawful
to offer any thing upon the altar, save only oil for the holy lamp, and incense
of thyme in divine oblation." Those who are in the least acquainted with the
writings of the apostolic age, and the after corrupt ages of the church, can be
at no loss to determine, in which of these ages, it is most likely, this canon
should be formed. And the curious reader, that will be at the pains to run over
the learned Dodwell's "book of incense," cannot well help being satisfied,
particularly as to the article of offering incense, that it was absolutely
unknown in the church, for some ages after the death of the Apostles.

CAN. V. "If any Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, shall celebrate with the Jews,
the holy day of easter before the vernal aequinox, let him be deposed." The
controversy between the eastern and western churches, about the time of keeping
easter, that happened in the second century, long after the death of the
Apostles, might, by this canon, have been settled: and yet, in the whole
management of this dispute, (which was prodigiously fierce) it was never once
appealed to, nor the least hint given, by either party, as if any such canon
was in being: which is certainly a very strange thing, if, before this dispute,
this cannon had been made, and committed to writing by direction from the
Apostles: especially considering, the chief managers of this dispute were the
Pastors of the several churches, the most learned and famous among them; who
must have known of this canon, if it had been in being; and cannot be supposed
not to have made use of it, since it was an apostolical one, and must at once
have ended the controversy.

CAN. XVII. "Forbids any one's being made a Clergyman, who has made himself an
eunuch; and commands every Clergyman, who has so made himself, to be deposed:
and, if he be a Laic, to be separated for three years:" which looks too much
like the production of after ages, when this practice became so common, as to
need some restraints to be laid upon it, to be admitted for apostolical.

CAN. XIX. "Of those who were single persons, when they were made Clergymen, we
command, that only Readers and Singers may take wives." A person can scarce
read this canon, without turning his thoughts to a scripture passage, which
founds as if, by special foreknowledge, it had been purposely inserted, to
confront the authority of these and such like decrees. Says one of the Apostles
of our Lord, "Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times, some
shall depart from the faith, -- FORBIDING TO MARRY."

CAN. XXVII. "Subjects all Bishops, of every province, to one that is first
among them, or the Metropolitan." But as nothing is more clearly evident, than
that Metropolitans were not known, in the church, until ages after the
Apostles; to these times this canon ought to be referred.

I SHALL only add two or three more canons, which seem to be of trifling
consideration, and not to merit a formal decree of the whole body of Apostles.

CAN. LXIX. "If any Clergyman has laughed at one that is dumb, or blind, or
lame in his feet, let him be separated: so also let the Layman."

CAN. LXX. "If any one has a devil, he may not be made a Clergyman: nor may he
pray with the faithful."

CAN. LXXI. "He that is deaf, dumb, or blind, let him not be made a Bishop."

HAVING thus offered what may be thought sufficient to evince the absurdity of
that opinion, which makes these canons the composure of the Apostles, I shall
not be so much concerned to inquire into other things of less importance. Who
the author of these canons was, is a matter of the greatest uncertainty. But
whether he was an impostor, that designed to impose upon the world, by putting
them forth under the name of the Apostles: or whether they are only the decrees
of ancient councils collected together in this form, by some person or persons
of honest intention; and styled apostolical, not as if they had been made by
the Apostles, but as containing things, in their apprehension, consonant to the
rules delivered by the Apostles; or as made up of usages and traditions
supposed, to be handed down from them: I say, whether of these opinions are the
truest, I shall not at present debate. Nor is it a matter agreed on, when these
canons first made their appearance in the world. Monsieur D'aille does not
allow them any being, until toward the fifth century: in opposition whereto,
Bishop Beveridge has ransacked all antiquity to confirm the opinion, that they
ought to be placed in the third century. But instead of examining the arguments
of these authors to know which are in the right, I shall rather observe
concerning both the apostolical constitutions, and canons, as a conclusion of
what I shall offer about them,

THAT however those learned writers, who have given the world their thoughts
about these books, may differ in matters of smaller importance; as the time,
manner, and occasion of their being wrote; yet, with great unanimity, they
reject them as the work of inspired Apostles. And indeed, Mr. Whiston
(depending on the credit of Dr. Smallbroke) is the first person, either ancient
or modern, so far as we are informed by ecclesiastical history, that ever had
this opinion of them: Even Bovius, and Turrianus, (to use the language of that
author) who first recommended the constitutions to the learned world, how
vainly soever they spent their time in writing forced and unnatural apologies
for them, were not so fond of novelty, as to suppose they were truly
apostolical, and the product of divine inspiration. Much less did they ever
dream of so high a degree of inspiration, as renders them (according to Mr.
Whiston) more sacred than the authentic gospels themselves. All that they
pretended to assert was, that Clemens Romanus had collected some apostolical
traditions, which he formed into the eight books of constitutions, then
retrieved and published by them. They, therefore, agreably to their hypothesis,
weak and precarious as it was, labored to establish the antiquity of the
constitutions, as a body of ecclesiastical discipline; but expressly disclaimed
all pretensions to divine authority, or to their being a sacred rule of life
and manners. He goes on in a manner that I shall think worth transcribing:
Indeed their principal design was to oppose those of the reformation by them.
And that it was so, both those warm patrons of the constitutions very frankly
acknowledge. Bovius, who translated them first into latin, and commented upon
them, dedicated his work to the Pope's legates that presided in the council of
Trent: In the epistle dedicatory to whom, he acquaints us, that, upon a recital
of some passages of the clementine constitutions, at a meeting of the fathers
of the council of Trent, those passages were thought so very serviceable to
what was there transacting in that synod, as to give the first hint to the
publication of the whole body of the constitutions. After which, Bovius
asserts, that there is scarce any thing that is opposed by the Heretics, that
is, Protestants, as crept into the church by error and superstition, but may be
defended by the authority of these constitutions, and shown to be of primitive
antiquity. Turrianus, likewise, who made these constitutions a considerable
part of his studies, assures us, that they were thought very beneficial to the
church, that is, the church of Rome, by the censors of books in the council of
Trent; and that their most grave and weighty judgment of them was sealed, and
laid up at Rome, in the public records of the inquisition. Again, he affirms,
that nothing of antiquity could be published more proper for that age, and
better adapted to the confutation of those innovators, the Protestants. He
adds, That these books were providentially published in that age, when there
was the greatest occasion for them, as witnesses against those of the
reformation: (at whom he rails very plentifully) and that it seemed, nothing
more was either wanting, or could be expected for their conviction. That these
books were sent by God to triumph over these Protestants, and to show the world
how justly they were condemned in the council of Trent.

DR. Smallbroke adds, the reason that he transcribed these passages from Bovius
and Turrianus was, That the reader might be rightly informed of the avowed
design of publishing the clementine constitutions, even the confutation of the
reformed religion, And I have thus transcribed the passages from him, because
he styles himself "Canon-Residentiary of Hereford, Treasurer of the church of
Landaff, and Chaplain to his Grace, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury."

THE next piece, that presents itself under the name of Clement, is the
"recognitions," as in the translation of Ruffin. But it is so empty of every
thing savoring of the simplicity of the first and pure ages of christianity,
and so full of fable, and feigned conferences about fate, and the influence of
the stars, and heavenly constellations, and such like ridiculous stuff, that it
is universally placed below the time of Clement, as altogether unworthy of him.

AND the same may be said of the other writings, we have mentioned under the
head of supposititious, if indeed they may be allowed to be called different
ones. The "clementines" are thought, by some, to be that "other edition of the
recognitions," Ruffin mentions in his preface to Gaudentius, prefixed to the
recognitions he made a version of: since they so exactly agree with the
character he there gives of them, differing in some things from that he
translated, but the same in many. And for the "epitome of the acts of Peter,"
Dr. Cave calls it "a third edition of the recognitions," or rather an "abstract
of both the recognitions and clementines," though keeping more closely to the
latter. But whether these are different compositions, or only one and the same
piece, something varied and differently modelled, it matters not; so long as we
have the concurrence of the main body of the learned world in throwing them
aside as evidently supposititious.

TESTIMONIES from CLEMENT's first epistle to the Corinthians.
The INSCRIPTION to the epistle.

"The church of God which is at Rome, [ e paroikousa Romen] to the church of
God which is at Corinth, [ e paroikousa Korinthon] elect, sanctified, by the
will of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: grace and peace from the Almighty
God, by Jesus Christ, be multipled unto you."

BRETHREN,

THE sudden and unexpected dangers and calamities that have fallen upon us,
have, we fear, made us the more slow in our consideration of those things which
you inquired of us; as also of that wicked and detestable SEDITION, so
unbecoming the elect of God, which a few heady and self-willed men have
fomented to such a degree of madness, that your venerable and renowned name, so
worthy of all men to be beloved, is greatly blasphemed thereby. For who that
has ever been among you, has not experimented the firmness of your faith, and
its fruitfulness in all good works? and admired the temper and moderation of
your religion in Christ? -- For ye did all things without respect of persons,
and walked according to the laws of God: being subject to those who had the
rule over you, [ upotassamenoi tois egoumenois umon,] and giving the honor that
was fiting to such as were the aged among you [ tois par umin presbuterois.] Ye
commanded the young men [ Neois] to think those things that were modest and
grave. The women, ye exhorted, to do all things with an unblameable, and
seemly, and pure conscience; loving their own husbands as was fiting." --

HE goes on, in the next section, commending their former christian good temper
and conduct; and then proceeds to tell them of their faults, in the following
words,

SECT. III. -- So was fulfilled that which is written, my beloved did eat and
drink, he was enlarged, and waxed fat, and he kicked. From hence came
emulation, and envy, and strife, and sedition; persecution and disorder, war
and captivity. So they who were of no renown lifted up themselves against the
honorable; those of no reputation, against those that were in respect; the
foolish against the wise; the young men against the aged [ oi neoi epi tous
presbuterous.] Therefore righteousness and peace are departed from you, because
every one has forsaken the fear of God." --

SECT. XXI. -- "The Spirit of the Lord is a candle, searching out the inward
parts of the belly." Let us therefore consider how near he is to us; and how
that none of our thoughts, or reasonings, which we frame within our selves, are
hid from him. It is therefore just, that we should not forsake our rank, by
doing contrary to his will. Let us choose to offend a few foolish and
inconsiderate men, lifted up, and glorying in their own pride, rather than God.
Let us reverence our Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood was given for us; let us
honor those who are set over us [ tous proegoumenous emon;] let us respect the
aged that are among us [ tous presbuterous emon;] let us instruct the younger
men in the discipline and fear of the Lord. Our wives let us direct to do that
which is good." --

SECT. XXXVII. "Let us therefore march on, men and brethren, with all
earnestness in his holy laws. Let us consider those who fight under our earthly
Governors: how orderly, how readily, and with what exact obedience they perform
those things that are commanded them? All are not Generals, nor Colonels, nor
Captains, nor inferior officers; but every one, in his respective rank, does
what is commanded him by the King, and those who have authority over him. They
who are great cannot subsist without those that are little; nor the little
without the great. But there must be a mixture in all things, and then there
will be use and profit too. Let us, for example, take our body: the head
without the feet is nothing, neither the feet without the head. And even the
smallest members of our body are yet both necessary, and useful to the whole
body. But all conspire together, and are subject to one common use, namely, the
preservation of the whole body."

HAVING applied what he had thus said, in the two following sections, xxxviii
and xxxix, to the encouragement of good order in the church of Corinth, he goes
on.

SECT. XL. "Seeing then these things are manifest to us, it will behove us to
take care, that, looking into the depths of the divine knowledge, we do all
things in order, whatsoever our Lord has commanded us to do. And, particularly,
that we perform our offerings and service to God at their appointed seasons;
for these he has commanded to be done, not rashly and disorderly, but at
certain determinate times and hours. And therefore he has ordained, by his
supreme will and authority, both where, and by what persons, they are to be
performed: that so all things being piously done unto all well-pleasing, they
may be acceptable to him. They therefore who make their offerings at the
appointed seasons are happy, and accepted; because that, obeying the
commandments of the Lord, they are free from sin. And the same care must be had
of the persons that minister unto him. The Archbishop has printed the above
sentence in italic, to let us know, I suppose, that it is not in the original.
For it is not to be found there.
For the chief Priest [ Archiereus, high Priest] has his proper services; and
to the Priests their proper place is appointed; and to the Levites appertain
their proper ministries; and the Layman is confined within the bounds of what
is commanded to Laymen." It follows immediately,

SECT. XLI. "Let every one of you therefore, brethren, bless God in his proper
station, with a good conscience, and with all gravity, not exceeding the rule
of his service that is appointed to him. The daily sacrifices are not offered
every where; nor the peace offerings, nor the sacrifices appointed for sin and
transgressions; but only at Jerusalem: nor in any place there, but only at the
altar before the temple; that which is offered, being first diligently examined
by the High Priest, and the other ministers, we before mentioned. They
therefore who do any thing which is not agreeable to his will, are punished
with death. Consider, brethren, that by how much the better knowledge God has
vouchsafed unto us, by so much the greater danger are we exposed to." The next
words are,

SECT. XLII. "The Apostles have preached to us, from our Lord Jesus Christ;
Jesus Christ, from God. Christ therefore was sent by God, the Apostles by
Christ: so both were orderly sent, according to the will of God. For having
received their command, and being thoroughly assured by the resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and convinced by the word of God, with the fullness of the
Holy Spirit, they went abroad publishing, that "the kingdom of God was at
hand." And thus preaching through countries and cities, [ Kata Choras kai
poleis] they appointed the first fruits of their conversions to be Bishops and
Ministers Is it so visible to the mere English reader, by this translation,
that Clement is here speaking of the apostolic constitution of the TWO ORDERS
in the church, BISHOPS and DEACONS, as it is to those who are acquainted with
the original words? Can even candor itself suppose, that the word DIAKONOUS,
could, in this place, have been translated, not DEACONS, but by the general
word MINISTERS, unless upon design? Especially, when those officers are here
intended to be pointed out, which both Clement, and the scriptures, signify by
the word, DIAKONOI, DEACONS, in its appropriated sense.
[ eis episkopous kai diakonous] over such as should afterward believe, having
first proved them by the Spirit. Nor was this any new thing; seeing that, long
before, it was written concerning Bishops and Deacons [ peri episcopon kai
diakonon.] For thus says the scripture, in a certain place, "I will appoint
their overseers [ episkopous auton] in righteousness, and their ministers [
diakonous auton] in faith."

AND having, in the next, the xliiid, section, spoken of the method Moses, of
old, came into to settle the Jewish Priesthood to prevent contention, he
proceeds,

SECT. XLIV. "So likewise our Apostles knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
there should contentions arise upon the account of the ministry [ epi tou
onomatos tes episcopes. "About the name of bishopric," as the Archbishop
renders it in the margin.
] And therefore having a perfect foreknowledge of this, they appointed
persons, as we have before said, and then gave direction The Archbishop has it
in the margin, "left a lift of other chosen and approved men, who should
succeed them in the ministry."
how, when they should die, other chosen and approved men should succeed in
their ministry. Wherefore we cannot think, that those may be justly thrown out
of their ministry, who were either appointed by them, or afterward chosen by
other eminent men* with the consent of the whole church; and who have, with all
lowliness and innocence, ministered to the flock of Christ, in peace, and
without self-interest, and were for a long time commended by all. For it would
be no small sin in us, should we cast off those from their ministry, If the
word, episcopes, instead of ministry, had been translated here episcopacy, or
episcopate, it would have been more agreeable to its just import, particularly
in this place, and not have looked like a design to impose on the English
reader.
[ tes episkopes] who holily and without blame fulfill the duties of it. Blessed
are those Priests, It is not easy to conceive, why the Archbishop should here
translate PRESBUTEROI, by the word PRIESTS, unless he had it in view to keep
the English reader from seeing, in so striking a light as otherwise he would,
that Presbyters, in the account of Clement, were precisely the same order of
officers with Bishops; as they are, in the preceding line, directly said to be
"cast out of their EPISCOPACY." The slipping in here the word PRIESTS, instead
of Presbyters, obscures the light, in which this certain truth so clearly
shines in this place. It may be added, the word PRIEST is no where used by
Clement, or by any of the writers of the new testament, to signify that
officer, in the christian church, who is pointed out by the word PRESBYTER: nor
was it ever so used, until the MAN OF SIN had grown to a very considerable
height. Its use, as having the same meaning with Presbyter, though common in
the public services of the English church, took its rise from the church of
ROME, and its public offices; which reflects no great honor on it.
[ makarioi oi Presbuteroi] who, having finished their course before these
times, have obtained a perfect and fruitful dissolution: For they have no fear
lest any one should turn them out of the place which is now appointed for them.
But we see how you have put out some, who lived reputably among you, from the
ministry, which by their innocence they had adorned.

SECT. XLVII. "Take the epistle of the blessed Paul, the Apostle, into your
hands. What was it that he wrote to you, at his first preaching the gospel
among you? Verily, he did, by the Spirit, admonish you concerning himself, and
Cephas, and Apollos, because that even then ye had begun to fall into parties
and factions among yourselves. Nevertheless your partiality then led you into a
much less sin: forasmuch as ye placed your affections upon Apostles, men of
eminent reputation in the church; and upon another, who was greatly tried, and
approved of, by them. But consider, we pray you, who were they that have now
led you astray, and lessened the reputation of that brotherly love that was so
eminent among you? It is a shame, my beloved, yea a very great shame, and
unworthy of your christian profession, to hear, that the most firm and ancient
church of the Corinthians should, by one or two persons, be led into a sedition
against its Priests [ pros tous Presbuterous.] And this report is come not only
to us, but to those also that differ from us: insomuch that the name of the
Lord is blasphemed through your folly; and even ye yourselves are brought into
danger by it."

SECT. XLVIII. "Let us therefore, with all haste, put an end to this sedition;
and let us fall down before the Lord, and beseech him with tears, that he would
be favorably reconciled to us, and restore us again to a seemly and holy course
of brotherly love." --

SECT. LIVE. "Who is there among you that is generous? Who that is
compassionate? Who that has charity? Let him say, if this sedition, this
contention, and these schisms, be upon my account, I am ready to depart, to go
away whithersoever ye please, and do whatsoever ye shall command me: only, let
the flock of Christ be in peace, with the Elders that are set over it, [ meta
ton kathestamenon Presbyteron.] He that shall do this, shall get to himself a
very great honor in the Lord."

SECT. LVII. "Do ye therefore who first laid the foundation of this sedition,
submit yourselves to your Priests [ tois Presbuterois;] and be instructed unto
repentance, bending the knees of your hearts. Learn to be subject, laying aside
all proud and arrogant boasting of your tongues. For it is better for you to be
found little, and approved, in the sheepfold of Christ, than to seem to
yourselves better than others; and be cast out of his fold." --

REMARKS and OBSERVATIONS on the foregoing testimonies.
HAVING laid before the reader's view all the passages, in Clement's epistle,
that relate to the Episcopalian controversy, I shall now take particular notice
of those among them, I have met with as used to support the opinion, which
would make Bishops an order in the church distinct from, and superior to,
Presbyters: which when I have done, I shall then propose such observations, in
favor of the parity of the order of these officers, as are evidently deducible
from the whole of what Clement has said upon this point.

THE passages insisted upon to support the superiority of Bishops to
Presbyters, I shall consider without observing any other method, than the order
in which they lie in the epistle.

THE first passage I meet with, recurred to by episcopal writers, we have in

SECT. I. -- "And ye walked according to the laws of God, being subject to
those [ upotassamenoi tois egoumenois umon] who had the rule over you, and
giving the honor that was fitting [ tois par umin Presbuterois] to such as were
aged among you." To which they add those parallel words, in sect. xxi. "Let us
honor those that are set over us; [ tous proegoumenous emon] let us respect [
tous Presbuterous emon] the aged that are among us."

THESE passages, it is pleaded, afford clear evidence, that there was, in the
days of Clement, a distinction between Bishops and Presbyters. Being subject,
egoumenois umon, that is, say they, to your ecclesiastical rulers; by whom they
conclude are meant Bishops: and this, as officers distinct from Presbyters;
because it follows, paying due honor tois par umin Presbuterois; by whom, they
suppose, we are to understand, not aged men, but those officers in the church,
called Presbyters.

NOW, in order to show the invalidity of this plea, I have no need to go into
the opinion of the learned Salmasius, and Burton, who unsterstand by these
egoumenoi, not ecclesiastical, but civil rulers; which opinion they strengthen
by observing, that this word is several times used in this epistle; but always
as signifying those, who were civil rulers. The places referred to by Salmasius
are five; and except those under consideration, they are all, in which it is
used; and it is used in them with reference to civil officers. But this
notwithstanding, as the word may, with propriety, be applied to ecclesiastical
rulers, and is frequently applied to them in the sacred books; and as there is
no hint given, any where in Clement's epistle, as if the Corinthians were
blameable for their disobedience to their civil rulers; and its chief design is
to teach them a suitable conduct, not toward those in the state, but in the
church, that were set over them: I say considering these things, I am willing
to allow, that, by these rulers, we are to understand, not those of the civil,
but ecclesiastical order: but must say, at the same time, that we have abundant
reason to conclude, they were Presbyters, and not Bishops; unless we take
Bishop and Presbyter, to be only different words for the same officer. For let
it be observed.

THERE was, at this time, a plurality of these rulers in the church of Corinth;
as is plain from the word, [ egoumenois] which is of a plural signification.
Now, it is certain, that there was a plurality of Presbyters in this church;
and Presbyters too, who had been "set over them," to whom they were commanded
to "be in SUBJECTION." Says Clement, [ upotagete tois Presbuterois] "Be ye
subject to your Presbyters." And it is observable, the same word, here joned
with Presbyters, requiring the subjection of the Corinthian church to them, is
joined also with the word, egoumenois, bespeaking the same subjection. The
interpretation is therefore smooth, natural, and consistent with the current
strain of the whole epistle, while by these egoumenois we understand the
Presbyters of the church; especially, if it be further considered, that
Presbyter-Bishops are the highest ecclesiastical rulers any where mentioned by
Clement: nor is his epistle at all acquainted with Bishops, only as they mean
officers in the church, precisely of the same rank with the Presbyters of it.

BESIDES, it may be worth a remark, the word egoumenoi is one of the names used
in scripture to point out Presbyters, or, in other words, those officers in the
christian church, that are elsewhere, in the sacred writings, promiscuously and
indifferently called either Bishops, or Presbyters. Thus in the epistle to the
Hebrews, when they are minded of their duty to their ecclesiastical guides, or
rulers, it is expressed after that manner, "Remember [ ton egoumenon umon] them
which have the rule over you, and have spoken to you the word of God." Heb.
xiii.7.
And a few verses below, "obey [ tois egoumenois umon] all them that have the
rule over you." And the epistle concludes in that style, "salute [ pantas tous
egoumenous umon] them that have the rule over you." And this use of the word,
in this epistle, is the rather to be regarded, because Eusebius and Jerome
speak, both of them, of so great an affinity, in many things, both as to words
and matter, between this and the epistle of Clement, that it was from thence
thought, that Clement was, at least, the translator of the epistle to the
Hebrews. And critics make use of it as a strong argument in proof of the
genuineness of the present copy of Clement's epistle, that it is found to agree
so well with this observation of Eusebius and Jerome.

BUT if, with the Episcopalians, we should suppose these egoumenoi mean
Bishops, in distinction from Presbyters; will it not follow, as an inevitable
consequence, that there was in the church of Corinth, at the same time, a
plurality of Bishops? It is observable, the word is egoumenois, not in the
singular, but plural number: which can never be reconciled with the doctrine of
one "Bishop in a church, as the center of unity." The dilemma here is plain:
either these egoumenoi were not Bishops in the sense pleaded for, or there were
more of these Bishops than one, in the same church, at the same time. That is
to say, either this testimony from Clement must be given up, or the old sacred
maxim, "one Bishop one altar." But rather than part with this, I doubt not we
shall be left in quiet possession of any testimony whatever.

IT will perhaps be objected against what has been offered, that these rulers
are distinguishued, in the passages themselves, from Presbyters; and therefore
can never mean the same officers.

IN answer whereto, I freely acknowledge, the Greek words, egoumenois, and
Presbuterois, are distinguished from each other; but that the word,
Presbuterois, means here those officers in the church, that are called
Presbyters, there is no reason to think. It is certain, this term is sometimes
used in its common and unappropriated sense, as signifying only aged persons.
In this sense it is taken in 1. Tim. v. i. "Rebuke not [ Presbutero] an Elder,
but entreat him as a father," -- Dr. Whitby's note here is, "In the judgment of
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, the Elder here signifies,
not a Priest, but a grave and ancient man; such being in all ages and nations
styled fathers. And this sense, the distinction here of ages, and of sexes,
seems to plead for. For so it follows, "the younger men (entreat) as brethren,
the elder women as mothers," and so on. In the same sense, this word is to be
taken in these passages of Clement, and for the same reason; though much
strengthened by its manner of connection. For let it be observed,

IN the first of these passages, Clement is commending the Corinthians for what
was FORMERLY worthy in their conduct; and, among other things, mentions it to
their praise, that they "had been subject to their egoumenois," and had "paid
due honor to their Presbyterois;" where, by Presbyterois, he means, and must
mean, not their Presbyters, but the AGED among them, not only because it
immediately follows, "ye commanded the YOUNG men to think those things that
were modest and grave;" but because the egoumenoi, they had, in their FORMER
orderly state, been subject to, were the PRESBYTERS of the church: for these,
as has been proved, he elsewhere mentions as "set over the church," and
accordingly enjoins their "subjection to them;" nor are any higher church
officers spoken of in his epistle; and what is more, he speaks of these, as has
been said, and will hereafter be further proved, as actually vested with
EPISCOPACY. The interpretation therefore is natural, obvious, and consistent,
which understands the word presbyteroi, in this place, not as pointing out the
officers in the church, called Presbyters, who had been spoken of in the
immediately foregoing words; but as signifying, in its unappropriated sense,
AGED PERSONS: whereas, to construe it otherwise, would make Clement a careless,
inattentive, not to say blundering, inconsistent writer.

IN the other passage, Clement, in opposition to the PRESENT disorderly,
seditious behavior of some in the Corinthian church, exhorts them to a temper
and conduct better befiting their character as Christians. Says he, "Let us
reverence our Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood was given for us; let us honor [
tous proegoumenous emon] those who are set over us; let us respect [ tous
Presbyterous emon] the aged among us; let us instruct the younger men [ neous]
in the fear of the Lord." The Proegoumenoi here are the same that are spoken of
in the above passage, that is, the Presbyters who had been set over the church.
The word, presbyteroi, therefore must mean their aged people. There will, in
this construction of the word, be order, propriety, and beauty, in the
exhortations that are severally made: whereas, if the word is translated so as
to signify the Presbyters of the church, there will be introduced tautology,
and a breach of order in the advices that are here given.

THE interpretation I have exhibited of these passages will more evidently
appear to be just; if we turn to sect. iiid, where Clement specifies the
disorders he would blame in the church at Corinth. His words are these, "They
who were of no renown lifted themselves up against the honorable; those of no
reputation against those that were in respect; the foolish against the wise;
the young men against the aged, neous epi tous Presbyterous: therefore
righteousness and peace are departed from you." -- The opposition between the
young men and the aged, is so plain here, that none ever pretended to dispute
this sense of the word, presbyteroi, in this place. And this, being its sense
here, must be its sense also in the other passages we have considered; for they
all relate to one and the same thing.

I SHALL only subjoin upon this head; in Cotelerius's "apostolical fathers" by
L'Clerc, in all these sections, the word presbuteroi is translated AGED
PERSONS. Archbishop Wake also, in his "epistles of the fathers," renders, the
same word, in all the above places, in the same manner: which I thus give
notice of, because their thus translating the word, must have proceeded from a
full conviction of the necessary propriety of this version, and not from want
of a good heart to serve the episcopal cause, as far as they could with a good
conscience.

THE next plea, made in favor of the distinction between Bishops and
Presbyters, is fetched from sect. xld, where Clement speaks of the threefold
order in the Jewish church, "High Priest, Priests, and Levites:" which is
supposed to be a plain intimation of a like threefold order in the Christian
church, in the distinct officers of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. And as
this is an argument great stress is laid upon, I shall be particular in
considering it.

ONLY I must first desire the reader carefully to look over sect. xxxvii, xl,
xli, xlii, xliv, which I have set down entire, that he may be able to judge of
the manner in which these words are introduced, the purpose they are brought to
serve, and the special application that is made of them; which must certainly
be allowed to be the best method to come at their genuine meaning. Nor can it
be thought fair to fix upon a few words, in a connected argumentative
discourse, and plead for them as they be dis-joined from what preceeds, and
follows: but their sense must be determined by the place they bear in the
argument of which they are a part. Having observed this,

I AM free to own, Clement, in order to reduce the church of Corinth to a state
of regularity, presents to their view the economy of the Jewish church; in
which proper order and decorum had been constituted, and was observed. But when
he mentions the "Jewish High Priest, Priests, and Levites," that it was his
intention to exhibit a pattern of the Christian church, under the threefold
order of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, there is no appearance of a
probability to suppose: as will be evident if we consider what follows in one
conjunct view.

I. LET us compare this with the like kind of arguing, in this epistle. In
sect. xxxvii, Clement sets before the Corinthians the example of an army: in
which every one has his proper place. "Some are only common Soldiers; some are
Praefects; some Chiliarchs; some Centurions; some Chieftains of fifty; every
one of whom keeps to his own station". Now, the design of this comparison is
obvious, namely, to represent the beauty and necessity of the like regularity
in the church of Corinth. And the meaning is entirely absolved in this general
accommodation, without going so far into the parallel, as to suppose precisely
as many distinct officers in the church, as there are in an army.

SURELY, it was not his meaning, "that the church militant must be regimented
into order, under Patriarchs. Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and other
officers, superior to the common christian military!" There is no imaginable
reason to suppose, such a thought ever entered into his heart.

IN Sect. XLII, he, in like manner, proposes to the consideration of the
Corinthian church the good order that was observed in the Jewish church,
particularly in their worship. They had (as he represents) "their sacrifices
both propitiatory and eucharistical:" but these were not to be offered "every
where," but "at Jerusalem only;" and not in every place even at Jerusalem, but
in "the temple on the altar." And his aim here is plain, to encourage, among
the Corinthians, from this example, the like decent regularity; without
carrying the matter so far, as to make the Jewish worship an exact model for
the Christian. So in the case before us: when Clement mentions the
"High Priest, Priests, and Levites," with each "their proper services assigned
them," though he so far accommodates this instance, as to argue it to be
reasonable, that there should be, in like manner, persons in the Christian
church, whose proper business it might be to attend its ministrations; yet,
that there ought to be exactly a threefold order of them, in answer to the
threefold order in the Jewish church, there is no more ground to think, than
that the parallel in the foregoing cases, ought to be entirely completed. It is
enough that the parallel answer in the general design, he has in view, without
making it, as we vulgarly speak, "run on all four." And it deserves particular
notice, in the use Clement makes of this argument, in the words immediately
following, he regards only its general accommodation. For thus he goes on, "Let
every one of you, Brethren, in his own proper order give God thanks; living in
good conscience, and keeping within the defined rule of his service." He infers
nothing in particular from the example of the Jewish "High Priest, Priests, and
Levites" with their "appointed services;" but only, in general, takes occasion
to recommend it to every one, in his proper place, to keep the duties of his
station; without so much as giving the least hint, as if there were just three
stations in the church of Corinth, as there were in the church of the Jews;
which must needs be deemed an argument of great negligence, if he had intended
any thing like an exact parallel. To go on,

II. IT is most obviously remarkable, Clement purposely sets himself, in sect.
xliid, to exhibit an account of the apostolic appointment of officers in the
Christian church: in which he quite lays aside the Jewish constitution in a
threefold order, and mentions, instead of it, only the twofold order of Bishops
and Deacons. Says he, "The Apostles have preached the gospel to us from our
Lord Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ from God. For Christ was sent by God, and
the Apostles by Christ. -- Preaching therefore through cities and countries,
they constituted their first fruits for BISHOPS and DEACONS."

IT certainly would have been natural, if Clement had intended a parallel
between the Jewish "High Priest, Priests, and Levites," and Christian "Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons;" I say, it would have been obvious for him to have
applied here his discourse but a few lines above: especially, considering he
was still upon the same argument, pursuing one and the same design. But is
there the least hint of any such application? So far from it, that he says not
a syllable of a threefold, but expressly mentions a twofold order; and this, as
appointed by the Apostles: which is an inconsistency, upon the impleaded
interpretation, not capable of being removed by any art of man.

NOR is it unworthy of a remark, that, in proving this constitution of Bishops
and Deacons to be, not a novel thing, but what had long before been wrote
about, Clement refers us to that passage in Isaiah, "I will appoint their
Bishops in righteousness, and Deacons in faith." Whether this text is
pertinently quoted, or not, is not my business to inquire: but thus much is
undeniable, that, had Clement perceived any resemblance between the Jewish
"High Priest and Levites," (of whom he had but just before spoken) and
christian "Bishops and Deacons", he would have much sooner have turned us back
to that constitution, then to this text; and his omitting to do this, can be
ascribed to no other rational cause, but its not having entered his heart, to
suppose any exact parallel between the Jewish, and Christian constitution, in
point of a threefold order of officers.

III. IT may not be amiss to inquire, upon supposition Clement really intended
the constitution of the Jewish church, in "High Priest, Priests, and Levites,"
as a pattern for the constitution of the christian church; I say, it may not be
improper to inquire; whether, even upon this supposition, he says any thing in
favor of a distinction of order between Bishops and Presbyters. And it is plain
he does not. For Bishops, in the days of Clement, (according to the highest
demand of prelatical writers) were the heads only of a few congregations in
particular cities, and their neighboring villages: whereas, nothing is more
known, than that the "High Priest" stood related, not to a few synagogues in
this, and the other city, and the towns bordering thereon; but to the whole
Jewish church. There is therefore no analogy between Bishops, and the Jewish
High Priest: nor shall we be able to find one any where short of ROME. For,
besides the POPE, there is no visible head to the christian church, in any
proper sense, answering to the High Priest among the Jews. One invisible one
indeed there is, "Jesus the HIGH PRIEST of our profession;" under whom are
placed, in the church, Bishops or Presbyters, and Deacons. And in this sense,
the parallel is strictly just, and perfectly consonant to the whole tenor of
Clement's epistle: in which Christ is expressly spoken of in the style of
HIGH PRIEST In sect. xxxvi, we have these words, "This is the way, beloved, in
which we may find our Savior, Jesus Christ, TON ARCHIEREA TON PROSPHORON EMON,"
that is, the "HIGH PRIEST of our offerings."
; and under him, no other officers are mentioned, as constituted in the
christian church, but Bishops, who are also called Presbyters, and Deacons. But
if we must have a visible head to the church, corresponding to the High Priest
in the Jewish model, there is no avoiding a submission to the PAPAL CHAIR. And,
accordingly, to this purpose the Romanists constantly make use of this passage
in Clement: and every one, with half an eye, may see, that the parallel is far
more just and natural between the POPE and the High Priest, than between the
High Priest and Bishops: since there may be hundreds of Bishops in the
christian church; whereas there neither was, nor could be, but one High Priest
in the Jewish.

IT will no doubt be here said, it was the manner, in ancient times, to argue
from the constitution of the Jewish church, in High Priest, Priests, and
Levites, to the constitution of the Christian church in Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons: and, therefore, that the parallel ought here to be thus run,
however unnatural it may appear. In answer whereto,

I READILY acknowledge, it was an ancient custom to argue from the Jewish to
the Christian constitution, as is pleaded; but, at the same time, must observe,
this method of arguing was not in use, in the days of Clement. It was plainly
the invention of later times, when Episcopacy (in some sort analagous to the
modern sense of the word) began to show itself: nor can an instance be
produced, from any writer, until long after the days of Clement, wherein it is
thus used. It is not therefore fair to argue for this application of the words
in Clement, from the like application of the same words, in those authors, who
had no being in the world, until Clement had been dead, and turned into dust,
for many years. Besides, it ought to be considered, the writers, in after
times, directly speak of Bishops in the style of Highpriests, and expressly
make them, in the parallel, answer to the Jewish High Priest; leaving no room
for doubt in the matter, with how much weakness and aukwardness soever they,
upon this account, become chargeable. But is this the case with Clement? Does
he ever call a Bishop, High Priest? Does he ever go about to apply the Jewish
constitution, so as to make Bishops answer in the parallel to the High Priest?
So far from any thing of this tendency, that he makes mention (as we have seen)
only of a twofold order of officers in the christian church, and gives not the
least hint, as if he ever thought of a third that was higher.

IV. I SHALL add to what has been said, if Clement is interpreted in the sense
I am opposing, there will be no harmony between his discourse here, and the
current strain of his epistle; which, through the whole, perfectly agrees with
the account he gives of the twofold order of Bishops and Deacons; but not at
all with a threefold one, in imitation of the Jewish hierarchy. It is common in
this epistle, it must be acknowledged, to meet with the word Bishops as well as
Presbyters; to which if Deacons are added, some may think, the parallel will be
made out. But it is observable, there never once occurs, in Clement's epistle,
such a mode of speech, as Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, the almost sacred
and invariable way of writing, after the distinction between Bishops and
Presbyters took place. And though (as was said) we read of Bishops, as well as
Presbyters, yet it is so ordered, that the Bishops are never so much as once
distinguished from Presbyters: nay, so far is Clement from representing any
distinction of order between them, that he directly considers the Presbyters of
Corinth, as vested with the Episcopal office, and in the most plain manner
reflects blame upon that church, for "casting their Presbyters out of their
Episcopacy." -- But of this we shall more particularly speak, under the last
argument, brought from Clement in defense of modern Episcopacy.

AND this is taken from those words in sect. xliv, "And the Apostles knew by
our Lord Jesus Christ, that there would be contention about the name of
Episcopacy: therefore, being endued with perfect foreknowledge, they
constituted the beforementioned persons (namely, Bishops and Deacons;) and
moreover gave direction how, if they should die, other approved men should
succeed in their ministry." -- Here it is urged, the Apostles are represented
as knowing there would arise those, who would appear against the cause of
Episcopacy; and, as it were on purpose, to guard against it, did themselves
appoint Bishops in the church, and provide for a succession of others in this
office, after the decease of those they appointed.

THIS plea, however often it has been urged, I shall show to be altogether
invalid, by making it evident, even from Clement himself, that his discourse in
this passage is so far from favoring any distinction of order between Bishops
and Presbyters, that it is the strongest testimony, in his whole epistle, for
their being the same order of officers in the church; and such an one, that we
could not have desired a stronger, if we had been present, when this was
exhibited, to direct his pen.

THE testimony begins," And the Apostles knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, there
would be contention about the name of Episcopacy." -- But what are we to
understand by this "Episcopacy?" Is it such an one, as they only are vested
with, who are officers in the church superior in their order to Presbyters? The
modern use, and sound, of the word, may possibly be apt to lead the less
thinking reader into such an imagination: but the term Episcopacy, in the days
of Clement, had quite another meaning from what it has now. With him, it
intends only an oversight of the flock; such an Episcopacy, as persons nothing
more than Presbyters might be, and actually were, vested with. And for the
proof of this, I shall appeal to Clement himself; who, in this very section,
tells us as much in the most plain language. His words are these, "For it is no
small sin, if we cast those out of their Episcopacy, [ Episkopes, the very word
used above] who have offered their gifts in an holy manner: Blessed are those
PRESBYTERS who have first finished their course." It seems then Presbyters
might, in Clement's opinion, be vested with Episcopacy, because he declares the
Presbyters of Corinth were in fact thus vested. Nor was the contention, "the
Apostles knew there would be about the name of Episcopacy," any other than such
a contention as then actually subsisted in the church of Corinth. And what was
this? Not a contention, whether there was a distinction of order between
Bishops and Presbyters: we have no hint of any such thing any where in the
epistle; but it was a contention about the ministerial order itself; a
contention about the office of Presbyters, or (as they are likewise called)
Bishops; which the people had carried to such an height, as that they had rose
up against their Bishops or Presbyters, and turned them out of their Episcopacy.

THE plea goes on, the Apostles, to guard against this contention about
Episcopacy, "constituted Bishops and Deacons, and moreover gave direction
(according to others a roll or list) that, when they should die, other approved
men might succeed in the ministry." And no one doubts, but the Apostles
appointed Bishops, and provided for a succession of such officers in the
church. But the question is, Who are here meant by these Bishops? Were they an
order in the church distinct from, and superior to, Presbyters? Clement himself
can best inform us. And this he has done so evidently, that we cannot well fail
of knowing his mind, if we will but attend to what he has said. Let us then
examine the connection of his discourse in this paragraph.

AND he very plainly lays it down (1) That "the Apostles knew there would be
contention about Episcopacy." (2) To guard against this, they did themselves
"appoint Bishops and Deacons in the church"; that is, (if we turn to sect.
xlii, the place he himself has refered to) they constituted of the "first
fruits of their conversions, a number of Bishops and Deacons" for the benefit
of the church, as believers should afterward increase. (3) Besides this
constitution of persons, they "gave direction," as deaths should happen, that
"others should be constituted to succeed in their room." (4) From these
premises, he infers it to be an unjustifiable thing to "cast those out of their
Episcopacy," who have behaved well; whether they had been constituted by the
Apostles themselves, or other excellent men afterward. And now (5) To bring
his argument to a point, and to let the church of Corinth certainly know, that
he aimed at them in all this discourse; and designed to condemn their unsuitable
conduct toward their Presbyters, he offers to their consideration the
"blessedness of those Presbyters, who have gone off the stage," in this article
in special, "that they could not be removed out of the place where they were
fixed, as they had removed some of their Presbyters from their honorable
ministrations."

THIS is the unquestionable connection of Clement's arguing in this paragraph.
Upon which I would appeal to any person of common understanding, whether he
could have any other intention, in this train of reasoning, than to offer
conviction to the church of Corinth, of their faulty conduct in "casting their
Presbyters out of their office?" But if their Presbyters had been any other
than those Bishops, he had spoken of as constituted, either by the Apostles
themselves, or other famous men afterward, what pertinency is there in this
method of reasoning? He mentions only Bishops and Deacons as constituted by the
Apostles, or to be constituted afterward by others, by their direction. If
therefore the Presbyters of Corinth had not been in the number of those
Bishops, they had not acted against any apostolical constitution, and could not
fall by the force of this arguing: whereas, on the other hand, if by these
Presbyters we understand the same order of officers with the Bishops here
spoken of, and consider the words Bishops and Presbyters, as only different
names to point out the same persons, the reasoning will not only be clear and
forceable, but perfectly consonant to the connection of his whole discourse;
which so obviously and necessarily leads to this, that I am well satisfied no
art of man can elude the evidence there is for it.

BESIDES, if these Bishops were an order of officers superior to Presbyters,
why should Clement so particularly mention the apostolic constitution of
Bishops, about whom (as officers distinct from, and superior to, Presbyters)
there is no hint, in the epistle, as if there was any contention; and, at the
same time, omit saying a word about the constitution of Presbyters, (as he
certainly does, if they are an order distinct from Bishops) against whom the
church of Corinth had rose up in the most unseemly manner? This seems
altogether unintelligible: especially considering, it is the governing design
of this whole epistle, and of this paragraph in special, to correct the conduct
of the Corinthians toward their PRESBYTERS, and set them right in their
behavior for time to come.

AND now, being let into the true meaning of Clement's Bishops, the
controversy, among the learned, about that difficult word epinomin, in that
part of the paragraph, where mention is made of the apostolic provision for the
succession of Bishops, is quite superseded. For whether we translate it with
Archbishop Wake, and Boyse, direction; or with Burton, Salmasius, and Bishop
Pearson, command; or with Young and Dr. Hammond, description, list, roll,
catalogue: I say, in which soever of these senses we take the word, it matters
not; so long as the Bishops in Clement are precisely the same order of officers
with Presbyters.

ONLY I cannot omit observing, that the construction, which supposes the
Apostles to have given a list, or roll of successors, does not seem at all
probable. For, as the learned Boyse argues against this interpretation, Who
ever heard of such a list or roll? Was it a catalogue of all their successors
to the worlds end? Or a list of their successors, for one, two, or three
centuries? How came this list, or roll to be lost? when the preservation of it
would have been of such vast consequence, to prevent all disputes about future
elections. For doubtless the churches would readily have concurred in the
choice of such, as the Apostles, from certain foreknowledge, had marked down
for Bishops and Deacons. So that it is certain, either this catalogue was never
given by them, or those churches, to whom it was given, were guilty of
inexcusable negligence, in suffering so valuable a roll, that would have
cleared up the uninterrupted line of Episcopal succession, beyond dispute, to
be so utterly lost, that no notion, no monument of it, should be heard of to
this day, and no Bishop ever once appeal to it, to justify his claim against
competitors.

THE evidence suppposed to be contained in this epistle, for the superiority of
Bishops to Presbyters, being thus removed out of the way; I am under the fairer
advantage to propose a few observations, which seem abundantly sufficient to
show it to have been the mind of Clement, that Bishops and Presbyters were, in
his day, one and the same order of officers in the Christian church. And,

1. I OBSERVE, when Clement sets himself, ex professo, to give an account of
the apostolical constitution of officers in the Christian church; and this, not
in one or two particular places only, but throughout cities and countries, as
they traveled to propagate the faith of Christ; he makes mention only of the
two orders of Bishops and Deacons. And it is remarkable, how exactly consonant
this account is, to the scripture account of the constitution of the church of
Philippi; in writing to whom, the Apostle Paul takes notice of no other
officers among them, save only Bishops and Deacons. And the same Apostle
writing to Timothy about church officers, describes only the qualifications of
Bishops and Deacons.

2. I OBSERVE what is yet more full to my purpose, those Bishops, Clement
mentions as constituted by the Apostles, or other famous men afterward, were
one and the same order of men with Presbyters: otherwise, he passes over a
whole order of ecclesiastical officers; and this, at a time when he had
undertaken to exhibit an account of the apostolic constitution of officers, in
the Christian church; which cannot but be thought an inexcusable omission. The
only officers he takes notice of, as appointed by the Apostles, are Bishops and
Deacons. But if by the term Bishops, he does not mean the same kind of officers
with those that are called Presbyters, he has certainly not said a word about
any appointment of this order of officers; which is unaccountably strange,
considering he makes particular mention of the lower order in the church, that
of Deacons. And indeed, unless we suppose Clement to mean precisely the same
sort of officers, when he uses, sometimes the word Bishops, and sometimes the
word Presbyters, we shall make him a most blundering writer. For one of the
main arguments he uses, to reflect blame upon the church of Corinth, for rising
up against their Presbyters, is, the apostolic constitution of Bishops: but if
by this term, he did not mean the same sort of officers, where would be the
force of this reasoning? How would it tend to afford conviction to the
Corinthians, that they had done ill in acting against their Presbyters, to be
told of the apostolic appointment of one order of officers superior to their
Presbyters, and another inferior to them; while, at the same time, not a word
is said whether the order of Presbyters was ever constituted at all? Such a
method of reasoning is certainly very extraordinary, and much better calculated
to encourage them in their sedition, than to bring them to repentance, and put
a stop to it. Bishops therefore with Clement are the same rank of officers with
Presbyters. And, as if he had it in design, that we should not mistake him, he
plainly speaks of the Presbyters of Corinth, as some of those very Bishops that
were constituted either by the Apostles, or others afterward by their
direction: for he supposes them placed in the episcopal office, in that he
directly finds fault with the Corinthians "for casting them out of their
Episcopacy."

AND upon this, it is most obvious to take notice of the perfect harmony there
is, between the language of Clement and the Apostle Paul; who, when he had left
Titus in Crete to ordain Elders in every city, writes to him to acquaint him
with the qualifications that ought to be found in those, who were to be
constituted Bishops; evidently using the words, Presbyters and Bishops, as
signifying the same order of church officers. The Evangelist Luke likewise
speaks of the Apostles, as ordaining Elders in every church; which is most
plainly the same account with this of Clement, who mentions them as
constituting Bishops in the churches they founded: for these Bishops were no
other than Elders; and if Clement had spoken of the Apostles, as appointing
Elders or Presbyters in the churches they planted, it would have been perfectly
the same thing with his saying, that they appointed Bishops.

3. I OBSERVE, as a yet further confirmation of what we are upon, that
Presbyter-Bishops are the highest order of ecclesiastical officers spoken of in
this epistle. They are the only persons mentioned as "set over the church of
Corinth;" they are the only persons that church are exhorted to be "in
subjection to:" nor is there a word lisped of any duty owing from them to any
superior order of men; no, nor the least hint given of any such order; which
leads me to observe in the last place,

4. THE moral assurance we have, that Clement knew of no Bishop, at least, in
the church of Corinth, of a superior order to that of Presbyter. -- Let us
consider the direction of the epistle: it runs in that style, "the church of
Rome to the church of Corinth," without any notice at all of their Bishop;
which is so much unlike the manner of inscriptions in after times, when Bishops
were distinguished from Presbyters, that, from this circumstance only, it looks
probable, there was no single Bishop at the head of that church. But the
probability will be heightened into certainty, if we add, there is as entire
silence, through the whole epistle, of the Bishop of this church: whereas, if
any single person had been at their head of an order distinct from their
Presbyters, and invested with a superior right of authoritatively managing in
all ecclesiastical affairs, it is not conceivable but he must, some how or
other, have been plainly pointed out.

THE first, most superior, and distinguished officer in this church, could not
but have been interested in the shameful disturbance that was the occasion of
this letter. He must have joined, either with the Presbyters, or the people, or
have been an idle spectator of the present quarrel; and, in either case, there
are great difficulties to be accounted for.

IF he had been united with the Presbyters, and made use of his Episcopal
authority to oblige the people to peace, and their duty to their Presbyters, it
is strange they are no where reprimanded for disregarding the authority of
their Bishop! nor can it well be imagined, that Clement should be so severe
upon them for their indecent carriage to their Presbyters, and yet silently
pass over their disobedience to their Bishop; which must surely have deserved a
rebuke, if they had opposed his authority, in their usage of their Presbyters.

OR, if he had favored the Corinthian church, in their ill treatment of their
Presbyters, it is much lie is not reasoned with, that he might be convinced of
his mistake: since the church are so sharply rebuked, and earnestly exhorted to
repentance and amendment: nor is it easy to conceive of the propriety
(according to the episcopal scheme) of their being thus blamed, and condemned,
while they had the countenance of their Bishop in what they did. Upon this
supposition, the first thing necessary, in order to peace, must have been to
have offered conviction to the Bishop, and engaged him to desist from
encouraging the church, in their seditious practice against their Presbyters.

OR if we might imagine it possible for a Bishop, to be so thoughtless of the
peace and quiet of his church, as to be an unconcerned spectator of this
faction, which had increased to such an height, as to excite the compassion of
the church of Rome, it is wonderful he is not admonished, at least, in a soft
and gentle manner, of his neglect; and besought to interpose with his authority
to heal this division! But instead of this, to complete the unaccountable
conduct both of Clement, and the church of Rome, though the Bishop was the most
suitable person to be applied to in this case, neither Presbyters, nor people
are directed to refer the matter to him; nor to ask his advice: nor is his
name, or any thing relating to him, or his office, so much as distantly hinted
at.

OR if it be supposed, without any appearance of proof, that the church of
Corinth happened to be without a Bishop, just at the time of this sedition, and
the composure of this epistle: I say, even supposing this, merely to serve an
hypothesis, it is a great difficulty no mention should be made of their late
Bishop, nor any advice given them to come into a speedy choice of a new Bishop,
as the most suitable remedy to heal their differences. This was thought one of
the best expedients to compose differences, in after times. And it is the very
method, the Presbyters of Rome, when that see was vacant by the death of
Fabian, mention in their letter to Cyprian, in order to the removal of their
difficulties. And it was as fit a method in the days of Clement, as in the days
of Cyprian; and no other reason can be assigned of his being wholly silent
about it, but that he knew of no difference between the order of Bishops, and
Presbyters.

UPON the whole, if Bishops, in the days of Clement, were officers in the
church any way resembling our modern Prelates, these are certainly most
inexcusable omissions: nor are they capable of being accounted for to
reasonable satisfaction.

I SHALL finish my examination of Clement, with inserting the opinion of two as
learned men as ever appeared, upon the matter we have last been disputing.
"They that can find any one single Bishop at Corinth, at the time, when Clement
wrote this epistle to them, must have better eyes, and judgment, than the
deservedly admired Grotius": so speaks the great Bishop of Worcester. Grotius's
judgment (here referred to) was plainly this, he mentions it as a proof of the
antiquity and genuineness of the present Copy of Clement's epistle, "That he no
where takes notice of that exorbitant power of Bishops, which was first
introduced in Alexandria, after the death of Mark, and from that example into
other churches; but evidently shows, that the churches were governed by the
common council of Presbyters, who, by him, and the Apostle Paul, are called
Bishops."

POLYCARP.
His character, writings, and testimonies from them, with observations and
remarks.
PREVIOUS to what may be offered relative to this Father, I would give notice,
that the order of time is a little broke in upon, by giving him a place here;
for his "epistle to the Philippians" was not wrote until after the death of
Ignatius, who must therefore have wrote before him. But, as there are some
important passages, in his "epistle," the reader should be acquainted with,
before he comes to Ignatius, it was thought best to place him first. Having
observed this, I go on;

POLYCARP had his birth in the apostolic age; and probably not a great many
years on this side, the middle of the first century. Some modern authors speak
of him as born in Smyrna; as being a slave in his younger years, and bought by
a certain Lady named Calesto, who, together with giving him his freedom,
instructed him in the Christian religion, and afterward made him her heir. But
as these accounts, with many other of a like import, are extracted from writers
greatly remote from the age in which Polycarp lived, and that were too much
given to the romantic strain, they are not to be depended on.

IT may, upon much better authority, be esteemed a just stroke in his
character, that he was one that "sat under the teaching of the Apostles," and
was familiarly "conversant with those that knew our Lord," and particularly
"with the Apostle John." This account we have from Irenaeus, which we may the
rather give credit to, because he speaks not only of his having, "in his
younger years, seen Polycarp;" but as "retaining in his mind a distinct
remembrance of having heard him relate these things."

HE likewise makes mention of him as Bishop of Smyrna, and as placed in this
office by the Apostles; though Tertullian names none of the Apostles, save
"John," as having an hand in his constitution. And Eusebius only says in
general, "He was made Bishop by those, who saw the Lord, and ministered to him."
But however it might be as to this circumstance, there is no difficulty about
the thing itself. He is readily allowed to have been Bishop of Smyrna.

AND from hence a mighty argument is drawn, in favor of his having been of an
order in the church, superior to that of Presbyters; especially, when, in
conjunction herewith, that is supposed to be true, which Archbishop Usher has
endeavored to prove to be so, namely, That he was Bishop of Smyrna, when the
Apostle John sent his "apocalyptical letter" to the "Angel of that church." But
the foundation of the argument at once vanishes, when it is considered, that,
in the age of Polycarp, no such thing as a distinction of order, between
Bishops and Presbyters, was known in the church. This we have already proved
from Clement of Rome, and Hermas, both Polycarp's contemporaries; and shall
further confirm from Polycarp himself, when we come to take notice of his
"epistle to the Philippians." And what is particularly observable, in the case
of Polycarp, he is by Irenaeus called Presbyter, as well as Bishop. In his
epistle to Florinus, that is the style in which he speaks of him, "Polycarp, [
apostolikos Presbuteros] the apostolical Presbyter"; which is the more worthy
of notice, because, with Irenaeus, the reciprocal use of the words, Bishop and
Presbyter, is very common. And herein (as we shall see in the progress of this
work) there is a wonderful agreement among the writers of this age, Ignatius
only excepted, which we shall account for afterward. So that if we should,
even, suppose, the "Angel of the church of Smyrna" to be Polycarp, a then
Bishop of that church, so long as we are just to interpret the word Bishop, in
the sense, in which it was understood, in this age of Christianity, nothing
more can be made of it, than that he was an officer in that church, of the same
order with the rest of the Presbyters of it: though he might be the most
eminent, known, and distinguished among them; and the most proper, upon these
accounts, to receive a letter which concerned the whole church.

IT is commonly, in modern accounts of the life of Polycarp, mentioned as an
article particularly redounding to his honor, that the venerable Ignatius had
such an opinion of him, as a truly apostolical man, that he pitched upon him,
as the most suitable person he could commend the care of his church at Antioch
to, when he was parted from them, and on his journey to Rome, to suffer
martyrdom. He is likewise highly esteemed in love, and reverenced, as being the
supposed collector of the epistles of Ignatius: which, together with one of his
own, he is said to have sent, by one Crescens, to the church of Philippi. --
But these things we shall have occasion to examine, at large, in a more proper
place; and so shall leave them at present.

NOTHING more is found recorded of this primitive Father, until the eastern and
western churches began to controvert about the time of keeping easter; which
occasioned his going to Rome (about the middle of the second century) in the
days of Anicetus, to confer with him upon that matter. And notwithstanding all
the discourse, these grave Fathers might have upon this head, they could not
come to an agreement; the one pleading apostolical practice for one time of
observing this feast, and the other the custom of his predecessors, even up to
the Apostles, for another: yet they were charitably disposed toward each
other; which they signified, by communicating together: and Anicetus, for the
reverence he had for Polycarp, gave him the eucharist in his church; after
which they amicably parted; and, as Eusebius says, "in the universal church,
they were at peace with one another."

HOWEVER this might be, I cannot help going out of my way to observe, that
peace did not continue very long; for the controversy, far from having a final
stop now put to it, strangely increased afterward, until it had even
overspread the whole Christian world, and filled it with uncharitableness and
contention. It seems to have been at a monstrous height, toward the latter end
of the second century, in the days of Victor, who (to rely on the authority of
Sir Peter King) was so very turbulent and imperious, that he excommunicated the
Asiatics, for their not complying with the church of Rome in this matter;
condemning them for Heretics, and bestowing upon them a long and frightful
name, because they kept their easter upon the fourteenth day after the
appearance of the moon, or at full moon, on what day soever it happened. Nor
was this controversy settled, until the council of Nice, anno 325, by their
authority, decided it; decreeing, that, throughout the whole Christian world,
easter should be observed, not on the day that the Jewish passover fell, that
is, at full moon; but on the Lord's day ensuing, as it was afterward kept.

THE learned Stillingfleet improves this controversy, by deducing from it an
argument against the certainty of pretended apostolic tradition, in a manner
well worth our inserting. For my part (says he) I see not how any man, that
would see reason for what he does, can adhere to the church for an
unquestionable tradition, received from the Apostles; when, in the case of
keeping easter, whether with the Jews on the fourteenth moon, or only on the
Lord's day, there was so much unreasonable heat showed on both sides, and such
confidence that, on either side, their tradition was apostolical. They had
herein all the advantages imaginable, in order to the knowing the certainty of
the thing then in question among them; as their nearness to apostolical times,
being but one remove from them; yea, the persons contending, pleading personal
acquaintance with some of the Apostles themselves, as Polycarp with John, and
Anicetus of Rome that he had the tradition from Peter: and yet, so great were
the heats, so irreconcilable the controversy, that they proceeded to dart the
thunderbolt of excommunication in one another faces.

I WILL here add, what makes this controversy the more strange, is, that there
is no account in scripture of the institution of any such annual feast; nor the
least intimation, that it was ever observed by Christians in the Apostle's
days. Upon which, I cannot restrain myself from transcribing the thoughts of
Socrates, one of our most ancient and valuable ecclesiastical historians, upon
this head. Lib. V. Cap. 22.
Says he, Neither the ancients, nor the moderns, who have studiously followed
the Jews, had, in my judgment, any just or rational cause of contending so much
about this festival. For they considered not with themselves, that, when the
Jewish religion was changed into Christianity, those accurate observances of
the mosaic law, and the types of things future, ceased. And this carries along
with it, its own demonstration. For no one of Christ's laws has permitted the
Christians to observe the rites of the Jews. Moreover, on the contrary, the
Apostle has expressly forbid this, and does not only reject circumcision, but
always advises against contending about festival days. Wherefore, in his
epistle to the Galatians, his words are these, "Tell me, ye that desire to be
under the law, do ye not hear the law?" And having spent some few words in his
discourse hereof, he demonstrates, that the people of the Jews are "servants,"
but that those who followed Christ are "called to liberty." Moreover, it is his
admonition, "that days, and months, and years, should in no wise be observed".
Besides, in his epistle to the Colossians, he loudly affirms, that such
observations "are a shadow." Wherefore he says, Let no man judge you in meat,
or in drink, or in respect of any holy day, or of the new moons, or of the
sabbath days; which are a shadow of things to come. -- The Apostles therefore,
and the gospels, have no where imposed the yoke of servitude on those, who have
approached the preaching of faith; but have left the feast of easter, and the
other festivals, to be honored by their gratitude and benevolence, who have had
benefits conferred on them on these days. Wherefore, in regard men love
festivals, because thereon they have cessation from their labors, each person,
in every place, according to his own pleasure, has, by a certain custom,
celebrated the memory of the saving passion. For neither our Savior, nor his
Apostles, have enjoined us by any law to observe this festival. Nor have the
gospels, or the Apostles, threatened us with any mulct, punishment, or curse,
as the mosaic law does the Jews. Moreover, it was not the Apostle's design to
make laws concerning festival days, but to introduce good life and piety. And
it seems to me, that, as many other things, in several places, have been
established by custom, so the feast of easter also had a peculiar observation
among all persons, from some old usage, in regard none of the Apostles (as I
have said) have made any determinate decree about it. Now, that the observation
of this festival had its original, among all men, in the primitive times, from
custom rather than law, the things themselves do demonstrate. And this he goes
on in several pages clearly to make out. But I must now return,

POLYCARP, being at Rome, did not forget his character as a minister of Jesus
Christ; but set himself to defend the doctrines of the gospel: which he did to
good purpose, confirming the souls of many, and recovering some from the
poisonous errors of those two arch-heretics Marcion and Valentinus. The former
of these he once accidentally met in the streets of Rome, but had no other
conversation with him, than to let him know, that he esteemed him to be the
"firstborn of satan." This may possibly be thought a rough compliment; but it
is a strong argument of his great indignation against those, who had so
abominably corrupted the faith of Christ. Irenaeus attributes this severity of
language to his strict adherence to that apostolic rule, "A man that is an
heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject: knowing that he that is
such is perverted, and sins, being condemned of himself."

THE next thing we meet with, concerning Polycarp, relates to his death; which
he did not suffer until he had long labored in the service of Christ. He is
universally acknowledged to have lived to be very old, not under ninety; and
some think, considerably upwards of an hundred years: and yet, he did not go
out of the world in the ordinary way, but fell a martyr in the cause of Christ.
We have extant an "epistle of the church of Smyrna", giving a particular
account of his martyrdom, as to its time, occasion, manner, and circumstances.
Dr. Cave calls it a piece "that challenges a singular esteem and reverence,
both for its subject matter, and antiquity; with the reading of which, he joins
with Scaliger in saying, every serious and devout mind must needs be so
affected, as to think he can never have enough of it." And it is very true,
some parts of this epistle are well calculated to affect a serious and
well-disposed mind; but then, it has such a mixture of what so evidently
carries the face of mere fable, as to make it questionable, whether it be an
exact representation of what was real fact. An instance of this we have in
Sect. xv, where we read of "the flames disposing themselves into the
resemblance of an arch, like the sails of a ship swelled with the wind, gently
encircling the body of the martyr; who stood all the while in the midst, not
like roasted flesh, but gold purified in the furnace; his body sending forth a
delightful fragrancy, like frankincense or costly spices, presenting itself to
the senses of the bystanders." Of the same nature is sect. xvi, which speaks
of "his body as incapable of being consumed by the fire; upon which the
executioner, being commanded, thrust a lance into him: which he had no sooner
done, but a pigeon came forth out of the wound; and, together therewith, such a
large quantity of blood as extinguished the fire." Some other things, in the
like strain, are here to be met with; which, perhaps, not many will find a
faith wide enough to swallow.

IT must not indeed be concealed, Eusebius has thought it worth while, not only
to mention this "epistle," but to give the greatest part of it a place in his
"ecclesiastical history." But then, it ought to be observed, he is the first
writer that takes any notice of it. And if his mentioning it be used as an
argument to establish its authority, the total silence of antiquity, from the
time of its supposed composure to his day, which was at least an hundred and
fifty years, may be opposed thereto as a counter-balance. The English reader
may meet with this "epistle" in Archbishop Wake's "apostolical fathers,"
complete, or the substance of it, in Dr. Cave's "lives of the primitive
Fathers," and the "biographia ecclesiastica" of an anonimous author.

I SHALL observe nothing further of Polycarp, but that the learned are at
variance about the particular time of his death. Bishop Pearson supposes him to
have been martyred under Antoninus Pius, in the year 147: but he is generally
thought to have suffered under Aurelius Verus; some think in the year 167;
others in 169; others in 170; others in 175. His memory is said to be
celebrated by the Greek church, February 23; by the Latin, January 26.

His WRITINGS.
IRENAEUS, in his letter to Florinus, mentions "several epistles" which he
wrote; some to the "neighboring churches for their confirmation in the faith;"
and others to certain of his "brethren for their encouragement and admonition."
But what the character of these pieces was, or to whom in particular they were
sent, he nowhere says; nor can it be known at this distance: nor is it a matter
of any importance, since there is, at present, extant nothing of Polycarp's,
save only his "epistle to the church of Philippi:" Nor indeed have we this
extant, complete in its original Greek; though the defect is, in some measure,
made up by a Latin version, that is very ancient, and seems to have nothing
wanting.

THIS "epistle" is cited by some of the fathers, and sometimes mentioned with
epithets denoting great esteem and honor. Eusebius observes its containing
testimonies that are taken out of the "first epistle of Peter;" which is a good
circumstance in favor of the copy we now have; since these references are here
to be met with. Nor may I omit taking notice of the manner in which it is
wrote; which is evidently such, as savors of the true primitive pureness and
simplicity. A celebrated writer speaks of it in that language, It seems to hold
a great affinity, both in style and substance, with Clement's epistle to the
Corinthians; often suggesting the same rules, and making use of the same words
and phrases. -- It is indeed a pious and truly Christian epistle, furnished
with short, and useful precepts, and rules of life, and penned with the modesty
and simplicity of the apostolic times; valued by the ancients next to the
writings of the holy canon; and St. Jerome tells us "that, even in his day, it
was read in Asiae conventu, in the public assemblies of the Asian church. I
only add, it was probably wrote a few years after the entrance of the second
century; not far from the time of Ignatius's death.

TESTIMONIES from POLYCARP'S epistle to the Corinthians.
The INSCRIPTION to the epistle.

"POLYCARP, and the PRESBYTERS that are with him, [ Polukarpos, kai oi sun auto
Presbuteroi] to the church of God that is at Philippi, [ te paroikouse
Philippois] mercy unto you, and peace, from God Almighty, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, our Savior, be multiplied."

SECT. V. "Knowing therefore that God is not mocked, we ought to walk worthy
both of his command, and of his glory. Also the Deacons [ Diakonoi] must be
blameless before him, as the ministers of God in Christ, and not of men. -- In
like manner, the younger men must be unblamable in all things: above all,
taking care of their purity, and to restrain themselves from all evil. For it
is good to be cut off from the lusts that are in the world; because every such
lust "warreth against the spirit." And "neither fornicators, nor esseminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, shall inherit the kingdom of God:" nor
they who do such things as are foolish and unreasonable. Wherefore ye must
needs abstain from all these things; being subject to the Priests and Deacons [
upotassamenous tois Presbuterois kai diakonois] as unto God, and Christ. The
virgins admonish to walk in a spotless and pure conscience." It immediately
follows,

SECT. VI. "And let the Elders [ Presbuteroi] be compassionate and merciful
toward all; turning them from their errors; seeking out those that are weak;
not forgetting the widows, the fatherless, and the poor; but always providing
what is good both in the sight of God and man: abstaining from all wrath,
respect of persons, and unrighteous judgment; and especially being free from
all covetousness. Not easy to believe any thing against any; not severe in
judgment; knowing that we are all debtors in point of law". --

SECT. XI. "I am greatly afflicted for Valens, who was once a Presbyter [ qui
factus est aliquando Presbyter apud vos] among you, that he should so little
understand the place that was given to him in the church. Wherefore I admonish
you, that ye abstain from covetousness; and that ye be chaste, and true of
speech. "Keep yourselves from all evil." For he that in these things cannot
govern himself, how shall he prescribe them to another?"

THERE are two or three passages in this epistle relative to Ignatius, which I
shall insert here in Archbishop Wake's translation; desiring the reader to
take particular notice of those words in them that are printed in capitals, for
a reason he will be at no loss to know, when he sees what is hereafter said
upon Ignatius's writings.

SECT. IX. "Wherefore I exhort all you, that ye obey the word of righteousness,
and exercise all patience; which YE HAVE SEEN SET FORTH BEFORE YOUR EYES, not
only in the blessed IGNATIUS, and Zozimus, and Rufus; but in others among
yourselves; and in Paul himself, and the rest of the Apostles: being confident
of this, that ALL THESE HAVE NOT RUN IN VAIN, but in faith and righteousness,
and ARE GONE TO THE PLACE THAT WAS DUE TO THEM FROM THE LORD, with whom also
THEY SUFFERED."

SECT. XIII. "Ye wrote to me, both ye and also Ignatius, that if any one went
from hence into Syria, he should bring your letters with him, which also I will
take care of, as soon as I shall have a convenient opportunity, either try my
self, or him whom I shall send upon your account. The epistles of Ignatius,
which he wrote unto us, together with what others OF HIS, The words OF HIS, the
Archbishop has been pleased arbitrarily to put in, without giving the least
notice that they are entirely his own, there being nothing in the original to
answer to them; hereby unavoidably leading the English reader into the notion
of more "Ignatian epistles" than Polycarp might think of. We may hear more of
this afterward, in its proper place.
have come to our hands, we have sent to you, according to your order; which
are subjoined to this epistle: by which ye may be greatly profited; for they
treat of faith and patience, and of all things that pertain to edification in
the Lord Jesus."

SECT. XIV. "What you certainly know of IGNATIUS, and THOSE THAT ARE WITH HlM,
signify unto us."

OBSERVATIONS and REMARKS on the foregoing testimonies.
UPON a review of the above passages, nothing is more evident than that
Polycarp speaks only of two orders of officers in the church at Philippi; in
which he remarkably harmonises with Clement of Rome: only, whereas Clement
promiscuously makes use of the names, Bishop and Presbyter to signify the
highest, or first, of these orders, Polycarp confines himself to the term
Presbyter, not so much as once naming the word Bishop, any where in his
epistle. Nor is there a less agreement between Polycarp, and the Apostle Paul
upon this head: only, whereas the Apostle Paul, in writing to this church at
Philippi, speaks of its officers in the style of "Bishops and Deacons;"
Polycarp alters the denomination, mentioning the first of these orders, under
the name of "Presbyters." And as they both intend one and the same order of
officers, the change of style, in which they speak of them, is a signal
illustration of the Presbyterian gloss upon the Apostle's words; as well as a
good argument, that, in the language of these times, the terms Bishop and
Presbyter meant precisely the same order of ecclesiastical officers.

NOR does Polycarp barely mention Presbyters as the highest of the two orders
he takes notice of, in the church at Philippi; but he likewise speaks of these
Presbyters, as having devolved on them the "inspection and rule" of the church.
He therefore exhorts the Philippians "to be subject to their Presbyters;" and
the Presbyters he exhorts, "to abstain from respect of persons and unrighteous
judgment; not hastily believing a report against any man; not being rigid in
judgment:" which plainly supposes them, in his opinion, to have been vested
with the power of ecclesiastical discipline: and this, without any person of a
superior order at their head. For it happens here, as in the epistle of
Clement, there is a total silence about the Bishop of this church. Neither his
name, or authority, are once mentioned: nor is there, through the whole
epistle, so much as a glance, leading our thoughts to any person, related to
this church, of superior authority to the Presbyters of it.

THE reply sometimes made to this is, perhaps the Bishop was dead. But what
intimation is there, the epistle, or elsewhere, that he was ever alive? It
ought first to be proved, and not taken for granted, that he once had
existence; before it will, in reason, account for the silence there is about
him, to say he was dead. Nor is it conceivable, if this had really been the
case, but Polycarp would have offered the Philippians matter of comfort under
so heavy a loss: at least, he might have wished them another Bishop, or
recommended it to them, to take care to get his place filled up.

IT may be worth while just to observe here, how frequently, according to the
episcopal scheme, the primitive sees were vacant by the death of their Bishops.
When Clement wrote to the Corinthians, one plea is, their Bishop was dead, in
order to satisfy for the silence there is about him. When we come to Philippi,
the same answer is made; the Bishop is dead. And he was doubtless dead too in
the days of the Apostle Paul: for he is as silent about him as Polycarp. The
words of the excellent Mr. Jameson deserve a place here. Says he Philippi is no
less fatal to the Episcopals, than its neighboring plains were to the
Pompeians: for they are stung and confounded with the very first words of Paul
to that church: and among their other wild shifts, they answer, that the Bishop
was often absent. But there was a good number of years between the writing of
Paul, and that of Polycarp, to the Philippians; and yet, we see the Bishop is
never come home. Why tarry the wheels of his Lordship's chariot? Has he not
sped at court, that, after so long absence, there is no news of his return? nor
are we like ever to hear any more of him, for now (say they) he is dead.

THERE being, in the body of this epistle, nothing but what makes much against
the cause of modern Episcopacy, great stress is laid upon these words in the
"inscription" to it, "Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him." But
notwithstanding all that can be made of these words, it will be impossible to
find in them any marks of a superiority of order between Polycarp, and these
Presbyters.

IT is true, Polycarp is first mentioned, and then the other Presbyters of
Smyrna: but what is this to prove his episcopal jurisdiction, his being placed
at the head of these Presbyters, as an officer of distinct and superior rank?
Certainly, no such thing can be collected, by any genuine deduction from this
mode of diction. It rather plainly imports a parity of order between the
persons directing the epistle; for they are evidently associated as a body,
without any sign of distinction at all, unless a mere primacy may be so called:
whereas, if Polycarp had been the episcopal head of the Presbyters of Smyrna,
the inscription (as the learned Salmatius observes) had more properly run,
"Polycarp the Bishop, and the Presbyters of Smyrna:" -- or rather, the epistle
had been sent in his own name, without any mention of the Presbyters. And there
is the more reason for this observation, if we may suppose the truth of what
this same author adds; namely, "There cannot be produced a single instance,
after the distinction between Bishops and Presbyters took place, of any epistle
wrote by any Bishop, who, in the inscription, made himself a co-partner with
Presbyters." This is evidently the case here; the most natural meaning of the
inscription being obviously this, "Polycarp and the rest of the Presbyters of
that college." Polycarp plainly here joins himself with the other Presbyters:
they are all represented as so many copartners in sending the epistle: nor is
there any distinction intimated between them; only, Polycarp is particularly
named, and first mentioned: which may easily, and satisfactorily, be accounted
for, without going into the supposition of his being of an order in the church
superior to that of Presbyters.

ONE great argument (exactly similar to this, from this inscription) the
Romanists make use of to prove "Peter's primacy," or superiority over the rest
of the Apostles, is taken from his name's being first placed in the catalogues,
and narrations, we have of him and them, both in scripture, and antiquity: to
which the great Dr. Barrow (allowing the fact at least to be so constant as not
to seem casual) answers, That position of names does not argue difference of
degree, or superiority in power; any small advantage of age, standing, merit,
or wealth, serving to ground such precedence; as common experience does show.
Now this observation will help us to account for the particular, and first,
mention of Polycarp, in the inscription under debate.

HE was probably the first in age among the Presbyters of Smyrna; being, at
least, between forty and fifty years old, when he wrote this "epistle to the
Philippians." Or however this might be, he was doubtless the first in standing
among them, that is, he was before any of them placed in the ministerial
office; was the senior Pastor of this church; and perhaps the very first
Pastor, the Smyrnaeans ever had fixed among them: to be sure, no mention is
made in antiquity of any one before him; but he is always placed at the head of
the succession. Now seniority of ordination, especially when seniority of age
is added thereto, is always found to be an occasion of precedence: and it is so
natural for it to be so, that it is ordinarily granted without so much as
laying in any claim to it. And among Pastors of precisely the same order, these
take place; and their names, when put into writing, are always first mentioned:
and sometimes these only are mentioned, while others of more late standing are
entirely left out.

BESIDES, Polycarp was one of distinguished personal worth; first among these
Presbyters, as being, it may be, of superior endowments, both intellectual and
moral: and as he was, by this means, in a more eminent manner qualified for the
pastoral office, his more eminent qualifications were a good ground of
precedence. He might, from a just sense of his own superior merit, be disposed
to assume the first place; and, by this means, custom might give him possession
of it: or, his more shining abilities might, being observed, procure from
others a voluntary giving him the pre-eminence. "For to those, who indisputably
excel in good qualities, honest and meek persons easily will yield precedence;
especially on occasions of public concernment, wherein it is expedient the best
qualified persons should be first seen." And if, upon the account of his
personal worth in special, the church of Smyrna had expressed a distinguishing
regard for Polycarp, it is nothing strange: nor if the Presbyters of this
church had honored him as their father; had allowed him a primacy of order or
dignity; waiting for him to lead in all public matters, and name himself first
in all epistles, as the first, or most distinguished person of their body, is
it any more than is now commonly practiced.

MOREOVER, it may be worth our notice, Polycarp was one that had acquaintance
with the Apostles of our Lord; and, what is more, was placed in the pastoral
office at Smyrna, by at least one of them: which are advantages that greatly
distinguished him. And if, in virtue hereof, being, distinguishly honored and
reverenced, he had assigned him the first place in the college of Presbyters,
belonging to this church, it is no more than might naturally be expected. Upon
the whole,

THERE is no reason to think, Polycarp's being first named, in this
inscription, was owing to any other cause, than some or all of those we have
mentioned. To be sure, it could not be because of his episcopal authority and
pre-eminence, unless the church of Smyrna was far different in its constitution
from the church at Philippi: and this is not in the least probable, since there
are no traces in this epistle of any superiority of order between Bishops and
Presbyters.

THERE is but one objection, what I have offered is liable to, that I know of:
and this is, that Polycarp is spoken of, in antiquity, as Bishop of Smyrna;
which being considered at the same time that we read this inscription, it will
naturally lead us to construe his particularly naming himself; and this, before
the Presbyters, as signifying his being of an order superior to them.

BUT as the whole weight of this objection (if there be any at all in it)
depends entirely upon the true import of the word Bishop, in the age of
Polycarp, there is no reason to be moved by it: since we shall see in these
papers (which are through the whole of them an answer to it) full evidence,
that this word, in this age, was certainly synonimous with the word Presbyter,
and used to signify nothing more than precisely the same order of church
officers.

IGNATIUS.
His character, writings, and testimonies from them, with observations and
remarks.
THE name, epithet, or whatever else any may please to call it, given this
Father, in all his epistles, is THEOPHOROS; which, as the learned say, may be
written differently accented: either THEOPHOROS, meaning, a "divine person,"
one who "carried God in his breast;" or THEOPHOROS signifying a person "carried
by God." The generality of those, who entertain a favorable opinion of
Ignatius's "epistles," think he was ordinarily spoken of, in the age in which
he lived, in the style of THEOPHOROS; and that this name was applied to him, in
the first of the above senses, on account of his great piety, his "soul's being
full of God." But both these points may, with good reason, be called in
question. It is undoubted fact, that he is never mentioned by any of the truly
primitive Fathers in the style of THEOPHOROS. And what may be worth notice,
those, among the later ones, who give him this name, do, at the same time,
speak of him as the "child" our Savior "took up into his arms," and "sat before
his disciples" as a pattern of humility. And this is the special reason they
assign of the application of this name. But, as the greatest admirers of
Ignatius esteem this a fabulous story, falling in with Chrysostom, who says of
this Father, that he never saw our Lord, nor enjoyed any converse with him,"
the name THEOPHOROS, founded on it, ought not to be ascribed to him. And,
probably, it was not originally inserted in the "inscriptions" to his
"epistles;" unless we should suppose them spurious, and not wrote until the
fable itself, that is the foundation of this name, in this sense, began to
obtain a currency.

IT is said, in support of the other reason of the application of this name,
that it seems to have been the very one, Ignatius himself is represented to
have given, in the extant account we have of his "martyrdom." For being asked,
"Who was THEOPHOROS?" His reply was, "He who has Christ in his breast." From
whence it is supposed, that he was commonly known by this name, and for this
reason. But, as "the acts of the martyrdom of Ignatius" are no where quoted,
mentioned, or so much as referred to, in any manner whatever, by any Father,
until we have got into those times that were greatly remote from his day, they
must be acknowledged to be, at least, of dubious authority, and not to be
depended on in point of argument. -- But it would take up too much room, to
little purpose, to enlarge here.

WHETHER Ignatius was called Theophoros or not; or whatever was the reason of
giving him this name, we are wholly at a loss to know, where he was born; how
educated; when, and by what means, converted to the Christian faith. And, in
truth, the ancient records are surprizingly silent about him; seldom mentioning
so much as his name, until we come into the fourth century. He is highly
celebrated by modern writers; and were we to judge, from the honorary manner,
in which they speak of him, we must suppose, that he was not only the most
pious and holy man, but the most faithful, and signally accomplished
gospel-minister, that ever lived. This, possibly, may be his just character;
but none can say that it is upon any other foot, than that of mere conjecture.

HE is commonly spoken of as Bishop of Antioch; but it ought to be remembered,
that Origin, a writer in the third century, is the first Father that mentions
him under this character. He is followed by the succeeding Fathers, in the
several ages in which they respectively flourished. And when they speak of him
in the style of Bishop, they doubtless took into the meaning of the word, the
whole that was understood by it in their day. But this will, by no means, let
us into the true idea of this term, as used in the days of Ignatius. It is
readily conceded, he was Bishop of Antioch; but utterly denied, that he was
Bishop of this church in the sense, in which this word was used, either in the
age of Origin, or in those ages that followed after. He might as properly be
called the Pastor, the first, or most eminent Presbyter, or Elder, of that
church, as the Bishop of it; for nothing more was meant by the word Bishop, in
the age in which Ignatius flourished.

IT may properly be observed here, the different account the Fathers give of
the order, or place, of his succession in the church of Antioch, makes a
difficulty not unlike that of Clement's succession in the church of Rome. The
difficulty is, where to place Ignatius in the line of succession; some of the
Fathers putting Euodius before him, and others placing Ignatius next after some
Apostle. The Episcopalians are much puzzled to solve this matter, and go into
very different schemes, which it is not my business, at present, to examine.

THE precise time of his taking upon him the charge of the Antiochian church
cannot be ascertained; nor is it particularly known, how he executed this
trust: though it may, in general, be charitably thought, that he approved
himself a faithful Minister of Christ; as he courageously chose to die rather
than disown his Master and Lord. There is no room to doubt his having laid down
his life for the sake of the religion of Jesus; but as to the manner and
circumstances of his death, as related in the "acts of his martyrdom," it may
be justly questioned, whether full credit is due to them. In special, it is
difficult to think that he should be sent from Antioch to suffer at Rome. The
most able writers are at a loss to account for this; and some look upon it as
plainly an incredible story. The great Jameson has this opinion of it. Says he,
Why should Trajan be at the pains to send him guarded thither? Certainly not
for an entertainment to the people, as the pretended "acts of Ignatius" affirm.
They had store of Christians of all sorts at Rome, with the spectacle of whose
sufferings they might daily be cloyed. Neither, as some answer, because he was
a famous Christian Bishop, at whose death the Roman Christians might be
terrified; seeing the Emperor might conclude, from Ignatius's great resolution
and boldness, which himself had perceived, that he would much animate them. But
the perpetual practice of these times frees us from further debate herein. I
can never find, that the Romans brought Christians from Asia, or such remote
places, to be executed at Rome; but to the nearest seats of justice; as is
clear in Polycarp, and other most famous Bishops, or Pastors. He goes on,
quoting a passage from Dr. Stillingfleet, in these words, And truly the story
of Ignatius, as much as it is defended with his epistles, does not seem to be
any of the most probable. For wherefore should Ignatius, of all others, be
brought to Rome to suffer? when the Pro-Consuls, and the Praesides
Provinciarum, did every where, in the time of persecution, execute their power
in punishing of Christians at their own tribunals, without sending them so long
a journey to Rome to be martyred there. -- But however it might be as to this,
and other circumstances, the fact itself, that he died a martyr, is not
disputed.

THE year of his martyrdom is variously fixed. Some place it in the year 107;
others in 110; and others still in 116. It would take up too much room, and to
no great purpose, to examine the reasons which have induced critical writers
thus to differ in settling the period of Ignatius's death; upon which account I
shall say nothing more about it.

His WRITINGS.
CONCERNING these, it will be proper I should be more particular, than would
have been necessary, had they not been the occasion of so much dispute in the
learned world.

No less than fifteen "Epistles" go under the name of Ignatius; and they have
commonly been divided into three classes. The first contains the three epistles
that are extant only in latin, and wrote, one of them to the "Virgin Mary," the
other two to "St. John." The second comprehends the five Greek epistles, which
are not mentioned either by Eusebius, or Jerome. The first, to "Mary
Cassabolita;" the second, to the inhabitants of Tarsus;" the third "to the
Antiochians;" the fourth, "to Hero," Deacon of the church at Antioch;" the
fifth, "to the Philippians." A few Roman-catholic writers give credit to these
epistles, as wrote by Ignatius; but they are herein universally opposed by
Episcopalian protestants, as well as others, who look upon them as evidently
supposititious. The third class comprises the seven epistles supposed to be
taken notice of by Eusebius; which are the following ones. The first, "to the
Ephesians;" the second, "to the Magnesians;" the third, "to the Trallians;" the
fourth, "to the Romans;" the fifth, "to the Philadelphians;" the sixth, "to the
Smyrnaeans;" the seventh "to Polycarp." N. B. Archbishop Usher, This noted
Antiquary was clearly and fully of the opinion, that the "epistle to Polycarp,"
which is reckoned among, and makes up, the seven "epistles of Ignatius," is
falsely attributed to him; as he supposes, this venerable Father wrote no
peculiar epistle to Polycarp, but that his "epistle to the church of Smyrna"
was wrote, both to them and their Bishop, and directed jointly to them both.
And he was in no doubt, but that this was the sentiment of Jerome also. And
others think so too; and the rather, because Honorius Augustodumensis, in his
book "de luminaribus ecclesiae," which is an epitome of Jerome, Bennadius,
Isadore Hispalensis, Beda, and others, enumerating the "epistles of Ignatius,"
altogether omits that to "Polycarp." It ought therefore to be, and, by the
great Usher, is ranked among those "epistles," which, to say the least, are
debious.
and some others after him, reject this last; supposing the six former to be
the only truly genuine ones.

THESE seven epistles, it may be observed, are again considered in two views.
The first exhibits them in the editions that were published before the days of
the celebrated Usher and Vossius; and thus considered, they are styled the
"larger epistles," and are now almost universally given up as incapable of a
defense, on account of the CORRUPTIONS that have some how or other unhappily
got mixed with them: though it ought always to be kept in remembrance, that the
former advocates for Prelacy, who had no other editions but these, strenuously
pleaded for them as the genuine valuable remains of the truly primitive
Ignatius, and appealed to them as such, in the cause of Episcopacy, perhaps
with as much frequency, and zeal, as any of their Episcopal brethren have done
since.

THE other view we have of these epistles is, as they are set forth by
Archbishop Usher, from two latin copies he met with in England, one in the
library of Caius college, the other in the library of Bishop Montague; and by
the learned Vossius, from a Greek manuscript copy he found in the Florentine
library. Considered in this view, they are called the "shorter epistles," and
represented as both genuine and uncorrupted. They are accordingly the only ones
now repaired to, in proof of the superiority of Bishops to Presbyters in order
and power. -- May it not be pertinently queried here. Do not Episcopalians
evidently condemn themselves, while they zealously adhere to these, and reject
the former editions of the "Ignatian epistles?" They would not be wrought upon,
by any methods of reasoning, to give up "epistles" they now acknowledge to be
basely interlarded with corruption, until they had got them, from other
manuscripts, in a state they could better defend. Does it not look, as though
they imagined their cause stood in absolute need of Ignatius, and were willing
to part with him in the former editions, only because they have others to
substitute in their room, that have not so glaring an appearance of a base
mixture.? One can scarce help thinking, if other editions should be set forth,
from still other manuscripts, more defensible than these they now have, they
would as readily quit these, as they have done the former ones.

BUT however pure and incorrupt these "shorter epistles," published from the
more lately discovered manuscripts, are supposed to be, there are some, and of
the first character too for learning, who have openly declared it to be their
opinion, that they are SPURIOUS; and a still greater number are persuaded they
have been corrupted, if they are not spurious, to a degree that unfits them to
be appealed to, as exhibiting the real sense of the true Ignatius.

THE strange silence of primitive antiquity concerning "epistles," under the
name of Ignatius, is mentioned by some, intimately acquainted with the Fathers,
as a sufficient reason to suspect that he never wrote any. There is no dispute
about the fact itself namely, that none of the Fathers, whose works are still
remaining, in whole, or in part, give notice of "epistles" wrote by IGNATIUS,
either a less or greater number, until we come into the fourth century, three
only excepted; of whom we shall particularly speak, in some proper place,
afterward. But then the plea is, this is a negative argument, and proves
nothing. It is acknowledged, negative evidence, considered in itself nakedly,
is of no great weight. But still, this kind of evidence may be so attended with
circumstances as to yield conviction, not much short of that which is grounded
on positive proof. Should a pretended writing be so circumstanced, in regard of
its supposed author, subject matter, occasion, and manner of penning, as that
there would be as much reason to expect, it should be taken notice of by those,
who must be thought to have been acquainted with it, as other writings of the
same age; and they are commemorated, while this is silently passed over with
neglect, not by here and there a Father, but the whole body of writers for two
hundred years: -- these are circumstances of no small importance, and add
strength to a negative testimony, rendering it almost equal in force to that
which is positive. Now, this is the case respecting these "Ignatian epistles."
For it ought to be remembered, and considered,

IGNATIUS lived in the first age of Christianity, was personally known to, at
least, some of the Apostles, and many of those who had been familiarly
conversant with them. And he was constituted, if we may believe the
Episcopalians, by one of the Apostles, at least, Bishop of the church of
Antioch, a noted city in itself, and remarkable on account of its being the
place, where believers were first distinguished by the name of CHRISTIANS.
These are circumstances, leaving it indisputable, that Ignatius was no obscure
person, but as likely to be known as any in that day. Besides all this, he was
a glorious martyr for the religion of Jesus; and, if he really wrote these
epistles, the circumstances of his martyrdom were truly extraordinary. For he
was condemned at Antioch, to die at Rome. And, in order to the execution of
this sentence, was conveyed, by a band of soldiers, as a prisoner of death for
the sake of Christ, through all the places, in which his name was named, that
lay in the way between the greatly distant cities from each other, Antioch and
Rome. This is a circumstance that would naturally spread his fame, and occasion
his being held in veneration by all the Christian churches, as he passed along.
Had he been before a person of no figure, this alone would have given him an
exalted reputation: nor is it supposeable, that any of the Fathers, of the same
age, should be more extensively known, or more frequently spoken of with honor.
These are the circumstances under which we are to conceive of the author of
these "epistles."

AND as extraordinary ones attend the "epistles" themselves; for they were
wrote (if wrote by him) in the character of one that was a prisoner, in bonds,
for the name of Christ, and actually on his journey to be devoured by wild
beasts: nor were they wrote to private friends, upon mere private concerns; but
to no less than six as famous churches as were then in the world; and, if we
may believe the Episcopalians, upon matters of the most essential importance.
These, surely, are considerations that will not suffer us to think, that these
"epistles" were unknown, or not esteemed worthy of particular notice. Epistles
wrote, and sent, to a number of such noted churches, by so good and great a
Bishop, upon the most weighty points, at so solemn a time as that of his dying
for the cause of Christ, must have occasioned much talk among Christians. They
would have put a distinguishing value upon such epistles; yea, they would have
esteemed them the most celebrated monuments of all uninspired antiquity. How
unaccountable then is it, that so little notice should be taken of them, for
the full space of two hundred years after the supposed date of their composure!
And what makes the matter still more strange is, that nothing more frequently
occurs, than the mention of other writings of the same age with these. There is
scarce an author, about the time in which Ignatius flourished, but his works
are particularly named, or quoted. And why should Ignatius, the most celebrated
of them all, be shamefully treated with silence and neglect? And this is the
more to be wondered at, as his writings were, in some cases, the most pertinent
that could have been referred to; far more so than other writings that are
particularly mentioned, and remembered with honor.

BUT the force of this negative argument will appear in a yet stronger point of
light, if, by way of specimen, we particularly consider one or two of the
ancient writers, who take no notice of these "epistles."

THE first shall be Irenaeus. We have extant of his a large volume, entitled,
"the confutation of that which is falsely called knowledge;" the main design of
which is, to explain and refute the erroneous notions of Simon, Menander,
Valentinus, Marcion, Cerinthus, Cerdon," and as many other heretics as had
appeared in his day, and for an hundred years before. In such a work as this,
of so great length, and such variety of matter and argument, it might well be
expected, some mention would have been made of so celebrated a writer, and
martyr, as Ignatius, who both wrote and died in this very age: especially, if
it be considered, that his "epistles" are peculiarly pertinent to the great
design of Irenaeus's argument, more so by far than any other ancient writing,
we know any thing of, then extant in the world. For some (perhaps the most) of
those very errors he opposes, were both noted and rejected by Ignatius. I need
not be at the pains to produce instances of this for the sake of those, who are
acquainted with these writings; and for others, if they will only compare the
"Ignatian epistles", with the first of "Irenaeus's five books", they may, with
their own eyes, see a number of them. What therefore more natural than to look
for references to "these epistles", in the works of Irenaeus? And how can it be
accounted for, that he should take no notice of them, but that he knew of no
such epistles? Had he confined himself to reason, or scripture, in confutation
of these heretics, having no recourse to former writers, it would be some
apology for his silence: but, far from this, one of his chief arguments is
taken from "the succession of doctrine in the Christian church;" in order to
confirm which, he recurs to the WRITINGS, as well as SAYINGS, of those who were
older than the heretics he was refuting. He makes a very particular and
honorable mention of CLEMENT, and his "epistle to the Corinthians," and opposes
even the whole of it against the heresies he had under consideration. Lib. iii.
Cap. iii.
And yet, not a word is said, either here, or elsewhere, in his whole book, in
commemoration of "Ignatius's epistles;" nor is there one word quoted from him
to the purpose of the grand argument he has in prosecution.

THE answer to this is, That, in the place where Irenaeus mentions "Clement,"
he had, to prevent being tedious, expressly limited himself to "the succession
of doctrine in the church at Rome," of which Clement had been Bishop; and as,
in the name of that church, he had wrote an "epistle to the Corinthians,"
wherein the doctrine of that church, and its opposition to the doctrine of
these heretics, might be easily discerned, there was good reason, why he should
distinguish Clement; a pertinency in appealing to him, while there would have
been none in appealing to Ignatius. But, it is observable, in this very place,
where he had confined his argument to the church of Rome, he takes occasion to
commemorate "Polycarp's epistle to the Philippians." Lib. iii. Cap. iii.
And why might he not, with as much propriety, have taken some notice of the
"epistles of Ignatius?" To this also it is replied, Irenaeus introduces the
mention he makes of Polycarp, by saying, he had been at Rome, where he opposed
these heretics, and recovered many from the errors wherewith they had been
infected: upon which account it was to his purpose to name Polycarp, while
there was no reason, at this time, to mention Ignatius. But, it deserves
consideration, over and above mentioning Polycarp's being at Rome, and
confuting the Heretics there, which was the only point directly to his
argument, he takes occasion to celebrate his "epistle to the Philippians".
There is little, or nothing, in this epistle to the design he was upon, and
accordingly he makes no use of it, or any sentence in it, to oppose the
heretics: yet, this primitive Father having an epistle extant, he could not
forbear making a record of it. And it might have been as proper, and pertinent,
even in this very place, to have done the like by the "epistles of Ignatius.
For it is particularly worthy of notice, Ignatius had been at Rome as well as
Polycarp; and, what is more, died there a glorious martyr in the cause of
Christ: Nor should it be forgot, that "these epistles," as Episcopalians tell
us, were collected by Polycarp, at least, some of them, and annexed by him to
his "own epistle" as part of one and the same volume. Irenaeus, therefore,
having mentioned "Polycarp's epistle", would, it may reasonably and naturally
be supposed, have mentioned the others also under the same cover, if he had
known of them; and the rather, because they were the work of so eminent a
primitive Father, and of all the writings, then extant, the best adapted to
confound the heretics he was arguing against.

BUT should it be allowed, that, in this particular place, while his argument
was under a special limitation, it was more proper to take notice of the
"epistles of Clement and Polycarp", than of "Ignatius"; yea, that there was
good reason for mentioning the former, and none at all for the latter; yet,
what is this to account for the silence there every where else appears
concerning these epistles? Because it was more proper in one place to mention
Clement and Polycarp, than Ignatius, will it therefore follow there was a
propriety in making no mention of him at all? If this was a proper place to
speak of Clement, and Polycarp, might he not, in some other place, have done
the like honor to Ignatius? And his silence with respect to this most noted
Father, is the more strange, as he has found some suitable place to remember,
not only Clement, and Polycarp, but Hermas, Ignatius's contemporary, and
Papias, and Justin, not a great way posterior to him. Surely, no one, who
esteems "Ignatius's epistles to be genuine, will say, that Irenaeus had more
reason, or could with greater propriety, record the writings of these Fathers,
than those of the more famed and memorable Ignatius. Besides all which, it may
be worth minding, that nothing is more common with Irenaeus, than to have
recourse to the sayings, both ORAL and WRITTEN, of those Elders who preceeded
him. "As a certain Elder says," "as was said by the Presbyters," "as I heard
from such a Senior," "as was delivered by those who were disciples of the
Apostles," are phrases very familiar with him. He often, in this manner,
introduces the words of the ancients. And yet, in so many references, he never
makes use of so much as a single sentence from Ignatius, to his grand purpose,
that of refuting the heretics; though, in most of his epistles, there was that
which was well adapted to such a design. It certainly looks, as if he knew
nothing of "these epistles": if he had, he must needs have dropped, at least,
some hint about them, somewhere or other, in so large a work.

I SHALL next mention Clement of Alexandria; a person of vast learning, second
to none in the age in which he lived, for his acquaintance with all sorts of
writers. Those works of his that are still in being are crowded with an immense
variety of quotations from philosophers, poets, historians, and all kinds of
writers, whether Pagan or Christian. He particularly mentions the "epistle of
Barnabas," the "epistle of Clement of Rome," the "pastor of Hermas," all
writers in the age in which Ignatius lived. And if the "Ignatian epistles" had
been extant in his day, one of his prodigious learning must have had knowledge
of it; and if he had, it is scarce credible he should have passed them over in
silence. He often takes occasion to speak of the heretics that corrupted the
Christian faith; and there being so much in Ignatius upon this head, it is
really strange, he should never once commemorate so famous a writer, and
martyr. It is quite natural to think, he had never seen, or heard of "epistles"
under the name of Ignatius.

AND the same may be said of Tertullian, and other writers, It may not be
unworthy of notice, that, among the numerous writings of the Fathers, which are
now lost, but were extant in the days of Eusebius, and red by him, he has named
no one that speaks of Ignatius as having wrote "epistles": from whence it may
be fairly concluded, that they made no mention of epistles of his, any more
than those which have been handed down to us. For nothing more common with
Eusebius, than to cite passages from the writings that are now lost, and
passages too which mention the names of writers con-temporary with Ignatius,
and posterior to him. It is therefore to the highest degree probable, if
Eusebius had met with any writers before his own day, who had mentioned
epistles of Ignatius, that he would have given us, at least, some intimation of
it. It is observable, he has preserved a fragment of an anonymous author, [some
think Maximus, for reasons it would be needless to insert here] in which he
says, in confutation of the heresy of Artemon, who held that "Christ was only a
mere man," that it was "first of all opposed by the holy scriptures, and next
by the books of sundry men long before the time of Victor, I mean Justin,
Miltiades, Tatian, Clement, Irenaeus, Melito, and many others;" H. E. Lib. v.
Cap. xviii. No notice is here taken of Ignatius, in whose epistles, if his, in
those editions of them that are contended for, this heresy of Artemon is as
directly and fully condemned, as by any of the writers whose names are
particularly mentioned. Surely, if this author had known of these epistles, he
would not have omitted to refer to them, when it would have been so pertinent
to the argument he was upon. And it must be acknowledged, to be altogether
unaccountable, if epistles of Ignatius had been mentioned, or quoted, in any of
the writings now lost, but in being in the days of Eusebius, and seen and
celebrated by him, that he should pass over so important an article in total
silence; especially, as it would have been so much to his purpose to have been
particular in taking notice of it.
between the days of Ignatius and Eusebius, who take no notice of "these
epistles"; as might be particularly illustrated with reference to them, but
that enough has been already said to let the reader see, that this negative
evidence is so circumstanced as to give just occasion to suspect, whether
Ignatius ever wrote the "epistles" that are ascribed to him.

IT will be but fair, before I proceed, to take notice of the supposed evidence
there is, within the three first centuries, that Ignatius wrote these
"epistles." And this I shall do, by impartially laying before the reader the
whole of it, in the very words of the original authors, without concealing any
one circumstance, within my knowledge, that will add weight to it; and, at the
same time, I shall offer, under each testimony, what may be said to weaken the
strength of the argument herefrom deduced.

POLYCARP is the first witness brought to testify, that Ignatius wrote the
"epistles" that are supposed to be his. The testimony to this purpose we have
in the Polycarpian "epistle to the Philippians." The 13th and 14th sections, in
which it is contained, run thus,

BOTH you, and Ignatius, wrote to me, that, should any one go into Syria, he
might carry your letters, if either I, or the messenger I should send for you,
should have a favorable opportunity. The epistles of Ignatius, which he sent to
US, and AS MANY OTHER AS WE HAD BY US, we have sent to you, according to your
desire: which are added to this epistle, by which you may be greatly profited.
For they treat of faith, patience, and whatever pertains to edification in the
Lord.

AND signify to me what ye certainly know about Ignatius, and those that are
with him.

SCRIPSISTIS mihi, et vos, et Ignatius, ut si quis vadit ad Syriam, deferat
literas meas quas fecero ad vos, si habuerimus tempus opportunum, sive ego, seu
legatus quem misero pro vobis. Epistolas sane Ignatii, quae transmissae sunt
vobis [fortasse nobis Archbishop Usher's note here is, Ita locum hunc citant
Eusebius, Nicephorus, et Graecus actorum Ignatii scriptor anonymus; quam
legitimam esse lectionem, agnoscit etiam Baronius." In the translation of
Archbishop Wake, we read US, instead of YOU.
] ab eo, et ALIAS QUANTASCUMQUE, apud nos habuimus, transmissimus vobis,
secundum quod mandastis: quae sunt subjectae huic epistolae; ex quibus magnus
vobis erit profectus. Continent enim fidem, patientiam, et omnem edificationem
ad Dominum nostrum pertinentem.

ET de ipso Ignatio, et de his qui cum eo sunt, quod certius agnoveritis
significate.

IT is thought a strong confirmation of this testimony from Polycarp, that
Eusebius, when speaking of the "Ignatian epistles," as commemorated by him,
quotes from him this passage in the original Greek, which exhibits the very
idea that is conveyed by the above ancient version.

UPON this "Polycarpian testimony" it may be observed, that the whole
paragraph, from whence it is taken, is suspected to have been an after
addition, designed to give credit to the "Ignatian epistles". And two things
are offered in support of such a suspicion.

THE first is, its apparent abruptness, and want of relation to the foregoing
discourse. There is no connection between this, and what went before: nor had
Polycarp dropped any hint, that would lead one to expect this notice of
"Ignatius epistles": and what is said, with reference to them, is so inserted,
as to its manner, that no one, when he had read the foregoing words, could
begin upon these without naturally making a pause, as meeting with what he had
no reason given him to look for. Some, of great intimacy with the ancient
writings, have, from this consideration only, been inclined to suspect, that
the passage was unfairly crowded into the epistle. -- But I only mention this
as a circumstance, that may give weight to what may be further offered of
greater importance.

The other ground of suspicion therefore is, an apparent inconsistency, or
contradiction, between what is affirmed in one of these passages, and another
in the body of the epistle. The ninth section contains these words, "Wherefore
I exhort all of you to obey the word of righteousness, and exercise all
patience, which ye have seen set before your eyes, not only in the blessed
IGNATIUS, and Zozimus, and Rufus, but in others among yourselves, and in Paul
himself, and the rest of the Apostles: being Confidentes quia hi omnes non in
vacuum concutrerunt, sed in fide et justitia; et ad debitum sibi locum a
Domino, cui et compassi sunt, abierunt.
confident in this, that all these have not run in vain, but in faith and
righteousness; and ARE GONE TO THE PLACE DUE TO THEM FROM THE LORD, for whom
they also suffered". -- Ignatius is so evidently here spoken of, as having
finished his sufferings, and gone to the Lord, that there can be no reasonable
room for doubt in the case. THESE ALL [HI OMNES] that is, IGNATIUS, Zosimus,
Rufus, and others, HAVE NOT RUN IN VAIN, but are GONE TO THE PLACE DUE TO THEM
FROM THE LORD. No one that reads these words can be at a loss to determine,
that Ignatius, in the thoughts of Polycarp, was really dead, and actually gone
to the place of future rewards. And yet, this very Ignatius is here directly
supposed to be alive, and not come to his last sufferings. "Signify to me what
ye know about IGNATIUS, and THOSE THAT ARE WITH HIM." Is not this a manner of
speaking altogether absurd, unless it had been presumed, that Ignatius was yet
alive? The most plain signification of the words is, that this was the real
truth. Can it now be imagined, that Polycarp, after he had spoken of Ignatius
as actually dead, and recommended his sufferings and death as an example to
others, should, in the same short epistle, speak of him as alive, and desire to
know about him; and this, from the very persons to whom he had recommended his
death as an example? This would be very strange; and it would be dishonorary to
so famous a Father to suppose, he should be thus inconsistent with himself: but
it is no uncommon thing for knavish persons to do that, which, through want of
caution, serves to discover their fraud.

BUT we shall be able to perceive more fully the force of what has been
offered, if we attend a while to what has been said to weaken its strength.

IT is pleaded, Polycarp does not, in the objected words, insinuate that
Ignatius was now alive, as is pretended, in contradiction to what he had said
of him as dead, in sect. ix. But, the Philippians, being likely to know
considerable about Ignatius, both while hs was alive, and while he was
suffering martyrdom, he writes to them, as it was proper and natural for to him
to do, to communicate to him what they knew, both about him, and those that
were his companions. This does not seem satisfactory. The question is not, what
the Philippians might know about Ignatius, nor whether it was proper for
Polycarp to desire them to tell him what they knew about him? but whether the
manner of writing, here used, is not such as evidently supposes Ignatius had
not yet come to his last sufferings, contrary to what he had before expressly
declared? The words, "signify to me what ye certainly know about Ignatius, and
those THAT ARE WITH HIM," obviously suppose the person wrote about to be alive.
And it is observable, he is represented as having his companions about him.
"Ignatius, and those that are with him;" ARE, in the present tense. And if
Polycarp had not known that he was dead, the mode of diction is easy and
natural; but uncouth, I may say unintelligible, if compared with the firm
persuasion he had before expressed, that he had finished his course, and
obtained the crown of martyrdom.

OTHERS endeavor to remove the difficulty another way. They argue, Polycarp,
when he wrote this epistle, concluded in his own mind, that Ignatius, by this
time, had gone through his sufferings; for which reason, he pertinently writes
as in sect. ix: yet, having received no certain account of his death, and not
being fully satisfied, whether he had suffered, or not; or, if he had, how he
had been treated by his persecutors, and how he had behaved in his last
encounter with the beasts, desires the Philippians, who were much nearer to
Rome than he was, and might therefore very probably have heard much later from
thence then he had, to send him an account of what they knew relative to these
matters. And in all this, what, they say, is there, not that locks like a
contradiction, but that is not very natural, and particularly most becoming the
love and friendship of the blessed Polycarp toward him, concerning whom he so
diligently enquired? It is obvious, at first sight, that this plea directly
contradicts the foregoing one; and yet, it is as far from unfolding the
difficulty. For, from the whole strain of sect. ix, it appears with a meridian
luster, that Polycarp was fully persuaded that Ignatius was dead, and gone to
reap the fruit of his fidelity to his Lord. He was in no doubt as to the truth
of this fact, nor needed any information about it. He speaks of it as a matter
that was well known both to himself, and to the Philippians: nor can words more
clearly and strongly signify this, than those he has used to the purpose.
"THESE ALL," therefore IGNATIUS among the rest, and as truly as Paul, and the
other Apostles, "have not run in vain, but ARE with the Lord in the place due
to them." And yet, according to the plea here made, it is supposed that
Polycarp, in the objected words, speaks of it as a matter of uncertainty,
whether Ignatius had come to his encounter with the beasts; which is no way
reconcilable with the clear persuasion of his being dead, he had before
expressed in sect. ix.

IT is further said, in favor of the genumeness of this passage, that no one
who designed to serve a turn by corrupting this epistle would have been, either
so negligent as not carefully to read it over, or having done this, would have
been so foolish as to have subjoined a request to the Philippians in direct
contradiction to what the true Polycarp had told them before; and which, by
consequence, must discover the fraud, and frustrate the design in view. This,
it is possible, may seem an argument of weight to those unacquainted with
antiquity; but it will not appear in the same light to such as are versed in
this kind of study; as they have often met with like instances of folly.
Whether the persons guilty of such fraudulent dealing were commonly weak; or
whether they imagined those they designed to impose upon were of this
character; or whether, though artful and cunning, they were left in Providence
(as is often the case at present in regard of all kinds of cheats) to do that,
through carelessness and inattention, which serves to discover their fraud, I
shall not pretend to say: but it is a fact notoriously known, that WHOLE
PIECES, as well as INTERPOLATED SENTENCES were, in those days, obtruded upon
the world, full as ridiculous as this supposed corruption can be represented to
be. Signal instances of this nature are to be met with in the "apostolical
constitutions and canons," which are universally allowed to have been
fraudulently dealt with, even by those who have not an opinion of them as
spurious. The interpolations, and additions, made in these writings, do so
grossly break in upon the order of time, the declared mind of the Apostles in
the inspired books, and are so often chargeable with contradicting other parts
of the same writings, that one could scarce believe it possible a person of
common sense should be guilty of such ridiculous weakness, but that there is no
arguing against stubborn fact. The reader that is inclined to see this supposed
addition to "Polycarp's epistle" fully matched for the weakness, and folly, it
is said to contain, may meet with it done to his mind, in what has been
offered, under the head of "Clement's writings," in the preceding pages. To
the like purpose he may consult Dr. Smallbroke's "Clementine constitutions
confuted, in answer to Mr. Whiston."

BUT if we drop the supposition of an "interpolation," and even allow this
"Polycarpian testimony," to be unsuspectedly genuine, it will not, at once, as
too many have imagined, decide the controversy relative to the "Ignatian
epistles. " For it does not prove what it is brought for; but leaves the
greatest part of " these epistles" destitute of all real evidence in their
support. At most, two only of these epistles are certainly taken notice of. No
more are couched under those words of Polycarp, "the epistles of Ignatius which
he sent to us:" nor do the greatest patrons of "Ignatius's writings" pretend,
that any other are here referred to, than his "epistle to the Smyrnaeans," and
a particular one to "Polycarp himself." And as to the words that immediately
follow, "and as many other epistles as we had by us;" though they are
interpreted, by episcopal writers, to mean " the other epistles of IGNATIUS,"
there is not the least need, unless to serve a turn, to look upon them as
referring at all to any of the "Ignatian epistles." They are generally wrote,
without any limitation to Ignatius. Archbishop Wake indeed has been pleased,
no less than three times Apost. Fathers, p. 22, 31, and in his translation of
the epistle, p. 59.
to insert the words OF HIS, without giving the reader any notice that they
were words of his own putting in; by means whereof the mere English reader, and
all who have seen only his translation, are unavoidably led to imagine, that
the words, in "Polycarp's epistle," are absolutely confined to Ignatius; when,
in truth, they are generally expressed, having nothing to answer the
Archbishop's limiting words OF HIS. In the "old version" of Polycarp, the
words run thus, "Epistolas sane Ignatii, quae transmissae sunt vobis [pro
nobis] ab eo, et ALIAS QUANTASCUMQUE apud nos habuimus, transmissimus vobis,
secundum quod mandastis." The original Greek, as quoted by Eusebius, perfectly
agrees herewith. What is translated in the old copy, " ET ALIAS QUANTASCUMQUE,"
is in the Greek, KAI ALLAS OSAS. It is acknowledged, in the first part of this
passage, "Epistles of Ignatius" are directly mentioned; that is, the
Episcopalians themselves being judges, "Epistolas sane Ignatii," Archbishop
Wake translates "the epistles of IGANATIUS;" and in the margin has these words,
" that is, to himself, and to the church of Smyrna". Cotelerius's note upon the
same words is this, "designantur duae Ignatii epistolae: una ad Polycarpum;
altera ad Polycarpi seu Smyrnemsem ecclesiam.
two of the epistles said to be his, "one to Polycarp;" the "other to the
church of Smyrna:" but, in the latter part of it, the words are general, and so
far from being limited to Ignatius, that they may, with propriety, be
interpreted of ANY EPISTLES WHATEVER, Polycarp, or the church of Smyrna, might
have had by them, of other famous primitive Fathers. And there are some
considerations that fairly lead to such a general construction of the words.
For it is plain, these epistles were sent, by Polycarp and his church, to the
church at Philippi, at their desire which had been signified to them. "We have
sent the epistles as you desired." And it is quite easy and natural to conceive
of their sending, upon the desire of the Philippians, the "epistles" Ignatius
had wrote to THEM. But how should they come by his other epistles, those which
he wrote to the "Magnesians," to the "Philadelphians," to the "Ephesians," to
the "Romans," and to the "Trallians?" And why should the church at Philippi
send to them for these epistles? If Ignatius had really wrote to these
churches, and the Philippians had a mind to see his epistles to them, it would
have been natural for them to have sent to those churches for a copy of their
respective letters; and in every respect as natural as was their sending to
Polycarp, and his church, for the letters he wrote to them. It therefore looks
as if the "epistles", here spoken of, as sent to the Philippians, were those
"epistles of Ignatius" which he had wrote to Polycarp, and the Smyrnaeans; and
"such other epistles", of other famous persons, as they had by them, that might
be of more special value. There is nothing in this construction of the words
that appears strained, or unnatural; nor is there the least need of any other
interpretation. And should this prove to be the true construction, only TWO of
the "SEVEN Ignatian epistles" are here mentioned. The remaining five must be
taken care of by others. Yea, should we allow of the Episcopalian
interpretation, the matter would not be a great deal mended. In this case, it
is true, it might be argued, that Ignatius wrote more than two epistles; but
what other epistles, to whom, or how many, would, after all, remain an utter
uncertainty. The words specify nothing. "And as many other epistles as we had
by us:" -- Nothing is here said by which it can be determined, how many
epistles were intended, nor whether any of the present collection were of their
number.

BUT, if we should suppose all that is pleaded for this testimony, from
Polycarp, to be really true, the controversy about these "epistles," in point
of dependence on them, as containing the sense of Ignatius, will remain still
undetermined. For if it be allowed, that Polycarp sent a collection of "seven
Ignatian epistles" to the church at Philippi; it will not follow from hence,
that the present collection of the like number of epistles, under the name of
Ignanatius, is the same incorrupt, unadulterated collection with that of
Polycarp's. It is granted, it was not the same before the days of Usher, and
Vossius. And, since the appearance of those learned antiquaries, the case may
possibly be the same; and it must evidently be so, if the collection of these
"epistles," in their supposed best edition, contain such things as argue a date
posterior to the age in which Ignatius lived, and that are altogether unworthy
of that primitive Father, and martyr: and that they contain such things as
these, we shall have occasion, in its proper place, particularly to evince.

IN the mean time, let us go on to Irenaeus, the next writer, within the second
century, cited in favor of the "epistles of Ignatius". His words are these, "as
one from among us SAID, being adjudged to the beasts that he might be a martyr
for God; I am the corn of Christ, and am ground with the teeth of beasts, that
I may be found the pure bread of God". Quemadmodum quidam de nostris DIXIT,
prompter martyrium in Deum adjudicatus ad bestias; "quoniam frumentnm sum
Christi, et per dentes bestiarum molor, ut mundus panis Dei inveniar." Advers.
Heret. Lib. v. Cap. xxviii.
These words are found in the epistle to the Romans, under the name of
Ignatius, sect. iv. And it is thought a weighty circumstance attending this
testimony, that Eusebius has quoted it, and after this manner; "and Irenaeus
knew of his [Ignatius's] martyrdom, and makes mention of his epistles in these
words, "as one among us SAID, [ eipe] being adjudged to the beasts for the
testimony of God, I am the what of God, and am ground with the teeth of beasts,
that I may be found pure bread." H. E. Lib. iii. Cap. xxxvi, where the Greek of
Eusebius well agrees with the Latin of Irenaeus.


IN answer to this testimony of Irenaeus, it is allowed, that Ignatius is the
person here referred to, and that the cited words are to be seen in one of the
extant epistles under his name.

BUT this notwithstanding, it does not appear sufficiently evident, that
Irenaeus either knew of this "epistle," or took this sentence out of it. It is
certain, he makes no mention of the "epistle," neither does he anywhere say,
that he transcribed these words from it. And it is observable, the words are
not introduced, "as one from among us WROTE;" but "as one from among us SAID."
A great deal of pains has been taken to prove, that the phrase," as was said,"
is not only proper, but frequently used, even by Irenaeus himself, to introduce
citations from known written books. And no one ever questioned its being a
phrase, both proper, and commonly used, by all kinds of authors, by which to
bring in the written words of others. But the question is, whether it is not as
proper a mode of speech, and as commonly used, to introduce the vocal as the
written sayings of others? And since the point in debate is, whether Ignatius
wrote these epistles, how can it be thought a satisfactory proof, that he did,
to bring a quotation from Irenaeus, introduced after that manner," as one of us
SAID?" which phrase, to say the least, is as well capable of being interpreted
to refer to a VOCAL, as a WRITTEN, saying? It is replied to this, the words
here quoted are found in one of the written "epistles" ascribed to Ignatius,
which is a circumstance that ought, in all reason, to determine the matter,
that Irenaeus took them from this "epistle." I answer, the total silence of
Irenaeus about any epistles of Ignatius, when he had the fairest, the most
frequent, and most urgent occasions, to have mentioned them, is a circumstance
full as strong to induce a belief, that he knew nothing of them. But this is
not all. Nothing more common with Irenaeus, than to have recourse to the VOCAL
sayings of those that were ancienter than himself; and a great number of them
are introduced, in the very same manner with these words of Ignatius, "as such
an one said." And as Irenaeus was acquainted with Polycarp, Ignatius's
contemporary, and a vast number of other ancients; why might he not have
received this saying from them, as what had been uttered by Ignatius, in the
day of his martyrdom? nor is this mere conjecture only. For these very words
are mentioned by Jerome, as delivered by Ignatius in his last sufferings. His
words are these: "Cum jam damnatus esset ad bestias, et ardore patiendi,
rugientes audiret leones, ait: frumentum Christi sum, dentibus bestiarum molor,
ut panis mundus inveniar." Vid. lib. de viris illust. Cap. 16.
"Now, when he had been condemned to the beasts, and in the heat of his
suffering had heard the roaring of the lions, he said, I am the corn of Christ,
I am ground with the teeth of beasts, that I may be found pure bread. And "the
acts of Ignatius's martyrdom," both the Greek and Latin acts, exhibit the same
account with Jerome; and so do Simeon the Metaphrast, and the Roman breviary.
Episcopalians will not deny, that these words were uttered by Ignatius, in the
time of his suffering. What difficulty can there then be in supposing, that
Irenaeus should make mention of them, as a known, memorable SAYING of his? And
why should not this be rather supposed, than that he should take them from that
"epistle" which is attributed to him as its author? Especially, as there are
such notorious circumstances, all conspiring to encourage the thought, that he
never saw it.

BUT if we should allow this testimony its utmost force, no more can be
collected from it, than that there was extant in the days of Irenaeus one
SEVENTH PART of those epistles that now go under the name of Ignatius. For it
is only the "epistle to the Romans," one of the seven that are attributed to
him, that is here referred to. And every one, at the first view, must be
sensible, how weak a testimony this is; and that if it be allowed, or
disallowed, it will neither much hurt, or benefit, the general credit of these
"epistles." And what may be thought worthy of notice, this "epistle to the
Romans," the only one, upon the largest supposition, here referred to, is the
only one, among all the "Ignatian epistles," that is silent about the cause of
Episcopacy. Nothing, as I remember, is said here upon this head; not so much as
the name Bishop mentioned, unless once very transiently. So that this is the
only "epistle," among the "seven," that is insignificant to the controversy we
are upon. And if it be received as quoted by Irenaeus, it will do the
Presbyterians no disservice; neither, if it be rejected as unknown to him, will
it do the Episcopalians any harm. It is perfectly a matter of no importance, as
to the present dispute, what becomes of it, or is said about it.

AFTER Irenaeus, Origin, who flourished in the third century, is recurred to.
In his "prologue to the commentaries on canticles," he says, "We remember one
to have said, Ignatius by name, concerning Christ, but my love is crucified:
nor do I judge him worthy of reproof for this." "Meminimus aliquem dixisse,
nomine Ignatium, de Christo, "meus autem amor crucifixus est": nec reprehendi
^um pro hoc dignum judico."
These words occur in the "Ignatian epistle to the Romans," section vii. This
same Origin, in his "sixth homily on Luke," speaks thus, "I have found it
elegantly wrote in the epistle of a certain martyr, Ignatius I mean, Bishop of
Antioch, the second after Peter, who fought with beasts in the persecution at
Rome, the virginity of Mary was kept secret from the prince of this world.
"E^eganter in cujusdam martyris epistola scriptum reperi, Ignatium dico,
Episcopum Antiochiae, post Petrum secundum, qui in persecutione Romae pugnavit
ad bestias, "principem saeculi hujus latuit Virginitas Mariae."
These words we have in the "Ignatian epistle to the Ephesians," sect. xix.

TO these testimonies from Origin, it must be said, that they lie under the
unhappiness of being as exceptionable, as well as those we have already
considered. As to the first of them, it is taken from a piece that is thought,
by many of the most learned writers, not to be Origen's, (who was a Presbyter
of the Greek church) but the work of some Latin author: or, should it be
supposed to be his, we have it only in the translation of Ruffin, who has taken
such a shameful liberty in all his translations of Origin, to add, alter, and
diminish, that there is no knowing what is his own, and what Origen's: and this
is so generally acknowledged, and lamented, by the learned, that a word need
not be said in proof of it. It is, I suppose, for this, or the foregoing
reason, or both, that those celebrated antiquaries, Usher, and Vossius, do
neither of them make use of this Origenical testimony, in the evidence they
exhibit in favor of the "epistles of Ignatius"; as may be seen in their
"prefaces" to their editions of these "epistles," in Le' Clerc's edition of
Cotelerius's "apostolical Fathers." They were certainly well acquainted with
it; and if they had thought it of any significancy, they would have insisted on
it. -- As for the other testimony, taken from the "homily on Luke," this also
is suspected to be the work, not of Origin, but of some Latin writer: or
otherwise, it is extant only in Latin; and if it was translated from the Greek
by Jerome, as is pretended, there is no knowing what is Origen's. Du-pin says,
"the versions of Jerome are not more exact than Ruffin's: and Ruffin complains
of the liberty Jerome took in his translations, as Jerome complains of Ruffin."
And, surely, no great credit ought to be given to mere translations, which are
known to have been done with an unbounded license: and as this is the case
here, these testimonies, brought to view, in evidence that Ignatius wrote
"epistles," are of little weight, and will be esteemed so by impartial judges.

IT would be an omission if I did not add, it is a shrewd circumstance, in
favor of Origen's having never made mention of the "Ignatian epistles," that
Eusebius takes not the least notice of it. No one was a greater admirer, and
reader, of Origen's works than Eusebius; nor was there an ancient Father more
thoroughly versed in them. It cannot therefore be accounted for, if Origin had,
in the above specified places, commemorated Ignatius, that he should be totally
silent about it. It is much more natural to think, they are not the words of
Origin, but of some interpolator, or false interpreter.

WE have now considered the whole evidence, in proof that Ignatius wrote such
"epistles" as go under his name, until we come into the fourth century. And, I
doubt not, that has been offered, which, to every unbiassed mind, will appear
sufficient to induce a suspicion, lest the venerable Ignatius should have been
personated by some bold impostor. Most certainly, the evidence, in support of
his being the real author of these "epistles," falls vastly short of what might
reasonably have been expected. There are, in all, but three writers, for the
full space of two hundred years, that are produced as witnesses, and the
evidence they give is so clogged with difficulties, as to occasion great doubt
and hesitation. And, in truth, considering the character of Ignatius, his
nearness to the Apostles, the extraordinary circumstances of his death, the
uncommon occasion of his writing these "epistles" (if they are truly his):
considering, I say, these things, I may venture to appeal to the common sense
of mankind, whether it is not astonishing, that such epistles, of such a man,
should be passed over in such silence for two hundred years together; no one
writer making mention of them, unless in such a manner, and under such marks of
suspicion, as to leave the mind in a state of uncertainty, to say the least? I
will not affirm, notwithstanding all that has been offered, that Ignatius wrote
none of the "epistles" he is said to have wrote, though, to me, it appears
highly improbable that he ever did.

I SHOULD now have gone on to show, that the "Ignatian epistles" are, if not
spurious, yet so intermixed with corruption, as to be unfit to be recurred to
in the present controversy. But previous to this, I shall take notice of a
difficulty that is urged, upon the supposition Ignatius is not allowed to have
wrote these "epistles" that are ascribed to him, and said to be his.

IT is this, that Eusebius certainly thought, "these epistles" were wrote by
Ignatius himself. And as he was a person well capable of judging in this
matter, much better than we who live at so great a distance from the times of
Ignatius, it is said to be a very bold thing now to plead, that "these
epistles" are spurious.

TO this the reply is, Eusebius was undoubtedly a person of great learning,
some think, the most learned among all the christian Greek Fathers. And we are
exceedingly beholden to him for many valuable fragments of the works of many
valuable primitive authors, which have long since perished by the injury of
time; as also for a great variety of knowledge, relative to the Christian
history, we must otherwise have been destitute of. But this notwithstanding, we
are not obliged to call him Master, and, at all adventures, to take every thing
for truth just as he has delivered it. For, after all his learning, and
whatever good qualities he might be possessed of, he was a man "subject to like
infirmities" with others; and there are too many instances, in his writings, of
carelessness, want of due attention, and a more thorough examination, not to
say any thing worse. And he is, on all sides, frequently charged with slips and
mistakes, and some that are very gross. The great Scaliger says of him, "No one
has contributed more to the Christian history, and no one is guilty of more
mistakes." Of the same mind was the learned Du-pin, though he expresses himself
in softer terms. For, having said what he judged proper in commendation of his
"ecclesiastical history," he adds, "it must nevertheless be acknowledged, it is
not altogether so perfect as were to be wished: for it is not written smoothly,
neither is it always exact." And in his note here, he reckons up, at least,
half a score of faults, which, says he, "are contrary both to the truth of
history, and chronology." Nor do any of the noted antiquaries, either
Protestant or Romish, Episcopal or Presbyterian, think themselves obliged
sacredly to adhere to him; but do all, in their turns, take liberty to differ
from him, and, as they imagine, upon just grounds.

BUT what is more particularly pertinent to what we are upon, Eusebius too
credulously suffered himself to be sometimes betrayed into the belief of that,
which, if he had examined with more care, caution, and suspicion, he would
readily have rejected. There are instances of this to be met with in his
valuable history. One I shall here mention, as being full to the point under
consideration. In the last chapter but one of the first book of this history,
we have a most formal account of "Agbarus's letter, King of Edessa, to our
Savior Jesus Christ, sent to him at Jerusalem by Ananias his footman;" and our
"Savior's letter to King Agbarus in answer to it." And, in the following
chapter, both these letters are inserted at large, Eusebius having translated
them out of the Syriac language, in which they were wrote, as he found the
copies of them in the archieves of Edessa. And these epistles, which he thus
published to the world, he as verily believed were wrote, one of them by our
Savior, and the other by King Agbarus, as he did, that the epistles he mentions
under the name of Ignatius were wrote by him. What regard now do the learned
world pay to Eusebius's judgment, with respect to these letters? Do they hold
themselves bound to receive them as "the epistles of Jesus Christ, and King
Agbarus," because Eusebius was too hastily led into this opinion of them? No;
but, notwithstanding the learning, the judgment, the integrity of Eusebius, and
his nearness to the primitive times, they are so free with him as to think, he
was credulous in esteeming "these letters" genuine; and that he did it without
sufficient caution and enquiry. Even Archbishop Wake has very plainly
signified this to have been his opinion. Says he, "Apostol. Fathers" p. 93.
Natalis Alexander delivers this conclusion; the "epistle of Agbarus" to our
Savior, and "his answer" to it, are supposititious, and apocryphal: and, at
large, answers all that is usually urged in favor of them. And Dupin, after
him, yet more solidly convinces of such manifest errors, as may serve to
satisfy all considering persons, that Eusebius and Ephraaem were too easy of
belief in this particular; and did not sufficiently examine into it, when they
delivered that as a certain truth, which, from several circumstances, appears
to have been evidently otherwise. Now, from this instance, produced from
Eusebius, the arguing is both natural and forcible. If he might be mistaken in
his opinion about "these letters," he might also be mistaken in his opinion
about the "Ignatian epistles." If he was too credulously betrayed into a belief
of the genuineness of "these letters," which are most palpably spurious, he
might also too credulously come into the belief of the genuineness of the
"epistles of Ignatius." If, with respect to "these letters," he was too
inattentive, not sufficiently suspicious, too thoughtless of being imposed upon
by religious fraud, this might also have been the case with respect to the
"epistles" in dispute. Nor if the learned world do, without any difficulty,
reject "these letters" as spurious, in contradiction to the judgment of
Eusebius, ought it to be objected as a difficulty in the way of rejecting
"Ignatius's epistles," that herein Eusebius's judgment is opposed: nor can this
be urged as a difficulty without evident partiality. For, in the instance we
have mentioned, no difficulty is pretended; but the whole body of writers, both
Romish and Protestant (a few only excepted) reject "these letters" as a
fraudulent imposition upon the world, without making any compliment to the
great Eusebius for their opposition to him in this matter.

BUT, besides what has been offered, Eusebius has, in the case before us,
represented the evidence upon which he received these "epistles;" which, if
deficient, we have plainly no reason to be moved by his judgment: and that it
really is so we before proved, when the testimonies of Polycarp and Irenaeus
were considered, the two only ones he has mentioned in support of the credit of
"these epistles." It may, perhaps, be thought strange, that Eusebius should
judge, from the testimonies of Polycarp and Irenaeus, that Ignatius wrote
"these epistles," if what they say, be, as we have already endeavored to
evince, insufficient for the purpose. But, why might not Eusebius make more of
these testimonies than they really contained, and argue too much from them, as
others have done since? And that he has so done (whether "these epistles" are
true or false) is too evident to be called in question; as appears from what
has been before offered upon this head. For, let it be observed, he introduces
Irenaeus speaking upon the matter after this manner, "and Irenaeus remembered
his EPISTLES, writing thus, because I am the wheat of God." -- These words are
to be found no where in the writings of Ignatius, but in the "epistle to the
Romans:" nor does Irenaeus anywhere where else mention any writing of Ignatius,
or refer to any passage in his supposed works. So that the utmost that can be
collected, in point of argument, from these words is, that "the epistle to the
Romans" was commemorated by Irenaeus. But the conclusion, which Eusebius draws,
respects the "epistles in general;" which is certainly an instance of
inattention to the just import of the words he argues from. He goes on, "and
Polycarp makes mention hereof, in his epistle to the Philippians, writing
thus, -- the epistle of Ignatius which he sent to us, and as many other
epistles." -- It is far from being evident, as has been abundantly proved
already, that Polycarp here mentions any more than TWO EPISTLES of Ignatius;
and yet, the words are brought in evidence of the EPISTLES WITHOUT LIMITATION;
which is another instance of a cursory consideration only of this passage. Had
he been sufficiently cautious, he might have seen reason to suspect, whether
this testimony was at all Polycarp's. -- The true state of the case seems to
have been this; -- There were extant, in the days of Eusebius, "epistles under
the name of Ignatius to several famous churches;" and, meeting with a passage
in Polycarp's letter, that made mention of "epistles of Ignatius," and another
in Irenaeus, citing words that are to be found in ONE of "these epistles," he
hastily concluded, without more ado, that Ignatius wrote ALL THE EPISTLES he
had seen under his name: whereas, if he had thoroughly examined the matter, he
would have found these testimonies too weak to support the conclusion he makes
from them; as they most certainly are, whatever is the truth as touching "these
epistles."

I SHALL only add, that Eusebius seems not to have been without some biass upon
his mind, in favor of the "Ignatian epistles." For it is a plain case, the
silence of the ancients, respecting particular writings, is, with him, an
argument much weakening the credit of them. The "second epistle of Clement" he
esteems, if not supposititious, at least "less famous, and less worthy of
notice," because "no testimonies are alleged for it by the Elders." And the
"dialogues of Peter and Apion" he looks upon as plainly spurious, for this,
among other reasons, "that none of the Elders have mentioned it." But, in the
present instance, though, as we have seen, there is a most surprising silence
in primitive antiquity about any writings of Ignatius, yet he takes no notice
at all of it; but receives the "epistles" extant in his day, under the name of
"this Father," without the least hesitation, and by the lump too. And if Mr.
Whiston's reasoning may be thought valid, a good account may be given of this
matter. According to him, the "epistles of Ignatius," extant in the days of
Eusebius, were the LARGER ONES, that is, these epistles as we have them in the
editions before those of Usher and Vossius. As to the SHORTER EPISTLES," that
is, those we have in the editions of these learned antiquaries, he speaks of
them as the LARGER EPISTLES arbitrarily mangled and curtailed. And his
arguments, upon this head, appear to me, I freely confess, to be exceeding
weighty: nor do I think, they ever have been, or can be, fully answered. And
should this be the truth, there is no great difficulty in supposing, that
Eusebius might be inclined to think as well of them as might be. For, as he and
Whiston were nearly of the same sentiments, relative to an important point of
Christian doctrine, it was but natural for him to be well affected to "these
epistles," which are well known to look with a favorable eye on this
distinguishing tenet of their's. So that, upon the whole, it is but reasonable
we should be left fairly to judge of the evidence in favor, or dis-favor, of
"these epistles," without being at all swayed by the judgment of Eusebius: nor
ought it to be looked upon as an objection of any weight against our rejecting
them, that that learned author thought them genuine; provided we have good
reason so to do.

I WILL not take upon me to say, that Ignatius did not write "epistles" that
were seen by Eusebius; but thus much I will venture to say, that it is highly
probable, most unprejudiced persons, in consequence of what has been offered,
will be strongly inclined to question, whether they were so certainly HIS, as
to leave no reasonable room for doubt in the case. -- But I must now go on,

TO offer what may be thought necessary to show, that "these epistles," if not
spurious, have yet been corrupted to a dedegree that unfits them to be appealed
to, as exhibiting the real mind of Ignatius; especially with respect to
Episcopacy, the point now under debate.

WHAT I here propose to consider, merely as interlarded corruption, is made use
of by Daille, La'roque, and other learned writers, to prove, from the INTERNAL
CONTENTS of "these epistles" themselves, that they were not wrote by Ignatius,
but by some later hand. And it must be acknowledged, the EXTERNAL EVIDENCE in
proof, that Ignatius did not write "these epistles," if considered in
connection with this INTERNAL EVIDENCE, will give great additional force to the
argument, and leave scarce any room for doubt in the case. -- But I choose to
give the Episcopalians all the advantage they can desire; and shall therefore
here argue upon the supposition, that Ignatius really wrote "epistles" that
were extant in the days of Eusebius: but, even upon this supposition, we claim
to be excused from placing any manner of dependence upon what they say,
especially upon the head of Episcopacy; and for this very good reason, because
we affirm, and shall prove, that they are so mingled with corruption, as not to
convey the mind of the truly venerable Ignatius.

SOME, perhaps, may think it owing to prejudice, when it is so much as
insinuated, as if there were any corrupt mixtures in such eminently valuable
"epistles" as those of Ignatius. But it ought to be known, and remembered, that
Ignatius has been impudently and fraudulently dealt with, no less than EIGHT of
the fifteen epistles, that bear his name, being FORGERIES, and owned to be so:
besides which, it is true likewise, and acknowledged as the truth, even by
Bishop Pearson himself, the great advocate for Ignatius, that the other "seven
epistles," in all the editions of them, before Usher and Vossius, were so
CORRUPTED by some knavish interpolator or other, as that they ought not to be
depended on as exhibiting the real mind of the true Ignatius. It is not argued
from hence, that the Usherian and Vossian editions must needs be corrupted
also; but thus much is obviously, and certainly deducible herefrom, that they
MAY be so; that to suppose such a thing is no indication of prejudice against
them, as it is no more than has been actually done, with respect to these very
"epistles," in former editions.

MUCH might easily be offered in support of the affirmation, that the "epistles
of Ignatius," in their latest, best, and most purged editions, are too much
mixed with interpolated corruption to be depended on, as letting us into his
true and real sentiments. I might particularly consider the "inscriptions" to
these epistles; all which carry with them this shrewd mark of time, LATER than
the days of Ignatius, their speaking of him in the style of THEOPHOROS, an
epithet never applied to him, until ages after his death. -- I might take
notice of the story of Ignatius's being "carried in bonds, from Syria to Rome,
to be thrown to wild beasts," on the truth of which his epistles entirely
depend; and yet, the story is in itself a very strange and unaccountable one,
and so esteemed by many of the most learned writers. -- I might insist upon
what is said of the " word's proceeding from Sige," a term of art in the
Valentinian theology, not known to be used as such, until after the departure
of Ignatius out of our world. -- In a word, I might bring to view a great
number of passages, which it would be a dishonor to Ignatius to ascribe to him,
they are either so weak, or absurd, or ridiculous, or inconsistent with what he
has elsewhere said, and sometimes in the same epistle. -- But it would be too
great, as well as needless, a trial of the reader's patience to consider so
many articles. I shall therefore pass them over, and wholly confine myself to
what, more especially, relates to the present controversy, the things that are
said concerning the OFFICERS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. And I the rather choose to
enlarge upon this head, as it is enlarged upon in ALL the "Ignatian epistles"
(the epistle to the Romans only excepted,) and in a MANNER evidently showing,
if these "epistles" are not spurious, that they have been tampered with, and
basely corrupted by some overheated zealot for ecclesiastical dignity, and
power, so as to be unfitted to hand to us the true sentiments of the real
Ignatius. And here it may be offered as follows.

CONSIDERING the circumstances of Ignatius, when he is said to have wrote these
epistles; -- his being a prisoner of death, and on his journey to Rome to
suffer martyrdom, it is not at all probable, he should have his heart so set on
exalting the Clergy, as, in all his epistles, to write, as if the main thing
suitable to be told the churches, was, that they had "worthy and God-becoming
Bishops and Presbyters, whom they ought to honor, and obey, even as Jesus
Christ honored and obeyed the Father." There is evidently more, much more,
said, in these epistles, upon the rights of the Clergy, and the subjection that
was due to them, than upon any other subject, though of fundamental importance.
-- Does not this appear strange? It would certainly do so in any epistles
wrote, at present, under like circumstances. And what makes the matter still
more extraordinary, the same words and phrases, upon the same beloved subject,
not only come over in every epistle, save one; but in most of them, they are
needlessly repeated; and, in some of them, their repetition over and over again
is quite fulsome. To this it is said by Episcopalians,

THAT heresies now began to be broached, and to infect the minds of many; and
therefore, as the most proper expedient that could, at that time, be thought
on, to preserve the churches pure, Ignatius exhorts them, and with pressing
earnestness, to an adherence to the Clergy, union with, and subjection to,
their Bishops and Presbyters. And his so zealously, and frequently, insisting
upon this head, is made even a sign of his soul's flaming with love to the
churches; discovered in ardent desires that they might flourish in peace,
truth, and holiness, after he had been devoured by wild beasts. In answer
whereto,

I WOULD not go about to detract, in the least, from the piety of Ignatius, his
concern for the purity of the churches, and desire to preserve them from
heresy: but, at the same time, cannot but think it very wonderful, if
"subjection to church-governors" an implicit adherence to the "Bishop and his
Clergy," such a notable expedient, so sure and effectual an one, to guard
against heresy, that none of the Fathers contemporary with Ignatius should be
so happy as to hit upon it. It was as good an expedient to cure divisions, as
to secure from heresy; and yet, Clement of Rome makes no mention at all of it
to the church of Corinth, when he wrote to them as rent with strife and scism.
And it is observable, Polycarp, who wrote just after Ignatius, and with his
"epistles" in keeping (as is pretended), among other things, cautions the
church at Philippi against the ERRORS that then prevailed among many. But how
does he press the exhortation? Why, not a word does he lisp about their
adhering to their Bishop, with the rest of the Clergy, the great argument here
said to be used by Ignatius: but he bespeaks them in these words, "These
things, my brethren, I took not the liberty of myself to write unto you. -- For
neither I, nor any other such as I am, come up to the wisdom of the blessed and
renowned Paul, who, being himself in person with those that then lived, did,
with exactness and soundness, teach the word of truth; and being gone from you
wrote an epistle to you, into which if you look, you will be able to edify
yourselves in the faith that has been delivered to you, which is the mother of
us all." -- And a little onwards, "Wherefore, leaving the vanity of many, and
their false doctrines, let us return to the word that was delivered to us from
the beginning." If Ignatius had been as particular, and full, in recommending
an adherence to the SCRIPTURE, an obedience to the APOSTOLIC WRITINGS, as he is
in urging an adherence to the CLERGY, and SUBJECTION TO THEM, it might,
possibly, have been as good a guard against "infection by heresy." He does,
indeed, sometimes exhorts those he writes to, "to study to be confirmed in the
doctrine of our Lord, and his Apostles;" but where he ONCE advises to this, I
will venture to say, he TEN TIMES presses a regard to the CLERGY; and this he
does in very unguarded language, without ever making the supposition, that they
also might be corrupted with error; and, in this case, cautioning the churches
against being led aside by their governors: which is making much more of the
Clergy, than the Apostles ever made of themselves. -- But I shall not enlarge
here, having mentioned what has been offered as a small circumstance only, in
comparison with what I have yet to say. To go on therefore,

IT is of more weighty consideration, that the officers of the christian church
are commonly spoken of, in "these epistles," in language not at all consonant
to the age in which the true Ignatius lived, nor indeed in the least worthy of
so famous and primitive a Father and martyr. What other thought can reasonably
be entertained of those passages, in which Bishops are represented as
"presiding in the place of God:" in which they are compared to "God the Father,
to Jesus Christ the Son of the Father:" in which the churches are taught it to
be their duty "to receive them as the Lord, to reverence them as Jesus Christ;"
yea* "to follow them as Christ does the Father:" in which they are commanded
"so to obey and subject themselves to the Bishop as to do nothing without him,
however reasonable it might appear to them:" in which they are exhorted to be
"so one with the Bishop, as Christ is one with the Father;" and "so to do
nothing without him, as Christ did nothing without the Father:" in which so
great account is made of obedience and subjection to the Bishop, that they that
"do any thing without him" are esteemed "doing the devil a service;" and those
that remain with him" are, upon this account only, thought worthy of the
character of "belonging to Christ;" and are represented as "walking not as men,
but according to Christ:" yea, in which obedience to the officers of the church
is so highly estimated by the writer, or interpolator, of "these epistles,"
that he even "pawns his soul for those that obey the Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons; and desires his portion in God may be with such."

THESE, and like expressions, to be met with in "these epistles," are not
easily to be accounted for, upon the supposition that they have not been
interlaced with corruption. In their literal and most obvious sense, they are
unworthy of any pious writer; much more of so venerable a Father, and
illustrious a martyr, as Ignatius: nor can it be disowned, that, in this sense,
they exalt the Clergy beyond all reasonable bounds, claiming for them the most
absolutely blind obedience: and should we qualify their sense, to the utmost
extent they are capable of, they carry the dignity and power of Bishops and
Presbyters, and the subjection due to them, not only far above their deserts,
but so as to discover the TRUE SPIRIT of AFTERTIMES, and not that in which
Ignatius is known to have lived.

IT may, with the exactest truth, be affirmed, that none of the writers, in the
days of Ignatius, or near the age in which he flourished, do bear the least
likeness to him in his mode of speaking, relative to the officers of the
church. These unite, as one, in language becoming the simplicity of the gospel,
and the purity and humility of those primitive times: whereas, the general
strain of "Ignatus's epistles" is evidently adapted, I may say, purposely
contrived, to aggrandise the Clergy, and bespeak for them the highest
reverence, honor, and submission. How can this be accounted for, without the
supposition of some meddling interpolator? Why, otherwise, should there be such
a signal difference between his manner of writing, and that of all the ancients
in his day, and for a long time after his life had come to a period here on
earth?

THE difference of style, in different writers, will not, as is pleaded here,
account for this. The style of Hermas widely differs fromt hat of Clement, as
Clement's does. from that of Polycarp, and Polycarp's from that of Justin
Martyr, and Irenaeus; and yet, they all lead us to think much the same thing
about the Clergy; and this, with all desirable clearness and certainty, though
they severally express themselves in a manner peculiar each one to himself. And
why might not Ignatius have wrote in his own style, and yet have concurred with
his contemporaries, in a like account of the officers of the church? It ought,
most certainly, to be ascribed, not to mere difference in style, but to some
other cause, that he so strangely differs from them. And what cause can this
be, but the interlading hand of some zealot for clerical power and honor?

HIS being a SYRIAN may, possibly, account for his sometimes barbarous Greek,
as well as high-sounding compounded words, No writer was ever more pleased with
compounding words to make them look big with meaning, than Ignatius. Those he
could join with PHOROS in the end, and AXIOS in the beginning, are particularly
observable in his "epistles." He speaks of one, or another of the churches he
writers to, as THEOPHOROI, NAOPHOROI, AGIOPHOROI, CHRISTOPHOROI,
PNEUMATOPHOROI, etc. The words also, AXIOTHEOS, AXIOMAKARISTOS, AXIONOMASTOS,
AXIOGAPEETOS, AXIOTHAUMASTOS, etc. are favorite compounds of his making.
Archbishop Wake seldom translates these, and such like words, so as that the
original Greek could from thence be so much as guessed at.
peculiar to himself; but it will, by no means, account for his sentimes
concerning the Clergy, as differing from those of all his contemporaries. For
not only the mode of language in "these epistles," but the idea conveyed by it,
is quite different from that which is contained in the "other writings" in, and
near, the same age. Bring down the high strains used in "these epistles," and
put them into plain simple language, still keeping to their true spirit, and
genuine intendment; and they will carry the power of the Clergy, and the
reverence and honor due to them, far beyond what it is carried, either in the
scripture, or the writings of all contemporary Fathers united together: nor can
a person read the "epistles of Ignatius," and not have excited in his mind a
much more exalted idea, both of Bishops and Presbyters, than by reading all the
other writers, within the two first centuries. Any common reader, by going over
the collection of testimonies brought to view, in this volume, may, with his
own eyes, see this to be the truth of fact.

LET the dispute about the superiority of Bishops to Presbyters be as it may,
nothing is more evident, than that the language relative to the Clergy,
bespeaking for them reverence and subjection, was quite different after the
second century, from what it was before. And as the language, in the "Ignatian
epistles," upon this head, is so unlike that of the age in which he lived, and
agrees so well with that, which was, in fact, used afterward, it is a sure
mark of unfair dealing somehow or other. Either Ignatius was not the writer of
"these epistles," or they have been basely and fraudulently corrupted, since
his death. No one, unbiassed in his mind, can, I should think, be at any lose
to determine thus. -- To proceed,

IT is most of all worthy of consideration, that the words, BISHOP and
PRESBYTER, are, in the Ignation epistles, APPROPRIATED terms; not used
PROMISCUOUSLY, but in a DISTINCTIVE sense. Bishops are never here called
Presbyters; nor, on the other hand, are Presbyters ever called Bishops. The
mode of diction is this; "Being subject to your Bishop, and the Presbytery." --
"Obeying your Bishop, and the Presbytery, with an entire affection." -- "Seeing
I have been judged worthy to see you by Damas, your Bishop; and by your worthy
Presbyters, Bassus and Apollonius". -- "In whom I rejoice, for that he is
subject unto his Bishop, as the grace of God; and to the Presbyter, as to the
law of Jesus Christ." -- "He that does any thing without the Bishop, and
Presbyters is not pure in his conscience." -- "Being subject to your Bishop, as
to the command of God; and so likewise to the Presbytery." -- "I cried, whilst
I was among you, I spoke with a loud voice, attend to the Bishop, and to the
Presbytery." -- "See that ye all follow your Bishop, as Jesus Christ the
Father; andt he Presbytery as the Apostles." -- "I salute your very worthy
Bishops, and your venerable Presbytery." -- You observe the terms Bishop and
Presbyter, are used, in these passages, in the APPROPRIATED sense; and they are
used in the same sense throughout the epistles. Nor can an instance be given to
the contrary. The APPROPRIATION of these terms is not accidental, but designed;
and it runs through all the copies of these epistles, the Usherian and Vossian,
as well as those that were extant before them: is, in no case, at no time, upon
no occasion, departed from.

WHAT agreement, now, is there between the supposed Ignatius, and his
contemporaries, upon this head? Do they use the words, Bishop and Presbyter, as
he does, in an appropriated fixed sense? It cannot, with any face of truth, be
affirmed, that they do. Far from this, they differ as much from him, in their
use of these terms, as they do from any of the writers of the third, or fourth
centuries. There is indeed no writer, either before Ignatius, or at the time
when he wrote, or even afterward for more than an hundred years, that uses
these words as he does, in a sense so certainly, and invariably, fixed and
appropriated. The reder is desired to compare the pretended Ignatius's mode of
diction, upon this point, with that which is held out to view, in the present
volume, from all the writers until toward the close of the second century; and
he may then, from ocular inspection, be convinced, that he greatly differs
fromt hem all; and eminently in this respect, that he invariably uses the
words, Bishop and Presbyter, in the APPROPRIATED sense; while they use them
promiscuously, sometimes calling Bishops, Presbyters; and sometimes Presbyters,
Bishops: meaning by both terms one and the same order of officers in the
church. He will evidently see, in "Hermas's pastor," that the word, Bishops, is
explained to signify, "those that preside in the church;" and that those who
preside in the church are "the Presbyters of it." He will at once perceive, in
"Clement's epistle to the Corinthians," that the same officers who are called
"Presbyters," are directly spoken of as "cast out of their Episcopacy." When he
turns to Polycarp, the supposed collector of the "Ignatian epistles," and the
next and nearest writer to him, so far will he be from finding an analogy
between "his epistle," and the "epistles of Ignatius," that he no where speaks
of the Bishop of Philippi, or of any other church: nor does he so much as
mention the word, Bishop; which is really unaccountable, if it be remembered,
conformably to the sentiments of Episcopalians, that Ignatius had very lately,
and under the most extraordinary circumstances too, wrote "his epistles," and
that Polycarp was particularly acquainted with them; yea, that he had wrote
"one epistle to Polycarp" himself, and another to "his church at Smyrna," in
one of which he "pawns his soul for them that were obedient to the Bishop, and
the other Clergy;" and, in the other, makes the Bishop so necessary, that "no
administration could be valid without him, but whatever he should approve would
be pleasing to God." And he will be no more able to find in Justin Martyr, or
Irenaeus, an APPROPRIATED use of the terms, Bishop and Presbyter, than in
either of the foregoing writers. Irenaeus, it is true, frequently uses these
terms, but in the PROMISCUOUS sense; as no one can be at a loss to perceive,
who will be at the trouble of reading over the testimonies, in this work,
produced out of his writings: nor are the words, Bishop and Presbyter, used as
APPROPRIATED ones, until toward the close of the second century; and, even
then, the APPROPRIATION was not steadily fixed. Clement of Alexandria, who
chiefly flourished in the latter end of the second century, and the beginning
of the third, is the first writer who uses the mode of speech, so common, and
invariable, with Ignatius, "Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; and yet, so long
after the days of Ignatius, the distinct APPROPRIATION of these names was not
certainly fixed. We must go into the third century, I may rather say, beyond
it, before the appropriation, after the manner of Ignatius, is constant,
sacred, and invariable.

UPON which, the enquiry is highly pertinent, how should Ignatius constantly,
and forever, use the words, Bishop and Presbyter, not in the sense in which
they were used, in the age in which he wrote; but in the sense, in which they
were used, in other ages, long after his death? This certainly looks
suspicious, and ought, in all reason, to put us upon our guard, lest we should
take some juggling impostor for the worthy, and primitive Ignatius. Words, we
know, often vary in their signification; and sometimes, when used in this or
that particular sense, are as sure a mark of such a particular age, as the
special mode or fashion of garments. And this is plainly the case here. Before
the days of Ignatius, about the time of his living, and dying, and for many
years after, the words, Bishop and Presbyter, were not APPROPRIATED names, and
as such applied to different persons; but were INDIFFERENTLY used to point out
either Bishops, or Presbyters: whereas, toward the going out of this age, or
rather the coming on of the next, they began to loose their PROMISCUOUS use,
and to become APPROPRIATED terms, conveying the idea of different persons, who
were commonly known, and distinguished, by the application of these now
different names: though, it ought to be remembered, this appropriation was not
so SACRED and INVIOLABLE, as in the "epistles of Ignatius", till we have got
much farther from the age in which he lived. And we are herefrom presented with
a criterion, by which we may determine, with all desirable certainty, either
that Ignatius did not write the "epistles" that go under his name, or that they
have been safely, and fraudulently, corrupted by some bigot for clerical honor
and power; insomuch, that there is no knowing the real sentiments of the true
Ignatius.

I HAVE now, with conscious care and impartiality, endeavored to exhibit the
true state of the "epistles" called "Ignatian;" leaving it with the reader to
judge for himself, how far they may, with certainty, be depended on; more
especially in the present debate. Possibly, he may be disposed to question,
whether Ignatius was at all the writer of the "epistles" that are ascribed to
him: or, should he be inclined to think he was, it is scarce supposable, but he
should be clearly satisfied, that some fraudulent hand has made him write in a
manner quite dissonant from the times in which he lived; and to such a degree,
as to unfit his "epistles" to be repaired to, with confidence, in the debate
concerning episcopacy.

TESTIMONIES from IGNATIUS
The EPISTLE to the EPHESIANS.
SECT. I -- "I received therefore in the name of God your whole multitude in
Onesimus; who by inexpressable love is our's, but according to the flesh is
your Bishop: whom I beseech you, by Jesus Christ, to love; and that you would
all strive to be like unto him. And blessed be God, who has granted unto you,
who are so worthy of him, to enjoy such an excellent Bishop."

SECT. II. "For what concerns my fellow servants Burrhus, and your most blessed
Deacon in things pertaining to God; I entreat you that he may tarry longer,
both for yours, and your Bishop's honor. -- It is therefore fitting, that you
should by all means glorify Jesus Christ, who has glorified you: that, by a
uniform obedience, "ye may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judgment; and may all speak the same things concerning every
thing:" and that, being subject to your Bishop, and the Presbytery, ye may be
wholly and thoroughly sanctified."

SECT. III. -- "But forasmuch as charity suffers me not to be silent toward
you, I have first taken upon me to exhort you, that ye would all run together
according to the will of God. For even Jesus Christ, our inseparable life, is
sent by the will of the Father; as the Bishops, appointed unto the utmost ends
of the earth, are by the will of Jesus Christ." It immediately follows,

SECT. IV. "Wherefore it will become you to run together according to the will
of your Bishop, as also ye do. For your famous Presbytery, worthy of God, is
fitted as exactly to the Bishop, as the strings are to the harp. Therefore in
your concord, and agreeing charity, Jesus Christ is sung; and every single
person among you makes up the chorus: that so being all consonant in love, and
taking up the song of God, ye may, in a perfect unity, with one voice, sing to
the Father by Jesus Christ; to the end that he may both hear you, and perceive
by your works, that ye are indeed the members of his Son. Wherefore it is
profitable for you to live in an unblemishable unity, that so ye may always
have a fellowship with God." The next words are,

SECT. V. "For if I, in this little time, have had such a familiarity with your
Bishop, I mean not a carnal, but spiritual acquaintance with him; how much more
must I think you happy, who are so joined to him, as the church is to Jesus
Christ, and Jesus Christ to the Father; that so all things may agree in the
same unity. Let no man deceive himself; if a man be not within the altar, he is
deprived of the bread of God. For if the prayer of one or two be of such force,
as we are told; how much more powerful shall that of the Bishop, and the whole
church be? He therefore that does not come together into the same place with
it, is proud and has already condemned himself. For it is written, "God
resists the proud." Let us take heed therefore, that we do not set ourselves
against the Bishop, that we may be subject to God."

SECT. VI. "The more any one sees his Bishop silent, the more let him revere
him. For whomsoever the Master of the house sends to be over his own household,
we ought in like manner to receive him, as we would do him that sent him. It is
therefore evident, that we ought to look upon the Bishop, even as we would do
upon the Lord himself." --

SECT. XIII. "Let it be your care therefore to come more fully together, to the
praise and glory of God. For when ye meet fully together in the same place, the
powers of the devil are destroyed, and his mischief is dissolved, by the unity
of your faith." --

SECT. XX. "But if Jesus Christ shall give me grace through your prayers, and
it be his will, I purpose in a second epistle, which I will suddenly write unto
you, to manifest to you more fully the dispensation of which I have begun to
speak, unto the new man, which is Jesus Christ; both in his faith, and charity;
in his suffering, and in his resurrection: especially if the Lord shall make
known to me, that ye all by name come together in common in one faith, and in
one Jesus Christ; who was of the race of David according to the flesh, the son
of man, and the Son of God; obeying your Bishop and the Presbytery with an
entire affection; breaking one and the same bread, which is the medicine of
immortality; our antidote that we should not die, but live forever in Christ
Jesus."

The EPISTLE to the MAGNESIANS.
SECT. II. "Seeing then, I have been judged worthy to see you, by Damas your
most excellent Bishop; and by your worthy Presbyters Bassus, and Apollonius;
and by my fellow servants Sotio, the Deacon, in whom I rejoice; forasmuch as he
is subject unto his Bishop as to the grace of God, and to the Presbytery as to
the law of Jesus Christ; I determined to write unto you."

SECT. III. "Wherefore it will become you also not to use your Bishop too
familiarly upon the account of his youth; but to yield all reverence to him
according to the power of God the Father: as also I perceive, that your holy
Presbyters do; not considering his age, which indeed to appearance is young;
but as becomes those who are prudent in God, submitting to him, or rather not
to him, but to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Bishop of us all. It
will therefore become you, with all sincerity, to obey your Bishop; in honor of
him whose pleasure it is that ye should do so. Because he that does not do so,
deceives not the Bishop whom he sees, but affronts him that is invisible. For
whatsoever of this kind is done, it reflects not upon man, but upon God, who
knows the secrets of our hearts."

SECT. IV. "It is therefore fitting, that we should not only be called
Christians, but be so: As some call indeed their Governor The words, printed in
italic have nothing to answer them in the original.
Bishop; but yet do all things without him. But I can never think that such as
these have a good conscience, seeing they are not gathered together thoroughly
according to God's commandment."

SECT. VI. "Forasmuch therefore as I have, in the persons beforementioned, seen
all of you in faith and charity; I exhort you that ye study to do all things in
divine concord; your Bishop presiding in the place of God; your Presbyters in
the place of the council of the Apostles; and your Deacons most dear to me,
being entrusted with the ministry of Jesus Christ, who was with the Father
before all ages, and appeared in the end to us. Wherefore taking the same holy
course, see that ye all reverence one another: and let no one look upon his
neighbor after the flesh; but do ye all mutually love each other in Jesus
Christ. Let there be nothing that may be able to make a division among you; but
be ye united to your Bishop, and those who preside over you, to be your pattern
and direction in the way to immortality." The next words are,

SECT. VII. "As therefore the Lord did nothing without the Father, being united
to him; neither by himself, nor yet by his Apostles; so neither do ye any thing
without your Bishop and Presbyters: neither endeavor to let any thing appear
rational to yourselves apart; but being come together into the same place, have
one common prayer; one supplication; one mind; one hope, in charity, and in joy
undefiled. There is one Lord Jesus Christ, than whom nothing is better.
Wherefore come ye all together as unto one temple of God; as to one altar; as
to one Jesus Christ; who proceeded from one Father, and exists in one, and is
returned to one."

SECT. XIII. "Study therefore to be confirmed in the doctrine of our Lord, and
of his Apostles; that so whatsoever ye do may prosper: -- together with your
most worthy Bishop, and the well wrought spiritual crown of your Presbytery,
and your Deacons which are according to God. Be subject to your Bishop, and to
one another, as Jesus Christ to the Father according to the flesh; and the
Apostles both to Christ, and to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost; that so ye
may be united both in body and spirit."

SECT. XV. "The Ephesians from Smyrna salute you, from which place I write to
you -- together with Polycarp the Bishop of the Smyrnaeans."

The EPPSTLE to the TRALLIANS.
SECT. I. "I have heard of your blameless and constant disposition through
patience, which not only appears in your outward conversation, but is naturally
rooted and grounded in you: in like manner as Polybius your Bishop has declared
unto me, who came to me to Smyrna, -- and so rejoiced with me in my bonds for
Jesus Christ, that in effect I found your whole church in him." --

SECT. II. "For whereas ye are subject to your Bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye
appear to me to live not after the manner of men, but according to Jesus
Christ; who died for us, that so believing in his death, ye might escape death.
It is therefore necessary, that as ye do, so without your Bishop, you should
do, nothing: also be ye subject to your Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Jesus
Christ our hope, in whom if we walk, we shall be found in him. The Deacons
also, as being the ministers of the mysteries of Jesus Christ, must by all
means please all. For they are not the ministers of meat and drink, but of the
church of God. Wherefore they must avoid all offenses, as they do fire."

SECT. III. "In like manner, let all reverence the Deacons as Jesus Christ; and
the Bishop as the Father; and the Presbyters as the sanhedrim of God, and
college of the Apostles. Without these there is no church. Concerning all which
I am persuaded, that ye think after the same manner: for I have received, and
even now have with me, the pattern of your love in your Bishop: whose very look
is instructive; and whose mildness is powerful: whom I am persuaded, the very
Atheists themselves cannot but reverence". --

SECT, VII. "Wherefore guard yourselves against such persons. And that you will
do, if you are not puffed up; but continue inseparable from Jesus Christ our
God, and from your Bishop, and from the command of the Apostles. He that is
within the altar is pure: but he that is without, that is, that does any thing
without the Bishop, and Presbyters, and Deacons, is not pure in his conscience".

SECT. XII. "I salute you from Smyrna, -- My bonds, that I carry about with me
for the sake of Christ, -- exhort you, that you continue in concord among
yourselves, and in prayer with one another. For it becomes every one of you,
especially the Presbyters, to refresh the Bishop, to the honor of the Father of
Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles." --

SECT. XIII. -- "Fare ye well in Jesus Christ; being subject to your Bishop, as
to the command of God, and so likewise to the Presbytery. Love every one his
brother with an unfeigned heart. My soul be your expiation, not only now, but
when I shall have attained to God: for I am yet under danger. --

The EPISTLE to the ROMANS.
SECT. II. -- "Wherefore ye cannot do me a greater kindness, than to suffer me
to be sacrificed to God, now that the altar is already prepared: that when ye
shall be gathered together in love, ye may give thanks to the Father, through
Christ Jesus; that he has vouchsafed to bring a Bishop of Syria unto you, being
called from the east to the west." --

SECT. IX. "Remember in your prayers the church of Syria, which now enjoys God
for its shepherd instead of me: Let Jesus Christ only oversee it, and your
charity." --

The EPISTLE to the PHILADELPHIANS.
The INSCRIPTION.

"IGNATIUS, who is also called Theophorus, to the church of God the Father, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is at Philadelphia in Asia; which has obtained
mercy, being fixed in the concord of God, and rejoicing evermore in the passion
of our Lord, and being fulfilled in all mercy through his resurrection: which
also I salute in the blood of Christ Jesus, which is our eternal and undefiled
joy; especially if they are at unity with the Bishop, and Presbyters who are
with him, and the Deacons appointed according to the mind of Jesus Christ; whom
he has settled according to his own will in all firmness by his holy Spirit:"

SECT. I. "Which Bishop I know obtained that ministry among you, not of
himself, neither by men, nor out of vain glory; but by the love of God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ: whose moderation I admire; who by his
silence is able to do more, than others with all their vain talk. For he is
fitted to the commands, as the harp to its strings." --

SECT. II. "Wherefore as becomes the children both of the light and of truth;
flee divisions and false doctrines: but where your shepherd is, there do ye, as
sheep follow after. For there are many wolves, who seem worthy of belief, that
with a false pleasure lead captive those that run in the course of God: but in
your concord they shall find no place."

SECT. III. "Abstain therefore from those evil herbs which Jesus Christ does
not dress; because such are not the plantation of the Father. Not that I have
found any divisions among you, but rather all manner of purity. For as many as
are of God, and of Jesus, are also with their Bishop. And as many as shall with
repentance return into the unity of the church, even these shall also be the
servants of God, that they may live according to Jesus Christ. Be not deceived,
brethren: if any one follows him that makes a schism in the church, he shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. If any one walks after any other opinion, he
agrees not with the passion of Christ."

SECT. IV. "Wherefore, let it be your endeavor to partake all of the same
eucharist. For there is but one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ; and one cup, in
the unity of his blood; one altar; as also there is one Bishop, together with
his Presbytery, and the Deacons my fellow servants: that so whatsoever ye do,
ye may do it according to the will of God."

SECT. VI -- "Flee therefore the wicked arts and snares of the prince of this
world; -- but come all togetherinto the same place, with an undivided heart."
--

SECT. VII. -- "I cried whilst I was among you, I spoke with a loud voice;
attend to the Bishop, and to the Presbytery, and to the Deacons. Now some
supposed, that I spoke this as foreseeing the divisions that should come among
you. But he is my witness, for whose sake I am in bonds, that I knew nothing
from any man. But the spirit spoke, saying on this wise; Do nothing without the
Bishop: keep your bodies as the temples of God: love unity: flee divisions: be
ye followers of Christ, as he was of the Father."

SECT. VIII. "I did therefore as became me, as a man composed to unity. For
where there is division and wrath, God dwells not. But the Lord forgives all
that repent, if they return to the unity of God, and the council of the
Bishop." --

SECT. X. "Now as concerning the church of Antioch which is in Syria; -- it
will become you, as the church of God, to ordain some Deacon to go to them
thither as the ambassador of God; that he may rejoice with them when they meet
together, and glorify God's name. Blessed be that man in Jesus Christ, who
shall be found worthy of such a ministry; and ye yourselves also shall be
glorified. Now if ye be willing, it is not impossible for you to do this for
the sake of God: as also the other neighboring churches have sent them, some
Bishops, some Priests, and Deacons."

The EPISTLE to the SMYRNAEANS.
SECT. VIII. "See that ye all follow your Bishop, as Jesus Christ, the Father;
and the Presbytery as the Apostles. And reverence the Deacons, as the command
of God. Let no man do any thing of what belongs to the church separately from
the Bishop. Let that eucharist be looked upon as well established, which is
either offered by the Bishop, or by him to whom the Bishop has given his
consent. Wheresoever the Bishop shall appear, there let the people also be: as
where Jesus Christ is, there is the catholic church. It is not lawful without
the Bishop, either to baptize, or to celebrate the holy communion: but
whatsoever he shall approve of, that is also pleasing to God; that so whatever
is done, may be sure and well done.' --

SECT. IX. "For what remains, it is very reasonable that we should repent,
whilst there is yet time to return to God. It is a good thing to have a due
regard both to God and the Bishop: he that honors the Bishop, shall be honored
of God: but he that does any thing without his knowledge, ministers unto the
devil."

SECT. XI. -- "It will be fitting, and for the honor of God, that your church
appoint some worthy delegate, who, being come as far as Syria, may rejoice
together with them that are in peace. -- Wherefore I should think it a worthy
action to send some one from you, with an epistle, to congratulate with them
their peace in God."

SECT. XII. -- "I salute your very worthy Bishop, and your venerable
Presbytery, and your Deacons my fellow servants; and all of you in general, and
every one in particular, in the name of Jesus Christ." --

The EPISTLE to POLYCARP.
The INSCRIPTION.

"IGNATIUS, who is also called Theophorus, to Polycarp, Bishop of the church,
which is at Smyrna; their overseer, but rather himself overlooked by God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: all happiness."

SECT. I. -- "Maintain thy place with all care both of flesh and spirit: make
it thy endeavor to preserve unity, than which nothing is better. -- Speak to
every one as God shall enable thee." --

SECT. IV. "Let not the widows be neglected: be thou, after God, their
guardian. Let nothing be done, without thy knowledge and consent: neither do
thou any thing but according to the will of God; as also thou do with all
constancy. Let your assemblies be more full: inquire into all by name "EX
ONOMATOSPANTAS ZEETEI." Inquire after, or seek out, all by name.
: overlook not the men nor maidservants; neither let them be puffed up, but
rather let them be more subject to the glory of God, that they may obtain from
him a better liberty." --

SECT. V. "If any man can remain in a virgin state, to the honor of the flesh
of Christ, let him remain without boasting; but if he boast he is undone. And
if he desire to be more taken notice of than the Bishop, he is corrupted. But
it becomes all such as are married, whether men or women, to come together with
the consent of the Bishop, that so their marriage may be according to
godliness, and not in lust. Let all things be done to the honor of God."

SECT. VI. "Hearken unto the Bishop, that God may also hearken unto you. My
soul be security for them that submit to their Bishop, with their Presbyters
and Deacons. And may my portion be together with their's in God." --

SECT. VII. "It will be very fit, O most worthy Polycarp, to call a select
council, and choose some one whom ye particularly love, and who is patient of
labor; that he may be the messenger of God: and that going into Syria, he may
glorify your incessant love, to the praise of Christ." --

SECT. VIII. But forasmuch as I have not been able to write to all the churches
-- do you write to the churches that are near you, as being instructed in the
will of God, that they also do in like manner. Let those that are able send
messengers, and let the rest send their letters by those who shall be sent by
you; that you may be glorified to all eternity, of which you are worthy." --

OBSERVATIONS and REMARKS upon the TESTIMONIES from IGNATIUS.
THOUGH I have enlarged, in the foregoing pages, upon the reasons we have to
think, that the "seven epistles" of Ignatius are either SPURIOUS, or so
INTERLARDED WITH AFTER ADDITIONS as not to be depended on; yet, I can truly
say, I was not moved to this from an apprehension, that "these epistles,"
unless taken out of the way, would be ruinous, or indeed at all hurtful, to the
cause in the defense of which I am engaged. Episcopalians, I know, ever repair
to them as their main strength; and are ready to think, and say, that we are
disposed to speak injuriously of them, upon any pretenses, however slighty,
because they speak so clearly and fully against us. But they are herein greatly
mistaken. It is owing to the force of truth, and not to prejudice, or fear lest
our cause should suffer, if tried by them, that we represent them as under very
strong marks of suspicion. And to induce a belief of this, and, at the same
time, to do justice to our side of the dispute, I shall, in what follows,
suppose these "epistles" to be GENUINE, as truly so as the writings of Clement,
or any other primitive Father; and, in this view of them, endeavor to show,
that they furnish much more evidence in favor of us, than of the Episcopalians;
and that they may be justly brought as witnesses in defense of our cause,
rather than their's.

IN order to set this matter in a fair point of light, let it be remembered,
the Bishops pleaded for by our antagonists are DIOCESAN ones; and the POWERS
they make ESSENTIAL to the episcopal office, and exclude Presbyters from, are
those of GOVERNMENT, ORDINATION, and CONFIRMATION. Let us now review the
"Ignatian testimonies," and see whether they speak of SUCH BISHOPS, or THESE
POWERS that are said to be ESSENTIAL to their office, and characteristical of
it.

I SHALL begin with saying, that, upon the strictest examination of all that is
said in the "epistles of Ignatius," nothing can be found that will lead one
into the idea of a DIOCESAN Bishop. It is as evident as it well can be, from
the whole tenor of "these epistles," that the Ignatian Bishop was the pastoral
head of a SINGLE CONGREGATION, who usually met together in one place, and
united in an attendance on the institutions of Christianity. So much is to be
met with upon this point, and in language so full and express, that no
reasonable room is left for hesitation or doubt.

IGNATIUS "inscribes" all these epistles to SINGLE societies of Christians, in
this and the other particular place. "To the church in Ephesus," in "Magnesia,"
in "Philadelphia," and so on. And he applies severally to these churches, as
one would speak to a single congregation of Christians, whose custom it was
frequently to assemble in one place, and join as one in worshipping God through
Jesus Christ. And not only so, but the directions and exhortations he gives,
both to these churches, and their Bishops, are such as make it morally certain,
that he writes to single congregations of Christians, and not a number of them
constituting one church. Instances to this purpose might easily be produced out
of each of "these epistles." But, as such an enumeration would be both
needless, and tedious, I shall select only a few striking specimens that must
be convincing to prejudice itself.

HE says to the church at Ephesus, "If the prayer of one or two has such
efficacy, how much more that of the Bishop, and the WHOLE CHURCH! HE that
comes not to the SAME PLACE The phrase EPI TO AUTO, may be understood as
referring either to TIME, PLACE, or DESIGN, and is accordingly translated, by
the best critics, in all these senses. It Is propriety as meaning PLACE or TIME,
rather then DESIGN; and DESIGN rather than either of the former, can be
determined only by the import of the sentence in which it is found, and the
part it bears as connected with the discourse. In this view of the phrase, it
cannot be better translated here, than in the words of Archbishop Wake, TO THE
SAME PLACE. He was as close a friend to the church of England as any man in his
day, and would not have given this turn to the words, could he have pitched
upon any other more favorable to the cause of Episcopacy. The plain truth is,
whether the phrase is translated here, or in the other places where it is used
in "Ignatius's epistles," TO THE SAME PLACE, or WITH ONE MIND, or DESIGN, the
argument, in support of the cause we are defending, is equally strong. For it
lies in this, that the Christians, constituting the Ephesian, and other
churches, wrote to by Ignatius, are evidently spoken of as SINGLE
CONGREGATIONS, which might, and ordinarily did, meet together for the worship
of God: and if so, it must be IN THE SAME PLACE, and more certainly than with
ONE MIND. It is true, if these churches were PREVIOUSLY known to consist of a
number of congregations, more or less, each having a Bishop at their head, as
their uniting principle, they might be said to come together with ONE HEART,
UPON ONE DESIGN, though the congregations, of which they consisted, assembled
for worship in fifty DIFFERENT PLACES. But it ought not to be taken for
granted, but first fully proved, that they were churches of this kind. Until
this is done, it ought to be supposed, that they were SINGLE CONGREGATIONS;
especially, as this is the natural and most obvious meaning of all the
sentences, in which the phrase is used, and of the whole discourse with which
it is connected.
is puffed up with pride. -- Endeavor to meet frequently to praise and glorify
God. For when you are often together in the SAME PLACE, the strength of satan
is broken. -- Since EVERY ONE OF YOU BY NAME, with common consent meet together
in one faith, and one Jesus Christ, breaking ONE LOAF, which is the medicine of
immortality." -- This is proper language, if applied to a single society of
worshipping Christians; but not easily understood, if considered as directed to
a diocesan church; or, in other words, a church constituted of a number of
congregations, more or less, incapable of meeting together in one place, and of
having personal communion there in the public offices of religion. It is
indeed, in this way of application, quite unintelligible, unless we recur to
that figurative mode of speech, which was made necessary in AFTER AGES, when
the church began to appear with the evident marks of antichrist.

HE writes to the church in Magnesia in these words, "When you meet together,
let there be one prayer, one deprecation, It has been urged, that the MIA
PROSEUCHEE, and MIA DEEESIS, to which the "Magnesian church" is here exhorted,
is no proof, that it did not consist of a number of congregations, who, in
DIFFERENT PLACES, offered up their prayers to God. It is acknowledged, was it a
PREVIOUSLY indisputed fact, that this church did consist of a number of
congregations, "the one prayer," and "one supplication," here spoken of, ought
to be understood in a sense that would comport with the nature of such a
church. And it is not denied, but that a sense might be invented, in which
there might be "one prayer," and "one supplication," though the church, that
joins in it, should assemble in an hundred different places. But what is all
this to the purpose? It is nothing more than first supposing, without proving,
that this "Magnesian church" was of the DIOCESAN KIND, a complex body, made ONE
by the union of its several parts with a Bishop at its head, and then putting a
sense on these words, as grounded on this supposition. Such reasoning, if used
by others, would be called a mere begging the question. Every one knows, that
the church of England, though a complex body, made up of a considerable number
of DIOCESSES, in each of which there are MANY worshipping assemblies of
Christians, does, and must, join in "one prayer," and in "one supplication",
because they are obliged to use precisely the same words in their public
addresses to Heaven. And was it as certain, that the churches Ignatius writes
to consisted of a number of worshipping assemblies, more or less, who, in their
prayers, used the same words, no argument could be deduced from their "one
prayer," and "one supplication," in evidence of their being single societies of
Christians. But the point in question is, whether these churches were DIOCESAN,
or SINGLE CONGREGATIONS; and it is a good argument, in proof of the latter,
that they are called upon to meet together, that they may unite as ONE in
prayer and supplication to God. They might, in some contrived sense, be said to
do this, if they met in different assemblies; but it ought to be clearly and
fully proved, that they thus met, before this sense can reasonably be put upon
the words. They are most naturally, easily, and obviously applicable to ONE
assembly of Christians, uniting in prayer to Almighty God: nor should this
sense be departed from, unless evident necessity should call for it.
one mind. -- There is one Jesus Christ, than whom nothing is more excellent.
ALL therefore run together as to ONE TEMPLE of God, as to one ALTAR, as to one
Jesus Christ." Is this speaking to a diocese, or a particular congregation of
Christians? If common sense may be the judge, there can be no dispute. The case
is too plain to admit of it.

HE thus bespeaks the church in Philadelphia, "It becomes you, as a church of
God to choose a Deacon to go thither [to Antioch] on a divine embassy, that he
may rejoice with them, being ASSEMBLED TOGETHER." -- Let me ask here, was it a
diocese, or a single congregation, who, as a Christian church, were to make
choice of a messenger to go to Antioch? And was it the church of Christians at
Antioch, or a whole diocese, that this messenger was to rejoice with, when they
had assembled together? No reasonable answer can be given to these questions,
but the right one; which is, that a single congregation of Christians only is
addressed to. It follows in the next words, "Happy in Christ Jesus is he who
shall be thought worthy of such a ministry: if ye be willing, ye may do this
for the sake of God; as the other NEIGHBORING CHURCHES have sent, some
Bishops, some Presbyters, and some Deacons." Is the mode of diction, here used,
episcopalian, or congregational? Is it the practice of diocesses, or single
congregations of Christians, to choose messengers, and send them to other
churches? When NEIGHBORING churches, with each their own Bishop, their own
Presbyters, and Deacons, are here spoken of, can it with propriety, or
consistency, be supposed, that these neighboring churches were diocesses? Is
it not infinitely more natural and reasonable, to understand by them single
congregations?

HE gives the following exhortations in his epistle to Polycarp, Bishop of the
church at Smyrna, "Let not the widows be neglected, be THOU after God their
guardian. -- Let your assemblies be more frequent. -- Enquire after ALL by
name. Do not proudly overlook the MENSERVANTS, and the MAIDSERVANTS." These
instructions are highly pertinent, if Polycarp's church was only a congregation
of Christians at Smyrna; and he might, if he was faithful and diligent, have
complied with them, to his own honor, and the spiritual good of the people who
were his special charge. But if his church had been of the diocesan kind, what
he is exhorted to is highly absurd, because absolutely impossible to be put in
practice. To evade the force of the argument here, it has been said, by the
author of "an original draught of the primitive church," p. 79, 80, that the
advice to Polycarp was only to do what the primitive Bishops always did, that
is, to keep the names of every member of his church enrolledin, what the
ancients called, the MATRICULA [list or register] of their church. He is
advised to "inquire out by name," that is, to get such a register of their
names, that upon occasion of any object of charity proposed to him, or of any
complaint, or application, made to him about any within his cure or
jurisdiction, -- he might, by means of this general MATRICULA, as the other
Bishops did, more directly know, how the case stood with them: and which was
more than all this, the names thus enrolled in this sacred record were
personally entitled then to all the public intercessions, and spiritual
blessings obtained by the eucharistical prayers, oblations, and sacraments of
the whole church. -- And these were sufficient reasons for that apostolical
Father [Ignatius] to mind a Bishop of the church to be careful of keeping such
a necessary MATRICULA as this, and an effectual way for St. Polycarp to take
care of the meanest and poorest members of his diocese. But as to the matter of
one single congregation being then under his care, and that he must "personally
know them all by name," as one neighbor knows another, I think they no more
imply it, than that Augustus Caesar had but one town to command, and could know
every subject he had, when (for many political reasons) he caused them all to
be enrolled, and required the state of his empire to be brought in to him.
Nothing more need be said to all this than just to observe, that the advice
here given to Polycarp is interpreted, not comformably to the age in which he
lived, but to after ages, when Bishops were at the head of churches known to be
diocesses consisting of numerous assemblies of worshipping Christians. It is no
wonder, if methods were now contrived for Bishops to do those duties of their
office by OTHERS, which they could not perform in their own PERSONS. But it was
not thus in the times of Ignatius. Bishops were then "in labors more abundant,"
both public and private, in which they PERSONALLY exerted themselves, and not
by those who were DEPUTIES under them. This did not become a custom, until the
love of ease, grandeur, and power, had got much the better of a zealous concern
to promote the true interest of the religion of Jesus. There is therefore no
imaginable good reason to think, but that the advice here given to Polycarp
was, PERSONALLY to acquaint himself with his whole church, even the meanest
members of it, that he might be able to suit his conduct, upon his own
knowledge, to their special circumstances. This is evidently that meaning of
the words which naturally offers at first fight: nor can any other be put upon
them, unless we needlessly, I may rather say unreasonably, repair to times
greatly distant from those, in which Ignatius and Polycarp sustained the office
of Bishops, and take our idea of the advice here given, not from their times,
but those after-ones, when there was a visible and signal difference, not only
in the external circumstances, but the known employment, of those who were then
Bishops. There is no hint given, within the two first centuries, of the
MATRICULA, this author speaks of; or of a Bishops acting in his cure, as
Augustus Caesar did, with respect to an enrollment of the people under his
command. We must come down to those ages, in which Bishops more nearly
resembled Emperors, than they did in the days of Ignatius, before we shall find
the least reason to interpret his advice to Polycarp, in a sense different from
that we have taken it in.
Besides, what diocesan Bishop ever imagined it was his duty to inquire after
ALL within his diocese by NAME, not overlooking even SERVANTS? most certainly
no one among this kind of Bishops ever performed, or endeavored to perform,
this service: whereas congregational Bishops esteem this their duty, and many
of them are faithful in the practice of it, and their churches herefrom receive
great benefit.

IN these epistles, he speaks of "one altar," or communion table, of "one
eucharist;" of "breaking one loaf;" of his being "deprived of the bread of God
who comes not to the "one altar." These phrases are all readily understood,
upon the supposition, that Ignatius is writing to single congregations; but
otherwise there is no sense in what he says, unless we make him speak
figuratively, when there is no need of it. A single congregation of Christians,
such an one as he is all along writing to, may come to "one altar," or
communion table; they may all "break" of the same sacramental "loaf:" whereas,
it is impossible, a Bishop with his whole diocese should literally do these
things. They cannot be supposed to do them, without calling in the help of a
strong and bold figure. When Christian churches, in process of time, consisted
of numerous assemblies, who had each their "altar," their "eucharist," their
sacramental "loaf," the invention of man contrived a sense, in which these
"altars," "eucharists," and "loaves," though NUMEROUS, might be called ONE; not
indeed in the SAME, but DIFFERENT RESPECTS. But this metaphysical dexterity did
not come into use, until long after the age of Ignatius: for which reason, it
is delusive, to say nothing worse, to apply these DIFFERENT RESPECTS to his
"one altar," "one eucharist," and "one loaf;" making them MANY, and yet ONE, in
RESPECTS that were never so much as thought of in his day. I have never yet
seen, within the two first centuries, nor until the art of man was evidently
employed to vindicate corruption in the church of God, so much as a single
instance of the mode of speaking here applied to the truly primitive Ignatius.
Let such an instance be produced, if any are able to do it. Until then, it will
be to no purpose to tell us, that, in ancient times, there was only "one
altar," and "one sacramental loaf," in a Christian church in ONE RESPECT,
though in ANOTHER there were some hundreds. It was not the manner, in truly
primitive times, to MULTIPLY altars in ONE SENSE, and make them all but ONE in
another. We may not look for this, until the church was far gone in
antichristian corruption.
-- But I may not enlarge. It would be an affront to the reader's
understanding, should I say any thing more upon a point so obviously evident.

IT will perhaps be pleaded, it is a circumstancial matter only, whether a
Bishop's church be great or small. His essential powers are the same, whether
it consists of a single congregation only, or a number, more or less. This, as
I apprehend, is a fundamental mistake upon this head. Diocesan, and parochial,
or congregational, episcopacy essentially differ, and are, in the nature of the
thing, subversive of each other. Scores, or hundreds, of parochial Bishops must
be deprived of the proper powers of their office, to make way for one such
diocesan, as the English Bishop is known to be. The plain truth is, diocesan
episcopacy is an invention of man, wholly a political constitution; and, I
believe, essentially wrong: as it is impossible a diocesan Bishop should do the
duty of the Bishop's office, as described in the new testament, or even in the
"epistles of Ignatius;" and the placing Bishops at the head of large diocesses,
instead of tending to serve the interest of Christ's spiritual kingdom, has
been greatly hurtful to it, in all ages from the first rise of antichrist to
this day. But however this be, which does not fall so directly within our
present design, thus much is certain, that the IGNATIAN Bishop was not a
DIOCESAN one, and that, if his Bishop is to be the pattern, or exemplar, there
is not a Bishop in all England conformed to it. The Bishops, or Pastors, of
parochial, or congregational, churches do much more nearly resemble the Bishop
held out to view in "his epistles." -- But to go on,

IGNATIUS is not only silent about diocesan Bishops, but the powers of
GOVERNMENT, ORDINATION, and CONFIRMATION, as appropriated to Bishops of any
kind, as an order distinct from Presbyters.

TO begin with GOVERNMENT. And here it ought to be observed, there was, in each
of the churches Ignatius wrote to, a PRESBYTERY, or, in other words, a number
of Presbyters, more or less, constituting a council, senate, college, or
whatever other name any may please to give it, of which the Bishop was the
first, or chief, having some degree of superiority beyond the rest. But that
the government of the church, or of the Presbyters of it, was SOLELY in his
hands; or that his precedence was such, as imported his being of another and
higher ORDER than that of Presbyters, he has no where given us to understand,
in any of his epistles. Far from this, the general strain of them all is, to
lead us into the thought, that all church affairs were to be directed, and
governed, not by the SOLE POWER OF THE BISHOP* but by the authority and voice
of the PRESBYTERY joined to his. This is so obvious, that no one can easily
read his epistles without perceiving it to be the truth of fact. The evidence
is too glaring not to be seen at once.

IT is acknowledged, Ignatius speaks of Bishops, in these epistles, in a high
strain of language, such as calls for great candor to free it from, at least,
some degree of profanity. But the same may be said, with as real truth, in
regard of the manner in which he speaks of Presbyters. Does he call Bishops
"the figure of the Father?" He goes on to call Presbyters, "the council of God,
and conjunction of the Apostles." Does he speak of the Bishop as "the grace of
God?" He, in the same place, speaks of the Presbytery as "law of Christ." Does
he represent the Bishop as "presiding in the place of God?" At the same time,
he puts the Presbyters "in the room of the apostolic senate."

IT is acknowledged likewise, he frequently exhorts the churches to "obey their
Bishops," to be in "subjection to them." But he enjoins it on them, in like
manner, to be "subject to their Presbyters." And the language in which he
exhorts them to obedience and subjection to their Presbyters, as well as
Bishops, is not only very strong and pressing, but so often repeated as to be
really disgustful. "Attend to the Bishop and Presbytery;" follow the Bishop,
and the Presbyters;" "obey the Bishop, and Presbyters;" be "subject to the
Bishop, and Presbytery," are injunctions, in these epistles, so frequent as to
be, at once, both needless, and troublesome.

SHOULD it be said here, he gives the church of Smyrna to understand, "it is
not lawful without the Bishop either to baptize, or make a love-feast;" and
accordingly exhorts, "let none do any of those things which belong to the
church without the Bishop." Should it be added, he tells the church of Tralles,
"it is necessary they should act nothing without the Bishop." The answer is
ready at hand; he as expressly tells the same church of Tralles, and in the
same epistle, "he that does any thing without the Bishop, and Presbyters, is
not of a pure conscience." And in his epistle to the Magnesians, the
exhortation is, "Neither do ye any thing without the Bishop and Presbyters."
And again, "I exhort you to do all things in the concord of God." What is that?
The explanation follows in the next words, "the Bishop presiding in the place
of God, and the Presbyters in the place of the apostolic senate." -- "Let
nothing divide you, but be united to the Bishop, and those that preside among
you." It should seem, from these passages, and many more that might easily be
mentioned, if there was need of it, as plainly evident as words can well make
it, that the Ignatian churches were governed, not by the Bishop only, but by a
common college, company, or senate, of which he was the first in superiority.
If nothing was to be done without the Bishop; neither was any thing to be done
without the Presbyters. The voice of the Presbytery was necessary, as truly as
the voice of the Bishop. UNION was plainly the great thing Ignatius had at
heart, and would promote in the management of all church affairs, not only
between the church, and the Bishop; but between the Bishop, and the Presbyters;
such an union as that nothing should be transacted without the Presbyters, any
more than without the Bishop. His aim was, that there should be the united
authority and consent of both Bishops and Presbyters, in the conduct of every
church-affair.

IT will, probably, be still pleaded, Ignatius is so careful, in all his
epistles, to distinguish Bishops from Presbyters, that we do not once find him
calling Presbyters, Bishops; or Bishops, Presbyters. Far from this, he has
always appropriated these names to different persons; from whence it may be
fairly and justly collected, that Bishops were a distinct set of officers in
the government of the church from Presbyters, of an higher order and vested
with superior powers, such as might not be exercised by Presbyters.

IT is granted, the names, Bishop and Presbyter, are carefully used, in the
Ignatian epistles, to specify different persons; but, at the same time, utterly
denied, that this appropriation of these names imports such a distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters, as is contended for; that is, a distinction
that supposes an higher and superior order of officers in the church to that of
Presbyters. That it imports some degree of precedence, or superiority, is
readily allowed; but why should it be thought, unless to serve the episcopal
cause, that this superiority was a superiority in such spiritual powers as
might not be exercised by Presbyters? Ignatius, as we shall see presently, has
said no such thing; nor has he, in any of his epistles, appropriated any one of
the powers proper to the ministerial office to Bishops, in distinction from
Presbyters. Episcopalians, if any men in the world, should be sensible of the
insufficiency of the argument, which would prove a distinction of ORDERS in the
church, or of ESSENTIAL POWERS in its officers, from the appropriation of
different names to different persons, even though it was an appropriation that
carried with it a very considerable degree of precedence and superiority. There
are, in the church of England, a great variety of officers, with appropriated
names, who greatly differ in the degree of their superiotity and inferiority;
while yet, their essential powers, as officers in the kingdom of Christ, are
precisely the same. The names, Archbishop and Bishop, are appropriated ones,
invariably pointing out different ecclesiastical officers, the one superior in
dignity and power to the other; and yet, Archbishops are the same order in the
church with Bishops, and they have no higher essential powers. To say that they
have would make FOUR ORDERS in the church of Christ, instead of THREE; which
would be a flat contradiction to the avowed doctrine of the church of England
itself. Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends. Rectors, and Curates, are all of them
officers in the English church, distinguished from each other by the
application of these names, and severally placed above each other in certain
degrees of superiority; and yet, they are all vested with exactly the same
essential powers. In regard of their ORDER, they are the same officers in the
church. In special, Rector and Curate are appropriated names, and stand to
signify different officers in the church, the one superior in dignity and power
to the other; while yet, they both sustain the same rank, and are perfectly
equal in the intrinsic instituted powers of their office. The Curate is
commissioned to preach, baptize, and administer the Lord's supper, as truly as
the Rector; and may, as well as he, perform any other part of duty that belongs
to this order of officers in the church. But this notwithstanding, the Rector
is placed in as high a degree of superiority above the Curate, as the Ignatian
Bishop is above a Presbyter. The Rector may, in the plenitude of his own power,
do any thing, within the limits of his office, in his own parish; the Curate
can do nothing but by his permission. He can neither read prayers, preach,
baptize, or perform any other public religious service, but in consequence of
his consenting allowance. He is in truth the servant of the Rector, and in
perfect subjection to him; yea, liable, unless quite subservient to his
pleasure, to be dismissed from service in this cure. Wherein, now, in what
instance, was the Ignatian Bishop more of a superior to his Presbyters? What
greater power had he over them? I may rather say, how does it appear, that he
either had, or ever exercised, so high a degree of power? The Rector may act,
in his own parish, without the advice of his Curate; or, should he condescend
to ask it, he may act in direct opposition to it. It was not thus with the
Ignatian-Bishop. He, with the Presbyters of the church, made one common
council, or senate; and it was, not according to his own sovereignty, but in
agreement with the united voice of this council, that he acted. All the affairs
of the church were managed in this way. -- The Rector may, of his own mere
arbitrary will, discharge the Curate from any further service in his parish.
Ignatius's Bishop had no such power. Most certainly it is no where said that he
had, either in his "epistles," or elsewhere. Let me ask now, why should it be
thought, that the Ignatian Bishop's superiority above a Presbyter must import a
superiority of ORDER, or ESSENTIAL POWERS, any more than a Rector's superiority
above his Curate should import the same thing? If a Rector's office is
ESSENTIALLY the same with his Curate's, notwithstanding his superiority in
power, why must it be otherwise in the case of Ignatius's Bishop? The plain
truth is, all the pre-eminence and superiority that Ignatius ascribes to his
Bishop may as easily, and as justly, be accounted for, without the supposition
of his being of an ORDER distinct from, and superior to, Presbyters, as the
Rector's superiority above his Curate. If, notwithstanding the subjection of
his Curate to him, they are both of the same order in the church, and partake
of the same essential powers; why may not the same be said, with equal truth
and justice, of the Ignatian Bishop and his Presbyters? Especially, if it be
remembered, and duly considered, that no one ministerial power is mentioned by
Ignatius, in any of his epistles, but what might be as well exercised by
Presbyters as Bishops. And this leads to

THE next power of Bishops, said to be distinguishing, and essential; which is
that of ORDINATION. And who could think, considering the vast labor that has
been expended in support of the credit of Ignatius's epistles, and the
perpetual use Episcopalians make of them, in defense of their cause, but that
he had expressed himself, upon this head, so clearly, positively, and fully, as
to leave no further room for dispute, at least, whether it was a FACT, in his
day, that Bishops, and they only, communicated holy orders? Especially, as the
validity of gospel-administrations is made to depend upon this method of
communication. And yet, we are as much at a loss for evidence in favor of this
article, essentially connected with the very being of Christianity itself, as
if Ignatius had never wrote any one of his epistles. He can no more be brought
as a witness to testify in behalf of EPISCOPAL-ORDINATION, either in point of
FACT, or RIGHT, than any of his predecessors, contemporaries, or successors
within the two first centuries. By only reading Archbishop Wake's "translation
of his epistles," one would not suspect he had so much as transiently said any
thing that looks like ORDINATION; but this he may have done in his "epistle to
the Magnesians," wherein he tells them, "It becomes you not to use your Bishop
too familiarly upon the account of his youth, but to yield all reverence to
him, according to the power of God the Father: as also I perceive your holy
Presbyters do; not considering his age, which indeed to appearance is young."
-- These last words are in the original, ten phainomenen neoteriken taxin;
which some have translated, his appearing youthful ordination. Thus I find them
translated by Cotelerius, in Le 'Clerc's edition of his "apostolical Fathers."
His words are, "apparentem puerilem ordinationem." In Archbishop Usher's
publication of the "Ignatian epistles," from the latin copies he found in
England, the version is, "apparentem juniorem ordinem;" which is thought to
refer to his being "vested with holy orders while apparently a young man." I
will not oppose this interpretation of the words, being willing Episcopalians
should make the most of what can be supposed to be said by Ignatius.
If this is a version that gives the true meaning of Ignatius, he has once, in
seven epistles, mentioned ORDINATION; but without saying, how it was performed,
or by whom; whether by a Bishop of some other church, or by the Presbyters of
this at Magnesia. The short of the matter is, he is totally silent, in all his
epistles, upon this most important and essential power of the Bishop; never
once saying, or so much as insinuating, that it was his PECULIAR RIGHT to
confer holy orders, or that they were, in FACT, ever conferred by Bishops, in
distinction from Presbyters.

IT will, perhaps, be pleaded here, Ignatius has expressly said, "it is not
lawful without the Bishop to baptize, or make a love feast;" and again, "it is
necessary nothing should be done without the Bishop." If so, then surely there
ought to be no ordination without him. This is the obvious and evident
implication of his words.

THE answer is plain and easy. Should this reasoning be allowed to be just and
valid, it will not follow from it, that the power of ordination was
appropriated to Bishops, any more than the administration of baptism, or making
a love-feast. The most that can be made of it is, that no church-affair should
be managed without the consent, the presence, or permission of the Bishop; but
with his allowance, for aught that appears to the contrary, Presbyters might
ORDAIN, as well as baptize, or administer the Lord's supper. And it is, with
me, past all doubt, that the affair of ORDINATION, as truly as other religious
offices, were managed, not by the BISHOP ALONE, but by the PRESBYTERY, of which
he was primus inter pares. For Ignatius is as express in saying, "nothing ought
to be done without the PRESBYTERS," as that "nothing ought to be done without
the BISHOP."

THE last peculiar power of Bishops is that which relates to CONFIRMATION. But
it unluckily happens, that the "Ignatian epistles" are, if possible, more
silent about this, than the foregoing article. They neither mention the name,
or the thing intended by the name. And as they appear to be utter strangers to
any such custom in the church of Christ, as that of confirmation, it would be
in vain to look to them for evidence, that it belonged to Bishops, to them
only, to them in distinction from Presbyters, to perform this extraordinary
piece of service.

UPON the whole, notwithstanding Bishops are so often mentioned by name by
Ignatius; notwithstanding the high strain of language in which he speaks of
them; notwithstanding all the claims he makes for them, and of obedience and
subjection to them; -- he is so far from being a competent witness to the GRAND
FACTS we are upon, that he either says nothing relative to them, or that which
is really destructive of them. It is as evident as words can well make it, that
the Bishops he speaks of, in his epistles, were of the PAROCHIAL, not the
DIOCESAN kind: from whence it follows, that the Rector, Pastor, or Bishop of a
SINGLE CONGREGATION of Christians, such an one as the churches in New England,
and the Protestant Dissenters at home, have at their head, is much more like to
the IGNATIAN Bishop, than any DIOCESAN in Great Britain. From the whole tenor
of what he offers upon the head of government it also most obviously appears,
as we have seen, that it was, and ought to be, managed, not by the Bishop as
SOLE MONARCH in the church, but by a common senate, or college, of which he was
nothing more than primus inter pares, being vested with no higher ESSENTIAL
POWERS than the other members of the Presbytery. And as to ORDINATION, and
CONFIRMATION, the appropriated right of Bishops, he says not a word. Could we,
in consistency with a due regard to truth, say, that the "epistles of Ignatius"
were unsuspectedly genuine and incorrupt, we should be as strenuous in
supporting their authority, as the Episcopalians; and for this reason in
special, because they are, in many respects, a real and great service to our
cause; and, in every respect, much more serviceable to us, than to them in the
dispute betwixt us.

PAPIAS, QUADRATUS, ARISTIDES, AGRIPPA, HEGESIPPUS.
PAPIAS, Bishop of Hierapolis, a city in Asia, is said by Irenaeus to have been
"an hearer of John, and companion of Polycarp." He unquestionably meant by
John, the writer of the gospel, and the three epistles under this name. Dr.
Cave places him at the year 110; but he is said by others, equally learned, to
have flourished about the years 115 and 116. He has sometimes been mentioned as
a martyr; but, as neither Eusebius or Jerome say any thing of this, it may be
considered as a fact not to be depended on. The time, as well as manner, of his
death is uncertain. Irenaeus and Eusebius both speak of him as having wrote
"five books" entitled "the explication of our Lord's discourses;" but nothing
remains of them except a few fragments preserved by ancient writers. Eusebius
describes him, in one place, as "an eloquent man, and expert in the scripture;"
H. E. Lib. 3. Cap. 35. Valesius, in his note here, represents this encomium to
have been an interpolation, as it is wanting in the version of Ruffinus, and in
three Greek manuscripts he used; and because it contradicts what he afterward
says of him. Dr. Grabe labors, in his" spicilegium patrum," to take off the
force of this arguing of Valesius. But so far as I am capable of judging, if
this is not an interpolation, Eusebius is inattentively inconsistent with
himself.
though, in another, H.E. Lib. 3. Cap. 39.
he says of him, he had but "small abilities," which, as he adds, "appears from
his books." And so far as we may judge from those parts of them that have been
handed down to us, this seems to be the truth; as likewise that he was too apt
to give heed to any pious tales that were reported to him. Eusebius writes of
him, H. E. Ibid.
that he has "told strange things, pretending to have received them by
tradition from the Elders." He speaks of it also Ibid.
as a doctrine of his, that "Christ shall corporally reign here on earth for
the space of a thousand years, after the resurrection of the dead; occasioning
diverse ecclesiastical persons, who regarded his antiquity, to fall into this
error;" particularly naming "Irenaeus."

DU-PIN, as I imagine, has very justly characterised Papias in the following
words; -- He was a good man, but very credulous, and of mean parts, who
delighted much in hearing and telling stories and miracles. He adds, since he
was exceedingly inquisitive, and inclined to believe any thing that was told
him, it is not to be admired that he has divulged diverse errors, and
extravagant notions, as the judgments of the Apostles, and has given us
fabulous narratives for real histories: which shows, that nothing is so
dangerous in matters of religion, as lightly to believe, and too greedily to
embrace, all that has the appearance of piety, without considering in the
first place how true it is.

No mention is made, in the preserved "fragments" of Papias's writings, of
Bishops; nor any thing said tending to illustrate the FACT we are upon, unless
it should be thought the following passages, cited by Eusebius in the 39th
chapter of his 3d book, may be improved to this purpose.

I shall not think it grievous to set down in writing, with my interpretations,
the things which I have learned of the Elders or Presbyters, [ para ton
Presbuteron] and remember as yet very well, being fully certified of their
truth -- If I met any where with one who had conversed with the Elders, [
Presbuterois] I enquired after the sayings of the Elders; [ Presbuteron] what
Andrew, what Peter, what Philip, what Thomas, or James had said; what John, or
Matthew, or any other disciples of the Lord were wont to say; and what Ariston,
or John the Presbyter [ o Presbuteros] said: for I am of the mind, I could not
profit so much by reading of books, as by attending to those who spoke viva
voce.

EUSEBIUS observes, in this same book and chapter, " that he mentions two
John's, the former of whom he ranks with Peter, James, Matthew, and the rest of
the Apostles, "evidently pointing out the Evangelist;" and another John, whom
he does not place with the Apostles, but joins with Ariston, expressly calling
him Elder, ton Presbuteron." -- This Papias, as Eusebius further speaks,
declares that "he received the sayings of the Apostles from those who conversed
with them;" and that he was "a hearer of Ariston, and John the Presbyter, tou
Presbuterou." -- He adds, in the same writing, "he [this Papias] delivers many
other narratives of the beforementioned Ariston concerning the words of our
Lord, and traditions of John the Presbyter [ Presbuterou.] To which we shall
subjoin a tradition, which he has concerning Mark, who wrote in the gospel, in
these words; "and this, the Presbyter or Elder, [ Presbuteros] meaning John,
said. --

QUADRATUS. Much is said of this Father by writers greatly distant from the age
in which he lived. He is particularly spoken of, in the martyrology of the
Greeks, as "a man of great learning and knowledge; and represented, after
having grievously suffered by the violence of persecutors, as one that received
the crown of martyrdom." But the most authentic account we have of him is that
which is given us by Eusebius. He ranks him among "the famous men in the reign
of Trajan, who died in 117." He speaks of him as having been "favored, together
with the daughters of Philip, with the gift of prophecy." He places him among
those, who were "in the first succession of the Apostles." H. E. Lib. 3. Cap.
37.
And, writing concerning Dionysius of Corinth, he introduces this Father,
saying, Ibid. Lib. 4. Cap. 23.
"he remembered Quadratus, who, after the martyrdom of Publius, was constituted
Bishop of Athens." It is disputed, whether the Bishop, here pointed out by this
Denis was the person we are treating of, or another of the same name. The
Doctors, Grabe and Cave, are fully of the opinion, that it was our Quadratus.
"Spicilegium patrum," part ii. p. 125. Lives of the Fathers. vol. i, p. 133.
Valesius and Du-pin are as clearly of the contrary mind; and for reasons, as
it appears to me, that cannot easily be set aside. Vid. Valesius's notes upon
the words of Dionysius of Corinth; and Du-pin's note (a) in his life of
Quadratus.


HE is no where mentioned as having wrote any thing, but "an apology for the
Christian faith." Eusebius's account of it is this; H E. Lib. iv, Chap. 3.
-- "When Trajan had reigned twenty years wanting six months, Elius Adrianus
succeeded him in the empire, to whom Quadratus dedicated an apology which he
had wrote in defense of the faith, as certain malevolent men had endeavored to
vex and molest the Christians. This book is yet extant among diverse of the
brethren, and a copy of it remains with us; in which there are conspicuous
marks of the understanding, and true apostolic doctrine of the man." This work
has long since been lost. Only one small fragment of it is preserved, in which
there is nothing observable, unless it be that he speaks of those who "had been
healed, and raised from the dead, as living not only while our Savior had his
abode on earth, but a long time after his ascension; yea, a number of them to
his day."

ARISTIDES flourished about the same time. He is celebrated by Eusebius, H. E.
Ibid.
as "a faithful man, and one that labored for the furtherance of religion." He
adds, "he published an "apology" (as Quadratus did before) for the "Christian
faith," with a "dedicatory epistle" to Adrian the Emperor; which book of his is
kept by many, even to this day." And it was in being in the days of Jerome; for
he writes both of this "apology," and its author, in these words; "Aristides
was an eloquent Athenian Philosopher, who, when he changed his religion, did
not alter his profession. He presented unto the Emperor Adrian, at the time
when Quadratus did, a volume in the form of an "apology," wherein he produced
the proofs of our religion; which, being still extant, shows the learned how
excellent a writer he was." He says again, "that this work was full of
philosophical notions, and that it was afterward imitated by Justin." It has
long been buried in oblivion. Dr. Grabe has not been able, in his "spicilegium
patrum," to gratify the curious with so much as the smallest fragment of it.

AGRIPPA, surnamed Castor, was contemporary with the above Fathers. His
abilities, as a learned man, and his zeal in defending the truly apostolic
doctrine, are said to have appeared in a book he wrote against the "heresy of
Basilides," which he fully confuted, after having detected his fraud. The best
account of him is handed to us by Eusebius, who, speaking of those who had
contended for the apostolic ecclesiastical doctrine, makes mention H. E. Lib.
iv. Cap. 7.
of "Agrippa Castor's strong and noble confutation of Basilides, in which he
disclosed his fraudulent and deceitful arts." This Basilides, as he goes on to
relate from Agrippa, "had written 24 books on the Gospels, and that he forged
several Prophets, who were never in the world, to whom he attributed
extraordinary names, as Barsabas and Barcoph, on purpose to amuse the minds of
his auditors. He affirmed also, that this heretic taught his followers, "that
it was a thing indifferent to eat sacrifices that were offered to idols; that
it was lawful to renounce the faith in a time of persecution; and that, in
imitation of Pythagoras, he imposed silence on his disciples for the space of
five years." There are no remains of so much as a single fragment of Agrippa's
confutation of this wild and erroneous writer.

HEGESIPPUS. He is thought to have been a convert from the Jewish to the
Christian religion. Eusebius ranks him among the first who lived, and
flourished, after the death of the Apostles. He speaks of himself, Eusebius. H. E.
Lib. iv. Cap. 22.
as having been in Rome a number of years, Du-pin says, from 165 to 180. He is
the first Father that composed an entire body of ecclesiastical history. This
he is said to have done, dividing it into "five books," styled "commentaries"
by Eusebius and Jerome; wherein he relates the principal occurrences in the
church, from the death of Christ to his own time. This work was penned,
according to Eusebius, "in a simple style;" and, as Jerome speaks, "in imitation
of the manner of those whose lives he wrote." There are no remains of it, but
some fragments preserved by Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history, and one
more by Photius from Stephen Gobar.

SOME have greatly lamented the loss of the writings of this Father; imagining,
had they been preserved, we should have been fully certified of the true state
of the church, in those days, particularly as to its officers and government.
But they might, possibly, have been disappointed. His account of James, the
just, recorded by Eusebius, H.E. Lib. ii. Cap. 24.
in his own words, evidently carries with it the air of a fabulous romantic
story. And some of the mentioned circumstances, relative both to his life and
death, are far from exhibiting the real truth. If we may judge from this
narrative, the world has not suffered much by the loss of his works.

BESIDES the five books beforementioned, five more are attributed to him;
containing "an history of the wars of the Jews," and of the "taking the city of
Jerusalem," which have been often printed, and, among other places, at Colen,
with the notes of Galterius. But there are few writers, who think it worth
while so much as to mention these works, they are so evidently of the spurious
kind. Du-pin says, "It is certain, they do not belong to Hegesippus; and has
given such reasons, in support of this assertion, as must be allowed to be
sufficient, if not more than so, by all capable judges in matters of this
nature.

THE two following extracts from the "fragments" of the writings of Hegesippus,
are the only passages that relate to the point we are upon. They are taken from
the ivth book, and 22d chapter, of Eusebius's ecclesiastical history.

THE church of Corinth remained pure in its doctrine to the time of P^imus,
Bishop in Corinth: with whom I familiarly conversed many days, while sailing to
Rome, and was much comforted with their right doctrine. Being come to Rome, I
abode there until the succession of Anicetus, or, more literally, until I made
the succession Dr. Grabe's note, upon the words, DIADOCHEEN EPOIEESAMEEN, is
this; has duas voces in Eusebio per incuriam sive scribae, sive typothetae,
omissas, ex nicephori lib. V: hist. eccles. cap. 17, restitui." "It may be
added, Eusebius's account of Hegesippus's going, and being at Rome, as given in
his 11th chapter of this same book, does not perfectly agree with what is said
here. To this purpose Vale^us, in his note, has these words; "In cap. 11, hujus
libri, ubi Eusebius hunc Hegesippi locum adduxit paulo aliter haec referuntur.
Etenim Eusebius illic scribit, Hegesippum Romam adventasse temporibus Aniceti,
et usque ad pontificatum Eleutherii in urbe Roma permansisse. Hegesippus tamen
in hoc loco id non dicit: sed tantum ait, se R^mae mansisse usque ad
pontificatum Aniceti. Romam ergo venerat Hegesippus, sub extrema pii tempora."
as far as Anicetus; whose Deacon was Eleutherius: Soter succeeded him, and
after him Eleutherius. In all the succession, and in every one of the cities,
it is no otherwise than the law, Prophets, and the Lord himself preached.

WHEN James the just had been martyred for the same doctrine which our Lord
preached, Simon, the son of Cleophas, was constituted Bishop with universal
preference, because he was the Lord's near kinsman. Wherefore they called that
church a pure virgin, because it was not defiled with corrupt doctrine. But
Thebuli, because he was not made Bishop, endeavored to corrupt the church;
being one of the seven heretics among the people, whereof was Simon, of whom
the Simonians.

IT may be proper to remark, upon these passages, that nothing is contained in
them that, either directly or implicitly, affirms the FACT contended for by
Episcopalians. They will not pretend, that the powers of ORDINATION,
CONFIRMATION, or GOVERNMENT, are here appropriated to Bishops, or said to have
been exercised by them, in distinction from Presbyters, either by custom, or
divine right. Mention is made, it is true, of Bishops. They are mentioned also
in the new-testament-books: nor was it ever denied, that there were Bishops in
the church, even from the beginning. The dispute is, what is their rank, or
order, in the church? What the special powers they are vested with? Not a word
is said by Hegesippus, in the above passages, from whence this can be
collected; unless an argument should be fetched from the SUCCESSION in the
church of Rome, of which he here speaks. But to argue from hence would be to
little purpose; as there might be a SUCCESSION OF BISHOPS without supposing
them to have been an order in the church distinct from, and superior to,
Presbyters. -- We shall have occasion largely to consider the "argument from
succession," when we come to Irenaeus, who says more upon this head, than all
the other Fathers of the two first centuries put together. --

JUSTIN MARTYR.
His character, writings, and testimonies from them, with observations and
remarks.
JUSTIN the Philosopher, afterward the Martyr, was born in Flavia Neapolis, a
city of Samaria in Palestine, anciently called Sichem, and in our Savior's day
Sichar. He accordingly speaks of himself as a Samaritan, in his "diologue with
Trypho." Neither, says he, "did I fear to offend my own countrymen, the
Samaritans, when I offered my apology to Caesar." His father, whose name was
Priscus, son of Bacchius, took early care to have him well educated; and, being
of an inquisitive studious turn, he soon made himself master of the philosophy
of that day, in all its various institutions; of which his writings give
abundant proof. He is called one of the most learned of the more early writers
of the eastern church.

IN his younger years, probably before his conversion to Christianity, he
traveled abroad for his further proficiency in knowledge. He went particularly
to Egypt, "the staple-place," as Dr. Cave calls it, of all the mysterious and
recondite parts of learning, and therefore commonly visited by those, who would
make a figure in the world, as Adepths in Philosophy. He was certainly at
Alexandria; for there it was, as he himself informs us, that he received an
account of the "seventy's translation" of the Hebrew-bible, and was carried to
the "cells" in which it was said they performed that celebrated work; which,
probably, his curiosity, together with the reports he might have had of these
matters, by being among the Jews, had induced him particularly to enquire after.

HE went through his philosophical studies under several masters. The first was
a "Stoic;" the second, a "Peripatetic;" the third a "Pythagorean;" and the last
a "Platonist," whose sentiments he preferred, and indeed was so well pleased
with that he ordered his conduct by them, until he became a convert to the
Christian faith, which he ever after esteemed "the only certain and useful
philosophy."

THE precise time of his conversion cannot be ascertained. Dr. Cave, and
Tillemont place it at the year 132 or 133. But whenever he was converted, the
holiness of the lives of Christians, and the firmness, resolution, and
undaunted courage, with which they faced, and encountered, death in the most
hideous forms, had a very powerful influence in effecting this anchge of his
religion: so we are informed by himself, in the account he gives of it to the
Roman Emperor, in one of his apologies. Says he, Apol. I. p. 50.
For my own part, being yet detained under the "Platonic institutions," when I
heard the Christians traduced and reproached, and yet saw them fearlessly
rushing upon death, and venturing upon all those things that are accounted most
dreadful and amazing to human nature, I concluded with myself, it was
impossible that those men should wallow in vice, and be carried away with the
love of lust and pleasure. For what man, that is a slave to pleasure and
intemperance, can cheerfully bid death welcome, which he knows must put a
period to all his pleasures and delights; and would not rather by all means
endeavor to prolong his life as much as is possible, and to delude his
adversaries, and conceal himself from the notice of the Magistrate, rather than
voluntarily betray and offer himself to present execution? -- His reasoning
here is certainly just: nor is it strange, that such extraordinary strength of
mind in Christians to bear up under the greatest dangers, and undergo the most
cruel sufferings and deaths, should give him favorable thoughts of the religion
they professed, and the truth of which they so cheerfully sealed with their
blood. Mavelous effects have been produced in the hearts of those, who have
been spectators of the horrid cruelties which have been exercised toward the
disciples of Christ, and the amazing patience, meekness, fortitude, and
submission, with which they endured them.

HAVING professed himself a Christian, he is said to have led an eminently
virtuous and holy life. It is certain, he stood up nobly in the Christian
cause; and it ought always to be remembered to his honor, that, in a time of
hot persecution, when a man's only owning himself to be a Christian was
sufficient to expose him to death, he should be able to put on resolution
enough to become an advocate for Christians, a public pleader of their cause;
as he appears to have been by his two "apologies" in their behalf.

HE was at Rome, in the reign of "Antonine the pious," when the persecution
began to break forth; and he then wrote an excellent "apology" in their
defense, and preferred it (as appears from the inscription) to "Antoninus Pius
the Emperor, and to his two sons Verus and Lucius, to the senate, and by them
to the whole people of Rome." This he did about the year 150, says Dupin.
Tillemont and Dr. Grabe think it was not presented before this year. Dr. Cave
fixes the time at 140. Pagi and Basnage at 139; whose opinion, says Dr.
Lardener, "appears to me the truest, for the reasons alleged by those learned
men."

THIS apology (says Du-pin) is commonly called the second, but is really the
first; whereas the other commonly so called is actually the second; nay, if we
may give credit to the testimony of Eusebius, was not presented to the Emperor,
and senate, until the time of Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, and successor
of Antoninus Pius. In this the most learned writers are now generally agreed.

WHAT Justin had principally in view, in this "apology" was, to represent the
injustice of the proceedings against the Christians; for that, without any
enquiry into the true merits of their case, they were adjudged to death as the
most impious, and flagitious of all men; only their being called by the name of
Christians, being accounted sufficient for their condemnation. -- He justifies
them against the calumnies that had been wickedly cast upon them; offering what
was abundantly sufficient to clear up their innocence. He particularly shows,
that they were not Atheists, as they had been characterised; because, though
they worshipped not the gods of the heathen, yet they knew the true God, and
performed that service which was agreeable to him* also, that they looked not
for an earthly kingdom (as was suspected of them, and for which cause the
Romans were fearful of their rebellion), but one that was divine and heavenly,
on which account they were willing to run the hazard, and suffer the loss, of
this present life, which they never could do, were they possessed with desires
of reigning in this world. He likewise wipes off those blasphemies wherewith
the Christians were loaded for their worshipping a "crucified man," by such as
were altogether ignorant of the mystery of the cross of Christ; showing that
the religion of such as worshipped the gods was but a vain and sordid
superstition. He, moreover, largely discourses of Christ, unfolds many things
relative to his suffering on the cross, and by convincing arguments proves the
truth of the Christian faith; not forgetting to represent the harmless lives of
Christians, their exact observance of chastity, patience, peaceableness,
gentleness, and love, even to their very enemies. In fine, he lays before them
the manner of Christians in their celebration of the sacred rites of baptism
and the Lord's supper, and their other observances; which he chose to do,
because of the base slanders that had been raised, and scattered abroad,
concerning them; as if horrible and abominable things were practiced by them in
their secret meetings upon such occasions. The "apology" is wrote with a
freedom and boldness, becoming a serious, zealous, and powerful advocate in
pleading the cause of truth and righteousness. And it had its desired success.
For the Emperor, moved by this apology, as well as by other notices he had
received, gave order that the Christians henceforward should be treated in a
regular and more gentle way; as appears from his "epistle to the commonality of
Asia," preserved by Eusebius, in the ivth book, and 13th chapter of his
ecclesiastical history, by Justin himself in his second apology, and from them,
by other writers. The English reader may meet with it, in a language he
understands, in Dr. Cave's lives of the Fathers.

THE "second apology," some few sentences of which are lost, does not
comprehend such variety of matter: it is a complaint or remonstrance directed
to the Emperor, representing the injuries that were unjustly offered to the
Christians; and making answer to the things objected against them. In this
"apology," he describes the snares that were laid for him by a certain Cynic
Philosopher, named "Crescens," through whose procurement he expected to suffer
death. "I expect, (says he) by some of those who falsely call themselves
Philosophers, to be betrayed, or brought to the stake or tree; it may be by
this Crescens, a lover of popular applause, and of insolent arrogance; a man
unworthy to be called a Philosopher, because he publicly witnesses the things
which he knows not, as if the Christians were atheistical and impious; and
all to be in favor with, and please, the multitudes whom he has deceived."

IT was not long before it happened according to what he had suggested. For we
are told, by Tatian, a disciple of Justin, that this same "Crescens" procured
his death, which he suffered, says Dupin, in the sixth year of the reign of
Marcus Antoninus, the Philosopher; that is, in the year of Christ 160. Dr. Cave
says, in 164. Tillemont, in 167 or 168. Fabricus supposes he was born in 89,
and suffered martyrdom in the 74th year of his age, A. D. 163. Dr. Grabe is of
the same opinion as to the time, both of his birth, and death.

HIS name is often mentioned with honor by the ancient Christian writers.
Tatian calls him "an admirable man." Methodius says, "he was not far removed
from the Apostles in time, or virtue". Eusebius mentions him as one that was
"famous, not long after the Apostles, an embracer of the true philosophy, and
well studied and exercised in the doctrine of the Gentiles." Photius says, "he
was well acquainted with the Christian philosophy, and especially with the
heathen; rich in the knowledge of history, and other parts of learning. But he
took little care to set off the native beauty of philosophy with the ornaments
of rhetoric. For which reason, his discourses, though weighty and learned, want
those allurements which are apt to attract the vulgar." He adds, "He showed
himself a Philosopher not only in words, but in his actions, and his habit.
Says Dr. Cave, "Though he laid aside his former profession, he still retained
his ancient garb, preaching and defending (as Eusebius, and Jerome report) the
Christian religion under his old "philosophic" habit, which was the "pallium,"
or "cloak," the usual badge of the Greek Philosophers, and which those
Christians still kept to, who, before their conversion, had been professed
Philosophers. So Jerome tells us of Aristides, the Athenian Philosopher, that,
under his former habit, he became Christ's disciple; and Origin of Her^olas,
afterward Bishop of Alexandria, that, giving himself up to the more strict
study of philosophy, he put on the philosophic habit, which he constantly wore,
even after he became Presbyter of the Christian church." This long continued a
custom; and might perhaps give rise to that distinction of habit, that has
prevailed, through so many ages, among the several orders in the Roman church.


His WRITINGS.
THE writings ascribed to Justin are numerous. But, as his "first apology," of
which we have already taken notice, is the only work of his we shall have
occasion to transcribe from, I shall barely insert a catalogue of what he has
wrote, least I should take up more room about that which is not directly to our
purpose, than can be well spared.

HIS works may be distinguished into those that are still extant, and held to
be genuine; those that are lost, and some of them of doubtful authority; and
those that are supposititious, but mostly yet remaining. We shall distinctly
enumerate them under these classes.

GENUINE and EXTANT.
"PARANAESIS," or an exhortation to the Gentiles. "Elenchus," an oration to the
Greeks. "Two apologies" in behalf of Christians. A book concerning the
"Monarchy of God." A "dialogue with Trypho," the Jew. An "epistle to Diognetus."

LOST and IN PART DOUBTFUL.
A "DISCOURE against all heresies, and against Marcion." "Two books against the
Gentiles." A "commentary on the hexameron." A book called "psaltes." Another
concerning "the soul," a scolistical discourse. A "commentary on the
apocalypse." An "epistle ad papam." A "discourse on the resurrection."

SUPPOSITITIOUS.
A BOOK "de monarchia." An "exposition of the true faith concerning the
trinity." A "confutation of certain aristotelian opinions." "Questions
propounded by the Christians to the Gentiles, and their answers to them, with a
confutation of them." "Certain questions propounded by the Greeks to the
Christians, with the answers of the Christians." "The answers to one hundred
and forty-six questions ad orthodoxos." "Summary solutions of doubts respecting
religion."

PERTINENTLY just is the remark of Hanmer, having spoken of these
supposititious works of Justin; "Upon how frail a foundation are those unsound
doctrines of the Papists built (for the proof of which these spurious writings
are often alleged) namely, the lawful use of the cross, the Virgin Mary
without sin, keeping and worshipping of relics, the use of Crism, ceremonies
of the mass, and that confirmation is a sacrament?"

I SHALL only add concerning this Father, that, though he appears to have been
a man of considerable learning, and very conversant with the sacred writings,
yet his reasoning sometimes will not bear being closely examined; nor are his
interpretations of the scripture always such, as would be admired in this age
of the world. He does not seem to have been studious of art in setting off his
discourses. His manner is more like a rigid Philosopher, than an eloquent
orator. He is often dry, and sometimes obscure. Nor would it do him wrong,
should it be said, that he was not without defect as to his religious
sentiments. His notion of the "millenium" was too gross and carnal. His
conceit, "that some of the sinning angels had too free communication with
women; begetting Demons, and introducing by this means, all kind of wickedness
among men," is quite extravagant. He may be thought to have lessened the
glorious efficacy of the cross of Christ by declaring, "that they that lived
according to the principles of natural reason, as Socrates, Heraclitus, and
others, might be called Christians." He seems indeed to suppose, they were
"saved by having lived up to the law of nature." This no mere man ever yet did;
for which reason, whoever are saved, must be saved upon the foot of grace
through Christ: and in this way, why should it be thought incredible, that some
among the heathen may have been saved; though they knew not the plan upon which
they obtained mercy?

I HAVE not mentioned these imperfections of this venerable Father to discover
his nakedness, but to make it manifest, that the inspired writings only are
exempt from error and defect, and that those of the most eminent men, however
ancient, are to be read with caution, examined by the only touchstone of
religious truth, the perfect and unerring word of God, and approved of so far
only as they are found to agree herewith. By this rule we must "try the spirits
whether they be of God," "holding fast" that only which we have "proved to be
good."

TESTIMONIES from JUSTIN.
APOL. I. p. 95. -- "We bring him that is persuaded, and agrees with us in his
sentiments, to THE PLACE where the brethren, so called, ARE ASSEMBLED for
common prayers both for themselves, the baptized [illuminated, tou
photisthentos] person, and all others every where; which prayers we perform
with an intense mind, that we may be counted worthy, and may be saved with an
everlasting salvation. Prayers being ended, we mutually salute one another with
a kiss. Bread, and a cup of water and wine, are then brought to the PRESIDENT
OF THE BRETHREN [ to proestoti ton adelphon:] and he, receiving them, offers
[sends up] praise and glory to the Father of all things, through the name of
the Son, and the holy Spirit: and he is long in giving thanks, for that we are
thought worthy of these blessings. When he has ended prayer, and giving of
thanks, the whole people present signify their approbation, by saying, amen.
Amen, in the Hebrew language means, "let the thing be, or come to pass." The
President having given thanks [ eucharistesantos tou proestotos,] and the whole
people having expressed their approbation, those that are called among us
Deacons [ Diakonoi] distribute to every one of those that are present, that
they may partake of the bread, and wine and water, for which thanks has been
given; and to those that are not present, they carry. This aliment is called
among us the EUCHARIST, which no one may lawfully partake of, but he that
believes those things to be true, which have been taught by us, and has been
washed in the laver that is for the remission of sins, and regeneration; and so
lives as Christ has delivered."

APOL. ib. p. 97. "And upon Sunday, all those who live in cities and
country-towns or villages belonging to them, meet together, The author of "an
original draught of the primitive church," in answer to the author of the
"enquiry into its constitution," takes notice of this passage as quoted ONLY in
p. 17 of the "enquiry;" where the words are, "on Sunday all assemble together
in the same place," leaving out, "throughout cities and countries:" upon which,
the writer of the "draught" triumphantly says, p. 44, "Why do we think he left
out these words, which were in the middle of the sentence? Why? Because those
words of the holy Martyr would undeniably show it to be a general account of
Christian practice, in all places of the Christian world; whereas our
enquirer's business was to make it a particular instance of a single Bishop's
diocese, and that all the members of it, both "in city and country," met in one
and the same place together at once; and if it were so, then "cities and
countries," in the plural number, would be too much for him: for if they proved
any thing in that sense, they would prove that "cities and countries,"
indefinitely taken, wherever there were any Christians in them, met all
together every Sunday, and made but one congregation." But if this remarker had
turned his readers, as he would have done, had he acted a fair part, to p. 42
of the "enquiry," he would at once have made it glaringly evident, that the
answer he has here given was nothing to the purpose. For the passage in Justin
is here inserted to the full, both in the original Greek, and an English
translation. The words, as quoted in Greek, are these, "TEE TOU EELIOULEGOMINEE
EEMERA, PANTON KATA POLEIS EE AGROUS MENONTON EPI TO AUTO SUNELEUSIS GINETAI;"
the very words quoted, by our remarker, in correction of p. 17 of the
"enquiry." And the English translation of these words, in this 42d p. of the
"enquiry," is the same with that the remarker himself has given of them, only
instead of "cities and countries," the "enquiry" has it, "in city and country."
But who does not at once see, that, conformably to the sentiment of Justin, it
is perfectly indifferent, whether his words are translated "cities and
countries," or "city and country?" The word AGROS may properly be taken to
signify that part of a COUNTRY which is adjacent to some CITY, whose towns or
villages belong to it. The "enquiry" might understand the word in this sense;
supposing that Justin's meaning was, that all the Christians, whether they
lived in a city, or some village in the country near to it, and a territory of
it, assembled together every Sunday. And in this sense of the word, AGROS, it
is precisely the same thing, whether the translation be, "in cities and
countries," or "in the city and country." And the same may be said, should we
suppose, with our remarker, that the thought Justin intended to communicate,
was* that all the Christians in the Roman empire, or elsewhere, throughout the
world, "in cities or countries, assembled together on Sunday; for he must mean,
not in ONE BODY, but in DISTINCT CONGREGATIONS. And if they thus assembled, it
must be EPI TO AUTO, "in the same place," that is, not the whole complex body,
but each part of which that body did consist. This, without doubt, was the
meaning of Justin, and of the author of the "enquiry," in the words he has
quoted from him. And, in this view of them, they are a clear and strong proof
of what they were introduced to make evident; which was, that, in Justin's day,
according to his account, the Bishop's charge was a single congregation of
Christians, who usually assembled together on Sunday, or met in the same place,
for the performance of those religious services he particularly relates. And
they are as express and full to the purpose, as could be desired; especially if
it be remembered, that these religious assemblies are directly spoken of by
Justin, as having each of them their Praeses, Bishop, Pastor, Prime-Presbyter,
or whatever other name any may please to give him; who, when the Christians
were thus together in their several places of worship, preached to them,
administered the sacraments, and did whatever else was proper to his office, at
such times. This is certainly Justin's representation of the matter, unless
"ALL the Christians, throughout cities and countries," met together EVERY
SUNDAY, in ONE GENERAL BODY; which our remarker justly says is "too much" to be
his meaning: nor could it possibly be the truth of fact. And it is most
obviously remarkable, not a word is said, or distantly hinted, as if there was
any officer in the Christian church superior to these Presidents, or that any
of them acted under him, as placed at their head; which must be deemed an
unpardonable omission in Justin, if there had been, in his day, such an
ecclesiastical officer: especially if it be considered, that he was now writing
to the "Emperor, the senate, and the whole body of the Roman people," on
purpose to give them a fair and impartial account of the nature, design, and
tendency of the meeting together of Christians, with those who had the
superintendency of their religious affairs.
and the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read, as the time will
allow. And the Lector being silent, the PRESIDENT [ o Proestos] admonishes, and
exhorts to an imitation of those things that are comely. We then all in common
rise up, and pour out prayers. And, as we have related, prayers being ended,
bread and wine and water are brought, and the PRESIDENT [ o Proestos,] as
above, gives thanks according to his ability; and the people signify their
approbation, saying, amen. Distribution and communication is then made to every
one that has joined in giving thanks; and to those that are absent it is sent
by the DEACONS. And those that are wealthy, and willing, contribute according
to their pleasure. What is collected, is deposited in the hands of the the
President [ para to Proestoti,] and he helps the orphans, and widows, those
that are in want by reason of sickness, or any other cause; those that are in
bonds, and that come strangers from abroad. He is the kind guardian of all that
are in want. We ALL ASSEMBLE on Sunday, because God, dispelling the darkness,
and informing the first matter, created the world; and also because, upon that
day, Jesus Christ our Savior rose from the dead. For the day before Saturday he
was crucified, and the day after it, which is Sunday, he appeared to his
Apostles and disciples, and taught them those things, which we have now related
to you, and ye yourselves may see." --

OBSERVATIONS.
ONE can scarce read the foregoing passages, and not take notice of the
unadulterated manner in which gospel ordinances are represented to have been
(...) ministered in that day. Nothing is said of those ceremonies and
superstitious additions, which, in after times, were brought in, and observed,
to the dishonor of God, the disturbance of the church, and despoiling the
ordinances themselves of their native purity and simplicity, in which they
appeared with a glory infinitely superior to that, which men have vainly
endeavored, by mixtures of their own invention, to put upon them. These, in
truth, have deformed, not adorned them. -- But to come nearer to the point in
hand.

IT will obviously be perceived, by a cursory reading only, that no evidence
can be collected, from these testimonies, in favor of the FACT pleaded for by
Episcopalians. Not so much as the word, Bishop, is to be found in them. -- Not
a syllable is lisped, importing a threefold order of officers in the church,
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. -- No insinuation is given, not so much as
indirectly or implicitly, that Bishops were officers superior in their order to
Presbyters. -- In short, so far is ORDINATION, or CONFIRMATION, from being
appropriated to Bishops as their exclusive right, that not the least hint is
suggested about the one, or the other. And this is the more worthy of notice,
as a very particular account is exhibited of the observation of the Lord's day,
of the administration of baptism and the Lord's supper, and of their being
administered by the PRESIDENTS OF THE BRETHREN. Surely, Justin would not have
omitted to speak of so important a matter as the office and distinguishing
powers of Bishops, if he had thought of them as some Episcopalians do at this
day. He had as fair an opportunity to mention these things, as the other; yea,
if Bishops, in his day, had been those essentially necessary officers in the
church, that they are made to be in this, he might with as much, nay, with much
more, reason have brought them into view. He certainly did not know of such
Bishops as are now contended for. Had there been any of this kind, in his day,
it was altogether inexcusable in him, while pleading the cause of Christians,
to let it suffer, by saying nothing of that, which is now thought to enter into
the very being of Christianity itself.

IT may be pertinently added to what has been said, that the PRAESES,
PRAEPOSITUS, or, in English, PRESIDENT of the brethren, was nothing more than
the Pastor of a SINGLE flock, or congregation. For he is described as "leading
in the prayers of a whole church, preaching to them, administering the Lord's
supper, and sending the consecrated elements to those who could not be present
at the time of administration." And it is remarkable, not a word is said of his
being placed over Presbyters as their ruler and Governor. Instead of this, he
is called the PRESIDENT OF THE BRETHREN. And Presidents and Deacons are the TWO
ORDERS in the church he particularly specifies; meaning by Presidents, those
officers that were, in this age, promiscuously called either Bishops, or
Presbyters: or, at most he could intend nothing more than Prime-Presbyters,
distinguishing them as such by the application of this name to them. Most
certainly, he could not mean Bishops in the impleaded sense; for then there
would be only Bishops and Deacons in the church: neither could he mean
Presbyters in distinction from Bishops; for, in this view, there would be no
Bishops. The plain truth is, Justin knew of but TWO INSTITUTED ORDERS of
church officers, the first of which he calls PRESIDENTS, meaning hereby those
officers that were then called both Bishops and Presbyters; the other, DEACONS.
And herein he agrees, not only with the apostolical writers, but with all his
predecessors to the day in which he lived, who mention only TWO ORDERS of
officers in the church; the first of which they promiscuously call either
Bishops or Presbyters, sometimes the former, and sometimes the latter.

MELITO, TATIAN, ATHENAGORAS, HERMIAS, THEOPHILUS, APOLLINARIUS, DIONYSIUS of
Corinth, PYNITUS, PHILIP, MODESTUS, MUSANUS, BARDESANES, The EPISTLE of the
Churches of VIENNE and LIONS.
THE above named Fathers were all writers. I have, with Du-pin, placed them
after Justin, and before Irenaeus, and in the same order; which, perhaps, is as
exact as any they could be put in. There was no real need of bringing these
writers to view; as the works of most of them are lost, and those of the other
have nothing that falls in with our present design: but it was thought best not
to pass them over, without saying what might be proper to give the reader a
just idea both of them, and of their writings.

MELITO. He was Bishop of Sardis, in Asia, and some suppose him to have been
the "Angel of the church" there, to whom one of the epistles in the
"apocalypse" is directed; but without the least probability of truth. He
flourished, according to Dr. Cave, about the year 170. Du-pin brings him down a
few years lower. Eusebius introduces Polycrates speaking of him in that style,
"Melito the Eunuch." It is generally said, he is thus spoken of on account of
his extraordinary chaste and self-denying life in celibacy, for religion's
sake. But no good reason has yet been given, so far as I have seen, why the
literal meaning of the word should be departed from. Jerome tells us, from one
of Terrullian's works, "that he was esteemed a Prophet by many of the people,"
that is, a man inspired by the Holy Ghost. He also informs us, from the same
writer, that his "genius was eloquent and oratorical." He himself, as Eusebius
writes in a quotation from him, tells us, "that he had traveled into the east,
and had compiled in order the books of the old testament, as they were then and
there received:" upon which, he (...) "we have wrote six books of
commentaries." The catalogue he has here exhibited contains the same books,
with those we now acknowledge as canonical; only Esther and Nehemiah are not
inserted, for what reason I know not, unless they were not esteemed, in that
day, as equal in authority with the other books. Dr. Lardner says, "This is the
first catalogue of the books of the old testament, recorded by any Christian
writer."

THIS Father is exceeded by few, if any, in his day, as to the number of books
which he wrote. Eusebius has given us the following catalogue of them." H. E.
Lib. vi, cap. xxvi.
"Two books concerning easter." One concerning "the rule of right living, and
of the Prophets." Another "of the church." Another "of the Lord's day." Also
one book "concerning the nature of man." Another of "his formation." Another
"of the obedience of the senses to faith." Moreover, a book "of the soul, and
body, and mind." Another "of baptism." Another "of the truth, faith, and the
generation of Jesus Christ." One also "concerning prophesy." Another "of
hospitality." A book entitled, "of the key." Another, "of the devil." Another
"of the revelation of John." Another "of the incorporeal God," or, as others
translate the original words, "of God incarnate." Dr. Lardner has not
translated the title of this book, because, says he, "the meaning of it is
doubtful." Says Du-pin, "It is expressed in Greek, PERI ENSOMATOU THEOU, "of
God incarnate," or "invested with a body." Others expound this passage after
another manner, supposing, that he maintained that God was "corporeal." This
last is not the proper signification of the Greek word. However, Origin, cited
by Theodoret, in ques. 20, in Exodus says, "That Melito wrote a book concerning
God, that he was corporeal." Eccles. hist. p. 55. note c.
Finally, his "little book to Antoninus;" undoubtedly meaning the "apology" he
addressed to him, in behalf of the suffering Christians. The date of this
apology, in Eusebius's "chronicle," with which the "Alexandrian" agrees, is
170. But Tillemont places it in 175; Basnage in 177, which latter date Dr.
Lardner thinks comes nearest the truth.

How long this celebrated Father lived, and in what manner he died, cannot be
said at this day. Thus much only we find, that Polycrates, in his "epistle to
the church of Rome," speaks of him, as "buried in Sardis, waiting for a
visitation from Heaven, when our Lord shall raise him from the dead." Eusebius. H.
E. Lib. v. cap. 24.


TATIAN. He was born in Assyria, where he was instructed in the theology of the
Grecians. The time of his conversion to the Christian faith is uncertain; but
it was effected, at least in part, by reading the sacred books, and by
considering the corruptions and absurdities of Paganism. Of these things, he
has informed us himself in his "discourse against the Gentiles," the only one,
among the many he wrote, Eusebius says, "He left to posterity in writing a
great number of commentaries." Jerome, in his book of illustrious men, expresses
it thus, "He left an infinite number of books."
that is still remaining. He is supposed to have published it before he left
the catholic opinions; Dr. Lardner thinks, between 165 and 173. He appears,
from this performance, to have been a diligent student in profane learning. It
is indeed filled with it; though the matters he treats of are not methodised in
the nicest manner. Eusebius calls this work "an elaborate one;" and says, "it
is the most elegant and useful of all his writings." He was Justin's disciple,
and lived in communion with the church during his life; but afterward he
embraced a variety of very absurd notions, and became the founder of a new
sect, called "Encratites," or "Continents." He condemned the use of wine, and
diverse sorts of flesh, denied the lawfulness of marriage, the salvation of
Adam, and, what is much worse, the reality of Christ's sufferings: besides all
which, he maintained the doctrine of Valentinus's "invisible aeons," and
asserted, with Marcion, that there are "two Gods." Eusebius speaks H. E. Lib.
iv. cap. 29.
of his having "patched together, a kind of harmony and collection of the
gospels, which he called "dia tessaron, of the four;" which, says he, "is still
in the hands of some." Theodoret, a writer in the fifth century, speaking of
this same book, says, as I find him quoted by Dr. Lardner, he, meaning Tatian,
composed a gospel, which is called "dia tessaron, of the four," leaving out the
genealogies, and every thing that shows the Lord to have been the seed of David
according to the flesh; which has been used, not only by those of his sect, but
also by them who followed the apostolical doctrine, not perceiving the fraud of
the composition, but simply using it as a compendious book. I have met with
more then two hundred of these books, which were in esteem in our churches; all
which I took away and laid aside in a parcel, and placed in their room the
gospels of the four Evangelists. It was a report, in Eusebius's day, that this
Tatian had the "assurance to alter the words of the Apostle [meaning without
doubt the Apostle Paul,] pretending to mend the composition, or order of his
style." Dr. Mills seems to think, this "altering the words of the Apostle" was
nothing more than some interlineary or marginal explanations; and that the
"correcting the Apostle's style" was only disposing his words, in the margin,
in a more natural order, without doing, or intending to do, any prejudice to
the original text. This is as candid an account as can be given of this matter;
but it does not well agree with the character of Tatian, whose defection
Eusebius H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 29*
ascribes to his being "so puffed up with a presumptuous self-estimation, as to
imagine he surpassed all others." Besides, having mentioned Severus, and his
followers, called Severiani, and said, "they revile the Apostle Paul, reject
his epistles, deny the acts of the Apostles;" he adds, "their first author was
Tatianus." How he died, is not known. Du-pin says, it was about the time that
Irenaeus wrote his volume against heresies; which, perhaps, is not far distant
from the exact truth. Nothing is to be met with in this writer relative to the
subject we are upon: or if there was, its credit would be much weakened, as,
instead of "holding fast the truth," he had "turned aside to fables."

ATHENAGORAS. Two pieces of his are extant, "an apology for the Christians,"
and a "discourse on the resurrection." In the former of these, he speaks of
himself as an "Athenian," and a "Philosopher." And this is the most we
certainly know of him, except what may be collected from his writings. Eusebius
and Jerome say nothing of him, or of any work of his; nor is he mentioned by any
of the ancients, until we have got down to Epiphanius, who has quoted a passage
from him. There is indeed some account of him by Philip Sidetes (a writer in
the fifth century) in a fragment of his "Christian history," published by
Dodwel. But the learned in these matters do not give much credit to it. Says
Dr. Lardner, "this history of Philip has no great character given it by
Socrates, or Photius, who had read it."

THE "apology" is inscribed to "Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius
Commodus." Critical writers differ in their judgments as to one of the persons,
to whom this apology is addressed, and accordingly put a different date to it.
Some think it was addressed to Marcus Antoninus, and his adopted brother and
colleague in the empire, Lucius Verus, who died in 169, before which time this
apology must have been wrote. Others think it was inscribed to Marcus
Antoninus, and his son Commodus. Those of this latter opinion place it about
the year 177 or 178. In this apology he wipes off the aspersions that had been
maliciously thrown on Christians; affirming, and describing, their holiness in
all manner of conversation. -- He asserts that the devils were ruined through
love to women. -- He admits free will in its utmost latitude. -- He commends
virginity, but condemns second marriages, calling them "honest adultery." -- He
treats of the resurrection, and the last judgment.

HIS discourse of the "resurrection" was probably wrote after the apology; and
what strengthens the probability is, that, having toward the conclusion of the
apology fallen upon the affair of the resurrection, he postpones a more full
discourse upon it to some other time. He endeavors to prove, in this work, that
a resurrection from the dead, far from being impossible, is extremely credible.
His arguments are taken rather from reason than the scriptures.

THE genuineness of neither of these pieces are called in question, though the
author of them had so little notice taken of him in primitive antiquity. Dr.
Lardner says, "He is a polite writer, and wrote in attic Greek; but he has
rendered his style less agreeable by frequent parentheses."

HERMIAS. He is called "a Christian Philosopher," and wrote a piece, entitled,
"Irrisio," an imperfect copy of which is still remaining. It contains a series
of satirical reflections on the wild opinions, and extravagant notions, of the
philosophycal Gentiles. Neither this work, or its author, are mentioned by any
of the primitive Fathers; nor can it be determined when he wrote it. However,
says Du-pin "It is not to be doubted but that he is ancient, and that he lived
before the pagan religion was extirpated." He adds, "This little book was
printed by itself, in Greek and Latin, at Basil, anno domini, 1553."

THEOPHILUS. He was born of heathen parents, and was himself an heathen in
religion, until his conversion to Christianity. When this was effected, or by
what special means, we know not; but, having professed himself a Christian, he
so adorned his character, in this view of it, as to be thought worthy of the
Episcopate at Antioch, in which he succeeded Eros, in the 8th of Marcus
Antoninus, or 168th of our Lord.

HE did not confine himself to the work of preaching to the people of his
particular charge, but endeavored by writing also to serve the common cause of
Christianity. He wrote, as the account is in Eusebius, H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 24.
"three books to Autolycus, containing the elements of religion;" another
"against the heresy of Hermogenes;" another "against Marcion." There are also,
says he, "other books of his concerning the rudiments of religion." Jerome, in
his book of illustrious men, besides mentioning the above writings, says, "I
have read some commentaries upon the gospel, and proverbs of Solomon, which go
under his name; but they do not appear to me to answer the style and elegance
of the beforementioned writings." There are still extant, "short commentaries
or allegories upon the four gospels, in four books," with the name of
Theophilus to them. Some have thought they were his; but without good reason.
It is generally conceded, that they are the work of a much later writer. If
these were the "commentaries" Jerome saw, he observed their difference in style
and elogance from the other works of Theophilus; for which reason, it may be
supposed, he was not the author of them; especially, as they were unknown to
Eusebius. The only writings of Theophilus still remaining, and accounted
genuine, are his "three books to Antolycus." They are supposed, by learned men,
to have been wrote not long before his death, that is, in the beginning of the
reign of Commodus, about 181.

THE first of these books may not improperly be called a discourse between him
and Autolycus, in answer to the desire of that heathen Philosopher, in which he
treats of the nature of God, and what we call his attributes or perfections.
The second book is wrote with a more immediate design to convince Autolycus of
the falsehood of heathenism, and the truth of Christianity. And here he mentions
the opinions of the heathen concerning their gods, representing their
absurdity, and pointing out the contradictions there were among their
Philosophers and Poets upon this head. He enlarges upon the creation of the
world; the history of Moses, which he shows to be the oldest and truest of any
in the world, and that they had extracted many things from the holy scriptures.
In the third book, after having proved the writings of the heathen to be
contrary to good sense, and good manners, he vindicates the Christians, by
setting their character in a fair and amiable light. At the end of these books,
he has added an historical chronology from the beginning of the world. Du-pin
says, Eccles. hist. 2d cent. p. 67.
It is apparent from this little epitome, how well this author was acquainted
with profane history. These books are filled with a great variety of curious
disquisitions relative to the Poets and Philosophers; though there are but few
things that relate immediately to the doctrines of the Christian religion: not
that he was ignorant of them, for it appears, from several passages, that he
was very skilful in these matters; but, as he composed these books chiefly to
convince a pagan, he insists, in proof of our religion, rather upon arguments
from without, than by expounding its doctrines. He adds, "The style of these
books is elegant, and the turn of thought agreeable. Whoever reads them, cannot
doubt but that the author was a very elegant man."

APOLLINARIUS or APOLLINARIS.

HE is said to have been Bishop of Hierapolis, a city in Phrygia. He flourished
in the reign of Marcus Antoninus, and wrote several books, the titles only of
which remain at this day. Eusebius's account of him is this." H. E. Lib. iv.
cap. 27.
"Though many volumes were wrote by Apollinarius; yet these only came to our
hands. "An oration to the beforenamed Emperor" [Marcus Antoninus]. "Five books
against the Gentiles." "Two books of the truth." "Two books against the Jews."
And such books as he afterward wrote against the "Phrygian heresy." Jerome, in
"catalogo," omits the books against the Jews. Neither are they found, says
Du-pin, in the "version of Ruffinus, nor even in some Greek manuscripts of
Eusebius." Photius, having read his "books against the Gentiles," as also those
"concerning piety and truth," which were extant in his day, says of him, Cod.
14.
"that he was much to be esteemed both for his doctrine and style."

DIONYSIUS of Corinth. He was Bishop of the church in this city, and
flourished, according to Dr. Cave* about the year 170: herewith agrees
Eusebius, who says, in his "cronicon," the 11th of Marcus Antoninus, which is
171 of Christ. The last mentioned author, speaking of him in his
"ecclesiastical history," says, Lib. iv. cap. 23.
"he not only made the people of his own charge partakers of his divine labors,
but the Christians in other countries also, by the "catholic epistles" which he
wrote and sent to many churches." He then particularly mentions these epistles,
and in the following order. The first, to the "Lacedaemonians;" containing an
institution of the right faith, and an exhortation to peace and unity. The
second, to the "Athenians;" tending to excite their faith, and stir them up to
a life of conformity to the rule of the gospel. The third, to the
"Nicomedians;" wherein he opposes the heresy of Marcion, comparing it with the
standard of faith. The fourth, to "the church of Gortyna, and all those of
Crete;" in which he greatly commends Philip their Bishop, for that the church,
committed to his charge, was so beautified with virtue and generosity. The
fifth, to the "church at Amastris, with the churches throughout Pontus;" in
which he explains diverse passages of scripture, laying down several precepts
concerning marriage and virginity. The sixth, to the "Gnossians:" in which he
advises Pinytus their Bishop, not to impose on the Christians the grievous
burden of vowed chastity as a matter of necessity. The seventh, to the
"Romans," directed to Soter their Bishop; in which they are commended for their
Christian love and charity. An "eighth epistle" is here mentioned as extant in
that day, which was wrote, and sent, to "Chrysophora, a most faithful sister."
Of these epistles there are now no remains, except a few fragments in Eusebius.
Jerome, in his book of illustrious men, after an enumeration of these epistles,
says, the author of them was "a man of great eloquence, and industry; and
flourished under Marcus Antoninus and Commodus." When, and how, he died is
uncertain. He has been numbered among the Martyrs; but without authority from
the records of the more ancient Fathers.

Dr. GRABE has been able to gather only two small fragments, from all
antiquity, of the writings of this Dionysius; in one of which, speaking to the
church of Rome, he calls "Soter their blessed Bishop." This I mention, not as
though I thought it of any importance in the present dispute; but because I was
not willing to omit noticing so much as the name, Bishop, in any writing, or
fragment of a writing.

PINYTUS. We are informed by Dionysius of Corinth, Eusebius. H. E. Lib. iv. cap.
23.
"that he was Bishop of the Gnossii at Crete, and that he wrote an answer to
the epistle which he sent to this church." This answer, says Eusebius, H. E. Ib.
"represents, as it were, a lively portraiture of Pinytus, his diligence in
watching over the flock, which he had been entrusted with by God, his great
knowledge in divinity, and his uncommon eloquence."

PHILLIPPUS. MODESTUS. These both, says Eusebius H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 25.
"left monuments in writing to posterity of their apostolic tradition, and
sound faith." They particularly write against Marcion. Dionysius of Corinth,
Eusebius. H. E. Lib iv. cap. 23.
in his epistle to the church at Gortyna, "commends Philip their Bishop on
account of the evidence this church had given of their virtuous generosity."
Eusebius Lib. ib. cap. 25.
ranks Modestus with Irenaeus, "as having, of all others, had the chiefest hand
in detecting and exposing the errors of Marcion."

MUSANUS. He is spoken of by Eusebius H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 28.
as having wrote an excellent book, entitled, "unto the brethren lately fallen
into the heresy of the Encratites," which had then lately sprung up, and
molested the churches with a strange kind of false and pernicious doctrine; the
author of which is said to have been Tatianus.

BARDESANES. He lived about the same time with the beforenamed Fathers, was a
Mesopotamian by birth, a very eloquent man, and skilful in logic. He published,
in the Syrian tongue, "dialogues, together with other books against Marcion,
and other grand heretics." These were translated by certain learned men (a
great number of which were his disciples) into the Greek language. His
"dialogue," in special, entitled, "of destiny,' was translated, and dedicated
to Antoninus the Emperor. Eusebius says, H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 30.
"it was of great force." He adds, "He wrote many other books, occasioned by
the persecution raised in those times. He was tutored by Valentinus; but
afterward reprehending and condemning his fabulous dreams, he became more
sound in the faith; though he was not altogether clear of the filth of the
former heresy."

The EPISTLE of the churches of VIENNE and LIONS. Nothing is to be met with in
this epistle, upon the subject of these papers, unless it be that Pothinus is
spoken of as "Bishop of Lions;" for which reason I should have passed it over
in silence, but that it is so valuable a piece of antiquity. It contains a
narrative of the grievous sufferings, and cruel deaths, of a great number of
Christians, particularly in the cities of Vienne and Lions. The facts are here
related, not in a romantic strain, but with such simplicity of language as to
render them at once credible, and greatly affecting. Dr. Lardner says of this
epistle, "It is the finest thing of the kind in all antiquity." It is wrote in
the spirit, and after the manner, of the apostolic age. The time of the
persecution, which occasioned this letter, is disputed. But Eusebius H. E. Lib.
v. proaem.
has with great precision placed it in the seventeenth year of Marcus
Antoninus, the 177th of our Lord. And in this date the most learned do
acquiesce.

IT appears from this epistle, a very great part of which is preserved in
Eusebius's "ecclesiastical history," that vast numbers of Christians were
called, in this persecution, to suffer the loss of all, yea, even their very
lives, and in the most formidable shapes, for the sake of their religion. It is
astonishing, that any of the human race should so far put off humanity, as to
be able to inflict those torments which the poor Martyrs now endured; --
banished from their houses-forbid to show so much as their heads -- vilified,
mocked, and insulted -- beaten with stripes -- hurried from place to place --
plundered, stoned, imprisoned, there treated with outrage and fury, and then
carried forth to execution in all the cruciating ways that malice could invent:
nor was this all: for, as the words are in this epistle, After the bodies of
the blessed saints had been, in every way, spitefully and scornfully treated,
and suffered to be six days unburied, they were burned to ashes; and the ashes
they gathered, and scattered in the river Rhodanus, so that not a jot of them
should any longer remain on the earth. This they did, that they might overcome
God, and hinder the reviving of the saints; lest, as they said, there should be
any further hope of the resurrection, whereof (say they) the Christians being
fully persuaded, bring among us a new and strange religion; contemning
punishment, and hastening themselves cheerfully to death. Now, say they, let us
see, whether they can arise, and whether their God can deliver them out of our
hands.

IRENAEUS.
His character, writings, testimonies from them, and remarks.
THE persons from whom Irenaeus descended are now unknown; and so is the
particular place where he was born. He might probably be a Greek, and of the
country of Asia. It is the conjecture of some, that he was a native of Smyrna,
or of some not far distant town, from his early acquaintance with the venerable
Polycarp. He was certainly, in his younger years, an attendant on the
instructions of this apostolical Father, whose doctrine was so deeply impressed
on his mind, that he firmly retained, even to old age, the remembrance of it.
Thus much he has told us himself, in his epistle to Florinus, quoted by
Eusebius. H. E. Lib. v. cap. 20.
Says he, I well remember the place where Polycarp set when he taught; his
going out, and coming in; his manner and course of life; the figure and
proportion of his body; the sermons which he preached to the multitude; the
relations he gave of his converse with the Apostle John, and others who saw the
Lord: how he remembered their sayings, and what he heard from their mouths,
touching the Lord, of his power and doctrine; reciting precepts, and all things
consonant to holy scripture, out of their mouths (I say) who had seen with
their eyes the word of life in the flesh. These things, at that time, I
diligently marked, and painted, not in paper, but in my heart; which
continually, through the grace of God, I ponder and meditate. -- This manifests
his antiquity; which further appears from that frequent mode of diction, in his
book against heresies, "as I heard from a certain Presbyter, who heard from
those who saw the Apostles." Eusebius takes particular notice of this. Says he,
H. E. Lib. v. cap. 8.
"Irenaeus has mentioned the sayings of a certain apostolical Presbyter without
telling his name, and puts down his expositions of the scriptures." Who this
Presbyter was cannot be ascertained. It might be Papias, whom he had seen, and
heard, and has sometimes pointed out by name. It might be Pothinus, his
predecessor, or some other ancient Father. He may from hence be justly styled a
man, if not of apostolical times, yet near to them; as having conversed with
those who had seen the Apostles, and were successors to them. When he took upon
him the profession of Christianity is not known; though it is probable, he way
indoctrinated in its principles from his earliest days, and not made a convert
to them from the idolatries and superstitions of Paganism.

THE time of his going to France cannot exactly be fixed; nor is the special
occasion that led them there now known. But he soon became famous in that part
of the world, and did much service for the interest of Christ, particularly in
the church at Lions. Pothinus, the Bishop, or Praeses of this church, in the
persecution under Antoninus Verus, which now greatly raged in France, was
brought before the civil tribunal for his adherence to the cause of Christ,
and, after a most barbarous beating, was thrown into prison almost breathless,
and in about two days died there in the 90th year of his age. Irenaeus was
thought the most proper person to succeed the aged Martyr, and was accordingly
chosen by the church of Lions their Bishop in his room, or, in other words,
their Prime-Presbyter.

THE state of their religious affairs was now unhappily difficult, not only on
account of that heavy persecution which was scarcely blown over, but also
through the busy endeavors of some cunning deceivers to corrupt the pure
doctrine of Christ embraced among them. The Valentinian heretics had by this
time spread themselves as far as France, and bewitched, among others, a number
of eminent women, with their wild and extravagant opinions. One Marcus was
particularly a deceiver and abuser of the weaker sex. Upon this occasion,
Irenaeus, as became a pious faithful Minister of Christ, diligently labored to
put a stop to the further spreading of this contagion, and to recover those who
had been infected. And having, under the favor of Heaven, secured his own
charge, he was greatly serviceable to other churches, as occasions therefore
were offered in Providence. The church at Rome, being in danger of being led
aside by two of her Presbyters, Florinus and Blastus, he wrote to both these
perverters of the truth, with great propriety and strength; as we have the
account from Eusebius. H. E. Lib. v. cap. 23.


THE Asian churches likewise were much troubled with the prophecies and
delusians of Montanus, Alcibiades, and Theodotus: upon which the Gallican
churches, either of their own accord, from christian love and sympathy, or at
the request of their Asian brethren, sent Irenaeus to them with their letters,
that he might comfort them under their trial, confirm them in the truth, and
assist them in the confutation of these heretics, who had rose up among them.

IN his time also, the controversy about the circumstances of keeping easter
was unhappily revived by Victor, Bishop of Rome, a furious hot headed bigot,
and increased to an height that was like to bring confusion to the churches.
Irenaeus, not unaffected with the unchristian heats and animosities that were
now too prevalent, thought it his duty to endeavor to promote love and peace
between the contending parties, notwithstanding their difference in sentiment
upon this point. He accordingly wrote, in the name of the brethren in France,
with great pertinence, to Victor of Rome. A large fragment of this letter
Eusebius has preserved, H. E. Lib. v. cap. 23.
in which Irenaeus says, Though he himself solemnised the feast of easter on
the Lord's day, according to his [Victor's] manner, yet he could not approve of
the bitter zeal he discovered against others for the observation of a custom
after the manner they had received from their ancestors. He tells him, that
different customs had been used in churches, not only in the celebration of the
feast of easter, but also of fasts, and in diverse other matters of practice.
And, in fine, he reminds him, That his predecessors did not contend with the
Asiatics in this matter; and that Polycarp, being at Rome, and having conferred
with Anicetus, upon this affair, they determined that mutual communion ought
not to be broken for a matter of so small importance; and that they
communicated with each other. He wrote, as Eusebius assures us, many
reconciling letters to other Bishops, upon this same head. And, it is probable,
they were followed with some good effect. For though the Asiatics did not lay
aside their custom, it does not appear that the union betwixt them and the
Romanists was broken; but a more calm and tranquil state of things took place.
Thus this good man, in agreement with the purport of his name, discovered
himself to be of a peaceable, and peacemaking temper. And he has, from that
time to this, been characterised as one happily disposed to promote candor,
love, and peace among brethren; though he could clothe himself with zeal, and
appear strenuous and resolute, when the purity of gospel truth was in danger of
being corrupted by the cunning arts of those, who lay in wait to deceive.

HE flourished Baron. ad an. 180.
under Antoninus Verus, the whole of Commodus, and part of the reign of
Severus; all along approving himself a faithful laborious servant of God, and
one that was eminently useful to the church of Christ, not only by his public
preaching and private conversation, but by the writings he left as monuments to
posterity of his concern for the doctrines of Christianity, that they might be
preserved pure, in opposition to the base mixtures with which they had been
polluted by evil men, in his day. His name is mentioned with great honor in the
ancient writings. The Martyrs of Lions, in their letter to Eleutheriu^, Bishop
of Rome, speak of him as worthy of notice "not so much for his being a
Presbyter, as for his piety and zeal for the gospel of Jesus Christ."
Tertullian calls him "omnium doctrinarum curiosissimum exploratorem," that is,
"a most curious searcher into all doctrines." Theodoret says, he was "an
apostolical man, admirable, and the light of the western church." Epiphanius
also is high in his encomium of him. His words are, "Old Irenaeus, every way
adorned by the holy Ghost, brought into the field by the Lord as a valiant and
expert soldier, and champion, and anointed with heavenly gifts and graces,
according to the true faith and knowledge, contended against all the arguments
of sottish heretics, and most exactly confuted them."

HIS WRITINGS.
HE was the author of diverse books, upon various subjects and occasions. But
(one only excepted, of which we shall presently take notice) they are so far
lost, through the injury of time, and neglect of succeeding ages, that there
are no other remains of them, than such fragments as may be met with in ancient
writers, who had seen them, and thought fit to make quotations from them. They
are these following ones.

(1.) A book entitled, "concerning knowledge." It is a "concise work," says
Eusebius, but extremely necessary."

(2.) A declaration of the "apostolic preaching," to a certain brother, named
Marcianus.

(3.) A book of "various tracts, or disquisitions."

(4.) An epistle to Blastus "concerning schism."

(5.) An epistle to Florinus "concerning Monarchy," or that "God is not the
author of evil;" in which he addresses to him in words we shall have occasion
by and by to consider.

(6.) A book entitled, "ogdoas," because it was wrote, says Du-pin, against the
"Octonary of the "aeons of the Valentinians." It was dedicated to Florinus,
who, in addition to his former error of making God "the author of evil," now
embraced those of Valentinus. Jerome calls it, "commentarium egregium," that is,
"an excellent commentary." In the close of it, we have a most solemn
obtestation, which both Eusebius and Jerome thought worthy of special notice. It
is in these words, Eusebius. H. E. Lib. v. cap. 20.
"I adjure thee, whosoever thou art that copiest this book, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by his glorious coming, when he shall judge the quick and the dead,
that thou compare what thou have written, and correct it carefully by the
exemplar from whence it is transcribed: and also that thou writest out this
adjuration, and insert it in the copy so taken." Dr. Cave very justly remarks
upon this, in the following words, "Well had it been with the ancient writers
of the church, had their books been treated with this care and reverence: more
of them had been conveyed down to us; at least, those few that are, had arrived
more sound and unpolluted."

(7) Diverse "epistles to Victor," and many other "Pastors of churches", about
the controversy relative to the keeping easter.

VOLATERAN speaks of an "ecclesiastical history" which he composed, and that
Eusebius had borrowed from it. And Sixtus Senensis says, he wrote "a commentary
upon the apocalypse." But these two last are scarce worth mentioning; as
neither Eusebius, in his history; nor Jerome, in his "catalogues;" nor Honorius
Augustudonensis, in his "luminaries of the church"; nor Trithemius, in his book
of "writers," make any mention of them.

THE only work of Irenaeus, that has been handed down to us, is his volume,
containing "five books" against the heresies of the Gnostics and Valentineans,
entitled, "a refutation and subversion of science falsely so called." This too,
it should seem, was almost lost, at least to the western churches. For Erasmus,
who published it in 1516, says Praef. in Iren.
"He might well call it HIS, having brought it to light, after it had been
covered with dust, and was moldy and moth-eaten."

IT has been a question, whether he wrote these books in Greek or Latin.
Erasmus was inclined rather to think, they they were originally wrote in Latin.
But most learned men are of another opinion. According to Baronius, Ad. an. 130.
"all consent in this, that he wrote in Greek." Says Cornatius, In praef. ad.
Epiph.
"the latin copy of Irenaeus is a most faulty traslation, and may better be
restored out of Ephiphanius; [that is, so far as he made quotations from
Irenaeus] than afford any help in translating of Epiphanius: so that it is
strange, Erasmus, who was of a piercing judgment in matters of this nature,
should think Irenaeus wrote in latin." To the like purpose speaks the great
Scaliger, In epis. ad Thomsonum, number. 239.
"I admire, says he, that, from such a feverish Latin interpreter, as he is
whom we now have, Erasmus should imagine, that it is the true Irenaeus, and
that he imitates the Greeks. That latin interpreter was weak, and either
omitted, or depraved, many things which he understood not. The fragments that
are extant in Epiphanius, as also in Eusebius, do sufficiently prove, both that
the man was a Grecian, and that he wrote in Greek: nor is it to be doubted of."
-- Du-pin, Dr. Cave, Dr. Lardner, and in short, the whole body of modern
writers speak of it, as beyond all doubt that Irenaeus wrote in Greek; and
their unanimous opinion also is, that the copy we now have is a rude,
barbarous, faulty, and ill-favored translation. It is not therefore easy to
say, what his distinguishing style and manner was in these books. Probably it
was, as Dr. Cave says, "simple, unaffected, vulgar, and ordinary, embossed, it
is like, and he confesses as much, with the natural language of the country
where he lived* nor had he studied the art of rhetoric, the ornaments of
speech, or had any skill in the elaborate methods and artifices of persuasion,
as he modesty apologies for himself." Praef. ad. Lib. prim.


THE contents of this volume are briefly and summarily contained in the
following abstract.

IN the first book, having largely described the heretical tenets of the
Valentinians, he opposes to them the faith of all the churches in the world,
which he comprehends, in a creed, truly catholic and excellent. This creed
being so unlike those we met with in after ages, containing, not metaphysical
niceties, but such gospel doctrines only, as are nearly and closely connected
with salvation, I shall think it worth while to insert it here. "It is, (as
Irenaeus's words are) to believe in one omnipotent God, who made heaven, and
the earth, and the seas, and all things that are in them; and in one Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, incarnate for our salvation; and in the Holy Ghost, who
by the Prophets, preached the mysteries of the dispensation and coming of
Christ, his birth of a virgin, his passion, resurrection from the dead,
assumption in his flesh into heaven, and his coming from heaven in the glory of
the Father to restore [recapitulate, or gather into one] all things, and to
raise the flesh [the bodies] of all mankind, that unto Jesus our Lord, and God,
and Savior, and King, according to the good pleasure of the Father, every knee
should bow, both of things in heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth,
and that every tongue should confess to him, and that he should pass a
righteous sentence upon all, and send spiritual wickednesses, the angels that
fell and become apostate, and also ungodly, unrighteous, lawless, and
blasphemous men into eternal fire; but that, for the righteous and holy, and
such as did keep his commandments, and abode in his love, some from the
beginning, and some by repentance, he might, gratifying them with life, bestow
on them incorruptibility, and eternal glory."
He then goes on to show, that all christians agree in this faith; and that the
most learned can add nothing to it, or make any changes in it, nor the most
simple and ignorant diminish any part of it. He then largely explains the
absurd notions of Valentinus and his disciples; and, returning to the original
of the heretics, and beginning with Simon Magus, he gives an account
successively of all the heresies that appeared since the time of that sorcerer,
to the time wherein he wrote. This first book is extremely dry, tedious, and
obscure; presenting us with scarce any thing but the wild conceits, and
extravagantly absurd notions of the primitive heretics. In the second book, he
makes use of the principles of these heretics to oppose their errors; showing
that they contradict themselves, and that their notions were idle, ridiculous
whimsies. In the third book, he confutes them by the authority of the sacred
writings, and tradition from those who had seen and conversed with the
Apostles. In the fourth book, he continues to prove, that there is but one God;
particularly, he shows against Marcion, that the same God is exhibited in the
old and new testament. He answers the objections of the heretics, especially
those they fetch from scripture. He then gives the reasons why a spiritual man,
that is to say, a Christian condemns Pagans, Jews, heretics and scismatics;
and, finally, rejects the opinion of those who affirmed, that men were
naturally good or evil, and proves the liberty of mankind. In the last book, he
treats of the fall of man, of the redemption by Jesus Christ, of the
resurrection of the dead, of the last judgment, of antichrist, and of the
state of souls after death. -- These, in general, are the subjects enlarged on
in these books.

POSSIBLY, there may have been an excess in the commendations of this Father,
on account of this work of his. Dr. Cave says, there are evidently to be seen
here the marks of "natural acumen and subtilty of parts," as well as "mastery
of philosophy and human literature. Lives of the Fathers, vol. i. p. 119.
Hanmer represents him to have had "a clear head," and to have made use of
"weighty arguments;" which, being "sharpened with holy zeal," are fitted "to
pierce deeply into the very hearts of the enemies of the truth, to their
shameful prostration, and utter overthrow." View of antiquity, p. 62.
Du-pin speaks of him as a "profound scholar in all sorts of knowledge, sacred
and profane"; especially, as having an "exquisite knowledge of the holy
scriptures." Eccles. hist. p, 60.
It is readily acknowledged, as Erasmus and the centuriators observe, that he
had read the books of the ancient philosophers, Thales, Aniximander,
Anaxagoras, Democritus, Empedocles, Plato, Aristotle, etc. as also of the
poets, tragic, comic, and lyric: for he endeavors to make it evident, that the
heresies which he opposes were taken from these profane authors, the names
only being changed. It is undoubtedly true likewise, that he had been much
conversant with the sacred writings. But it may be justly questioned, whether
his judgment was equal to his reading. The learned Photius says of him, Cod.
120.
"That he had in some of his books, "sophisticated the truth of ecclesiastical
doctrines by spurious reasonings." This is a real fact, and known to be so, by
all who are acquainted with his writings. His manner of arguing is sometimes
weak, not to say trifling. I am sure, it would be thought to be so in any one,
who, at this day, should reason as he has done. However, he appears, after all,
to have been a pious, learned, valuable man, whose memory ought to be-blessed
for his laborious services in the cause of truth. Many things are to be met
with in his writings well worth our special notice; though he sometimes makes
it appear, that he had his failings and imperfections. Candor itself will not
pretend, that he has not, in some instances, deviated from that unerring rule,
the word of truth. He, with other writers, both before and after him, have
built some hay and stubble upon the foundation they held, which will not endure
the trial of the fire.

THE learned are not agreed as to the exact time, when Irenaeus wrote his "five
books against heresies." Dodwel supposes it to have been in 176 or 177. Massuet
in 172. Tillemont, later still, toward the end of the pontificate of
Eleutherius. Dr. Lardner says, "As to the time of his writing these "five
books," it is the opinion of diverse learned men, that they were not wrote, and
published all together, but rather at some distance of time." And, though he
does not attempt to settle precisely the year, in which this work was
completed, he places Irenaeus in the year 178; though he is inclined to think,
his "books against heresies" were not published quite so soon.

"HIS death, says Du-pin, was no less glorious than his life. For, after having
governed the flock, which Jesus Christ had committed to his charge for 24
years, he fell a Martyr at Lions, in the persecution of the Emperor Severus,
which was more cruel in France than in any other part of the world, anno
Christi 202, or 203." He has often been spoken of as a Martyr by other learned
men. But, from the silence of Tertullian, Eusebius, and other ancient Fathers
concerning this matter, it is very justly argued by Dr. Cave, Basnage, Dr.
Lardner, and others, that there is no good reason to say he died a Martyr. The
most critical inquirers into matters of this nature place his death, some in
190, and others in 191, or 192. Baronius Ad. An. 205.
extends the time to the 11th of Severus, or 205th of Christ.

TESTIMONIES from IRENAEUS.
LIB. I. cap. 3. Having declared that faith, he had before described, was that
which was universally taught, and received with one heart and mind, he adds the
following words, "And of those who preside in the churches [ex iis qui praesunt
ecclesiis] he that would prevail, or excel, in his discourse, will not say
otherwise."

LIB. iii. Cap. 2. -- Speaking of Marcion, Valentinus, Cerinthus, and other
heretics, he says, "When Cum autem ad eam iterum traditionem, quae est ab
apostolis, quae per successiones Presbyterorum in eccles^is custoditur,
provocamus eos; adversantur traditioni dicentes, se non solum Presbyteris, sed
etiam apostolis existentes sapiento^es, sinceram invenisse veritatem. --
we challenge them to that apostolic tradition, which is preserved in the
churches through the successions of the Presbyters; they oppose the tradition,
pretending, that, being more wise than not only the Presbyters, but the
Apostles also, they have found out the truth." --

LIB. ib. cap. 3. "Therefore the apostolic tradition, made manifest all over
the world, is present in every church, for all that would see the truth: and we
can enumerate those, who were constituted "Et habemus annumerare eos qui ab
apostolis institu^i sunt Episcopi in eccles^iis, et successores eorum usque ad
nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt." --
Bishops by the Apostles in the churches, and their successors even to us, who
taught no such thing, nor had any knowledge of what these men have run
distracted about. For if the Apostles had known any hidden mysteries, which
they taught those that were perfect privately, and apart from the rest, they
would more especially have delivered them to those to whom they committed the
churches themselves; for they would, that they should be perfect and unblamable
in all things "Quos et successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum locu^ Magesterii
tradentes." --
whom they left their successors, delivering to them their own place of
mastership, or (as others translate the word) of being teachers. But because it
would be tedious, in such a volume as this, to enumerate [omnium ecclesiarum
enumerare successiones] the successions in all the churches, showing to you the
tradition, and declared faith, of the greatest, and most ancient, and noted
church, founded at Rome by the two glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul, which she
received from the Apostles, and is come to us through the successions of the
Bishops, [per successiones Episcoporum pervenientem usque ad nos] we confound
all who conclude otherwise than they ought, by what means soever they do so;
whether it be from a wicked endeavor to please themselves, or from vainglory,
or blindness, or an unsound opinion. To this church, "Ad hanc enim ecclesiam,
propter potentiorem principalita^om, necesse est omnem convenire ecclesiam."
because of its more potent principality, it is necessary all other churches
should agree; that is, the faithful everywhere; in which agreement, that
tradition which is from the Apostles is preserved always by those who are
scattered everywhere. The Apostles therefore, founding and instructing that
church, delivered to Linus "Lino Episcopatum administrandae ecclesiae
tradiderunt." --
the oversight of administering in it. Paul makes mention of this Linus in his
epistles to Timothy. Anacletus succeeded him. And after him, "Post eum, in
tertio loco, ab Apostolis, Episcopatum sortitur Clemens." --
in the third place, Clemens obtained the episcopate from the Apostles; who
both saw the Apostles, and conferred with them. -- To this Clement succeeded
Euaristus; and to Euaristus, Alexander; and Sixtus, the sixth from the
Apostles, was constituted; and after him Telesphorus, who was also a glorious
Martyr; and then Hyginus; after him, Pius; after whom, Anicletus; then
Eleutherius had the episcopate, "Nunc duodecimo loco, Episcopatum ab Apostolis
habet Eleutherius. Hac ordinatione, et successione, ea quae est ab Apostolis in
ecclesia traditio, et veritatis praeconiatio, pervenit usque ad nos." --
in the twelfth place from the Apostles. By this ordination and succession,
that tradition in the church, and publication of the truth, which is from the
Apostles, has come even to us. And this is a full demonstration, that it is
the one, and the same life-giving faith, that, from the Apostles, until now,
has been delivered, and preserved in the church in Corinth. Polycarp also, who
was not only instructed by the Apostles, and conversant with many of those who
saw our Lord, but likewise by the Apostles "S^d etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in
ea quae est Smyrnis ecclesia constitutus Episcopus." --
constituted Bishop in Asia, in the church of Smyrna, whom also we saw in the
first of our age. -- These things he taught, having learned them from the
Apostles; which he also delivered to the church, and they only are true. All
the churches in Asia testify to these things, and they who succeeded Polycarp
even to this day." --

LIB. ib. cap. 14. For he [Paul] applied himself to -- "In mil^to enim
convocatis Episcopis et Presbyteris, qui erant ab Epheso, et a reliquis
pro^imis civitatibus." --
the Bishops and Presbyters convened at Miletus, who were of Ephesus, and the
other neighboring cities, because he was going in haste to Jerusalem to keep
Pentecost, testifying many things to them, and telling them what would happen
at Jerusalem.

LIB. iv. cap. 43. -- Wherefore we ought "Quapropter eis qui in ecclesia sunt
Presbyteris obaudire opo^tet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, sicut
ostendimus; qui, cum Episcopatus successione, charisma veritatis certum,
secundum placitum patris, acceperunt. Reliquos vero qui absistunt a principali
successione, et quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere, vel qua^^
hereticos."
to obey those Presbyters in the church, who have succession, as we have shown,
from the Apostles; who, with the succession of the Episcopate, received the
certain gift of truth, according to the good pleasure of the Father. As for the
rest who depart from the principal succession, they are to be suspected as
heretics, in what place soever they are collected. --

LIB. ib. cap. 44. -- And truly they "Qui vero crediti quidem sunt a multis
esse Presbyteri, serviunt autem suis voluptatibus, et non praeponunt timorem
Dei in cordibus, sed contumeliis agunt reliquos, et principalis consessionis
tomere elati sunt, et in abscons^^ agunt mala." --
who are thought by many to be Presbyters, serve their own pleasures, and not
having the fear of God in their hearts, reproach the other [Presbyters,] and
are lifted up with pride of the principal session, and do wickedness in secret.
-- We ought therefore to withdraw from all such, and adhere, as we have said,
to those who keep the Apostles doctrine, and together with the order of
Presbyters, "Et cum Presbyterii ordine sermonem sanum --
do show forth sound speech and an inoffensive conversation. -- Such Presbyters
[tales Presbyteros] the church nourishes -- concerning whom the Prophet says,
"Et dabo principes tuos in pace, et Episcopos tuos in justitia."
"I will give you Princes in peace, and Bishops in righteousness."

LIB. ib. cap. 45. Where therefore one shall find such, Paul teaching says,
"God has put in the church first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers. Where therefore the gifts of God are put, there we ought to learn the
truth, with whom "Apud quos est ea quae est ab Apostolis ecclesiae successio."
is that succession of the church which is from the Apostles." -- A little
further we can have the following words, "As I heard from a certain Presbyter,
[a quodam Presbytero] who heard from those who saw the Apostles, and who
learned from these." --

LIB. ib. cap. 47. The Presbyters [Presbyteri] demonstrated that they were
extreme foolish, who, from what happened to those who were disobedient to God,
attempted to introduce another Father."

LIB. ib. cap. 49. "As a certain Presbyter said, [sicut et Presbyter dicebat)
they who throw it in our teeth, that the people, going forth by the command of
God, took vessels, and vestments, of all sorts from the Egyptians." --

Lib. ib. cap. 52. Mention is transiently made of "a senior disciple of the
Apostles" [senior Apostolorum discipulus.] And in the same chapter the
"Presbyters of the church" are spoken of as "those with whom is the apostolic
doctrine;" "apud eos qui in ecclesia sunt Presbyteri, apud quos est apostolica
doctrina."

LIB. ib. cap. 63. "True knowledge is the doctrine of the Apostles, and the
ancient state of the church all over the world, and the character of the body
of Christ, according to the successions "Secundum successiones Episcoporum,
quibus illi eam quae in unoquoque loco est ecclesiam tradiderunt." --
of Bishops, to whom they delivered the church in every place; which doctrine
has reached us, preserved in its most full delivery, without any fiction of
scriptures, or ading to, or taking from them." --

LIB. v. cap. 5. -- "And God planted paradise in Eden eastward, and there he
put the man whom he had formed. And from thence, being disobedient, he was cast
out into this world. "Quapropter dicunt Presbyteri, qui sunt Apostolorum
discipuli." --
Wherefore the Presbyters, who are the disciples of the Apostles, say, that
those who are translated, are translated from thence".

LIB. ib. cap. 20. For all those "Omnes enim ii valde posteriores sunt quam
Episcopi, quibus apostoli tradiderunt ecclesias." --
are far later than the Bishops, to whom the Apostles delivered the churches;
and this we have carefully made manifest in the third book. -- They therefore
who have the truth published by the church, charge the holy Presbyters with
unskilfulness, "Imperitiam sanctorum Presbyterorum arguunt."
not considering how far a weak religious person is from being a blasphemer,
and impudent sophister".

LIB. ib. cap. 36. -- "The Presbyters, the disciples of the Apostles say,
[dicunt Presbyteri, apostolorum discipuli] this is according to the order and
disposition of those who are saved" --.

THESE are all the passages, I have been able to find in Irenaeus's five books
against heresies, that relate to the subject we are upon. But two very
considerable FRAGMENTS of his other "writings" have been preserved by Eusebius,
which I may not omit, upon this occasion, to bring to view.

THE first is a quotation from an "epistle of his to Florinus," in which he
says, Eusebius. lib. v. cap. 20.
"This doctrine, O Florinus, that I may boldly speak the truth, is not sound:
this doctrine disagreeth with the church, and brings such as listen to it
into extreme impiety: this doctrine, not even the heretics which are out of the
church, ever dared to publish: this doctrine, such as were Presbyters before us
[ oi pro emon Presbuteroi,] and disciples of the Apostles, never delivered unto
thee." And having mentioned Polycarp, and said some things of him, he goes on,
"I am able to testify before God, that if that holy and apostical Presbyter [
apostolicos Presbuteros] had heard any such thing, he would at once have
reclaimed, and stopped his ears, and after his manner pronounced, "Good God!
into what times have thou reserved me! Yea, he would instantly have shunned the
place where he had heard such speeches."

THE second, which is eminently pertinent to the point in debate, is contained
in his "epistle to Victor" of Rome, which was extant in the days of Eusebius,
though it has long since been lost. The words are these, Eusebius H. E. Lib. v.
cap. 24.
"And the Presbyters [ oi Presbuteroi] before Soter, who were over the church
which thou governest [ oi prostantes tes ecclesias es nun aphege] I mean
Anicetus, and Pius, and Huginus, with Telesphorus and Sixtus; they did by no
means observe it [he is speaking of the day of keeping easter;] neither did
they allow those who were with them to observe it. -- And those Presbyters that
were before you [ oi pro sou Presbuteroi,] though they did not observe it
themselves, yet they sent the eucharist to those of other churches who did
observe it. And when blessed Polycarp, in the days of Anicetus, came to Rome,
and there was a small controversy between them upon other things, they soon
saluted each other with a kiss, and there was no great contention between them
upon this head. Anicetus was unable to persuade Polycarp not to retain that
which he had always observed with John, the disciple of our Lord, and the rest
of the Apostles, with whom he had been conversant: neither did Polycarp much
persuade Anicetus to observe it, since he told him that he ought to retain the
custom of the Presbyters to whom he succeeded [ ton pro auton Presbuteron.]

OBSERVATIONS and REMARKS upon the testimonies from IRENAEUS.
NOTHING is more obviously evident, so far as we regard the above passages,
than that Irenaeus cannot be called in as a WITNESS, either to the CLAIM or
EXERCISE of those powers, which Episcopalians pretend are essential to the
office of Bishops. For he no where says, that it is the RIGHT of Bishops, in
distinction from Presbyters, to CONFER HOLY ORDERS; or that they were the
persons, who did in FACT confer them, either in the age in which he lived, or
any other: neither does he affirm, directly or indirectly, that it was any part
of the work of Bishops, much less their appropriate discriminate work, to
GOVERN PRESBYTERS, or that they ever did so. And, instead of declaring, that
Bishops are officers in the church DISTINCT from, and SUPERIOR to, Presbyters,
he speaks of them, as clearly and fully as he could have done, in language
necessarily leading us to look upon them as sustaining the SAME OFFICE only in
the church. No writer, since the apostolic times, has more exactly, or
frequently, copied after the inspired penmen, in the promiscuous use of the
words Bishops and Presbyters. He uses these words indifferently, and
frequently, to point out the same officers in the church. And unless when he
uses the word, Bishops, he means the same church officers, as when he uses the
word, Presbyters, there is neither coherence, consistency, or the least force
of argument, in most of the passages, in which these words are mentioned. As
this is an important point in the present debate, I shall enlarge in its
illustration, and take occasion for it by answering what is pleaded, from
Irenaeus, in favor of Episcopacy.

THE grand plea is, that he is pirticular in giving us the line of succession;
that he does it in single persons; and that these persons are frequently and
expressly called Bishops: evidently importing a distinction of place, order, or
office, between them and Presbyters.

THE answer is easy, and, as I imagine, strongly conclusive. It is allowed,
reckoning the succession by single persons intimates some difference betwixt
the named persons, and others of the same church, as the ground, or reason, of
their being singled out.But what conceivable need is there, unless to serve a
turn, to suppose, that the difference must be so great as to import an imparity
of order, or office? Are there no instances, in which it is certain, particular
persons have been distinguished from their brethren of the same order, to
answer the like end? Bishop Stillingfleet has told us of some admirably well
adapted to the purpose. Says he, Iren. p. 300.
At Athens, after they grew weary of their ten years Archontes, the people
chose nine every year to govern the affairs of the commonwealth. These nine
enjoyed a parity of power among themselves, and therefore had a place where
they consulted together about the matters of state, which was called Stategion,
as Demosthenes, Plutarch, and others tell us: now although they enjoyed this
equality of power, yet one of them had greater dignity than the rest, and
therefore was called Archon by way of excellency, and his name only was set in
the public records of that year, and therefore was called Archon eponumos; and
the year was reckoned from him, as Pausanias and Julius Pollux inform us. Here
we see now the succession clear in one single person, and yet no superiority of
power in him over his colleagues. The like may be observed of the Ephori and
bidiaei at Sparta. The number of the ephori was always five from their first
institution by Lycurgus, and not nine, as the Greek etymologist imagines. These
likewise enjoyed a parity of power; but among these, to give name to the year,
they made choice of one who was called Eponumos here too, as the Archon at
Athens; and him they called Prestota ton ephoron, as Plutarch tells: where we
have the very name Proestos attributed to him that had only this primacy of
order, without any superiority of power, which is used by Justin Martyr of the
President of assemblies among Christians. Now from hence we may evidently see,
that mere succession of some single persons named above the rest, in the
successions of apostolical churches, cannot enforce any superiority of power in
the persons so named, above others supposed to be joint governors of the
churches with them. There was, we see, among the Archontes at Athens, and the
Ephori at Sparta, a senior in office, a chairman, or president; and he was,
for this reason, singled out, from his brethren of the same office-power, to
give denomination to the year. The like may be said in the case before us.
Among the Presbyters in each church, who all sustained the same office, and
were vested with the same essential powers, there might be a praeses,
Moderator, or prime-Presbyter; It may be worthy of special notice here,
Irenaeus himself very plainly intimates, that, among PRESBYTERS, or those who
were of that ORDER which constituted the PRESBYTERATE, there were some, in his
day, who, "not having the fear of God in their hearts," but being "elated with
the dignity of the FIRST or PRINCIPAL SESSION, contumeliously treated the other
Presbyters." Vid. lib. iv. cap. 44. This FIRST SESSION was not, in the view of
Irenaeus, the session of BISHOPS, as officers in the church of a superior ORD^^
to that of Presbyters; for he here considers them all as sustaining the SAME
ORDER; though in this same order there was a difference in DEGREE. He here
speaks of a PRINCIPAL SESSION* that is, one that belonged to the
PRIME-PRESBYTER, the HEAD or PRAESES of the PRESBYTERY.
and he might, on this account, be selected to have his name mentioned in the
succession: or his name might be inserted, merely as being the
senior-Presbyter, or because he was best known, and most celebrated for his
learning, piety, and strict attachment to the apostolic doctrine. This
difference of character, without the supposition of any difference in point of
office, or power, will fully account for a succession as reckoned in a line of
single persons; and it is sufficient, could nothing else be said, to render
their arguing invalid, who, merely from hence, would conclude, that these
particularly distinguished and named persons were of a superior, and distinct
order, in the churches, from the Presbyters belonging to them.

BUT, to give strength to this argument, it is further said, single persons are
not only named in the succession, but they are frequently and expressly called
Bishops. Very true; but then it is as true, that Irenaeas has taken all proper
care, as though he had it in design, to guard against any ones mistaking his
"succession of Bishops," for the succession of a "superior order" in the church
to that of Presbyters. This is particularly worthy of notice. I shall
accordingly endeavor to set it in the clearest and strongest point of light.
And I know of no way in which I can better do this, than by placing a few of
the foregoing passages, upon the head of succession, in two opposite columns.
It will then appear, at first sight, to every intelligent unprejudiced reader,
that Irenaeus means, and, unless he is made to speak nonsense, must mean by the
"succession of Bishops," one and the same thing with the "succession of
Presbyters," and vice-versa.

Lib. iii. cap. 3. THE apostolic tradition is present in every church. We can
enumerate those who were constituted BISHOPS by the Apostles in the churches,
and their SUCCESSORS even to us, who taught no such thing. -- By showing the
tradition and declared faith of the greatest and most ancient church of Rome
which she received from the Apostles, and is come to us through the SUCCESSIONS
OF THE BISHOPS, we confound. --

Lib. iv. cap. 53. TRUE knowledge is the doctrine of the Apostles according to
the SUCCESSION OF BISHOPS, to whom they delivered the church in every place,
which doctrine has reached us preserved in its most full delivery. --

Lib. v. cap. 20. THESE are far later than the BISHOPS TO WHOM THE APOSTLES
DELIVERED THE CHURCHES: and this we have carefully made manifest in the third
book.

Lib. iii. cap. 3. -- The Apostles, founding and instructing that church [the
church of Rome] delivered to Linus, the EPISCOPATE -- Anacletus SUCCEEDED him.
After him, Clemens obtained the EPISCOPATE from the Apostles -- To Clement
SUCCEEDED Euaristus; to him, Alexander; then Sixtus; and after him Telesphorus;
then Hugynus; after him Pius; then Anicetus: and when Soter had succeeded
Anicetus, then Eleutherius had the EPISCOPATE in the twelfth place.By this
SUCCESSION, that tradition in the church, and publication of the truth, which
is from the Apostles, is come to us.

Lib. iii. cap. 2. WHEN we challenge them [the heretics] to that apostolical
tradition, which is preserved in the churches through the SUCCESSION OF THE
PRESBYTERS, they oppose the tradition, pretending that they are wiser than not
only the PRESBYTERS, but the Apostles also.

Lib. iv. cap. 43. OBEY THOSE PRESBYTERS in the church, who have SUCCESSION, as
we have shown, from the Apostles; who, with the SUCCESSION OF THE EPISCOPATE,
received the gift of truth, according to the good pleasure of the Father. --

Lib. iv. cap. 44. -- WE ought therefore to adhere to THOSE PRESBYTERS WHO KEEP
THE APOSTLES DOCTRINE, and, together with the ORDER OF THE PRESBYTERATE, do
show forth sound speech. -- Such PRESBYTERS the church nourishes; and of such
the Prophet says, "I will give them PRINCES in peace, and BISHOPS in
righteousness.

Epistle to Victor. THOSE PRESBYTERS [that is, in the church of Rome] before
Soter, who GOVERNED THE CHURCH which thou [that is, Victor] NOW GOVERNEST, I
mean, Anicetus, Pius, Hugynus, Telesphorus, and Sixtus, they did not observe it
[that is, the day on which he observed Esther] -- And those PRESBYTERS WHO
PRECEEDED YOU, though they did not observe it themselves, yet sent the
Eucharist to those [Presbyters] of other churches who did observe it. And when
blessed Polycarp, in the days of Anicetus, came to Rome, -- he did not much
persuade Anicetus to observe it, as he [that is, Anicetus] declared that the
custom of the PRESBYTERS WHO WERE HIS PREDECESSORS should be retained.

IF it would not be construed an affront to the reader's understanding, I would
observe, with reference to the above insertions, that Irenaeus has not only
promiscuously used the names, Bishops, and Presbyters, but has done it in a
manner that renders it really impossible, he should mean by Bishops, if he had
any meaning at all, an order of officers in the church superior to, and
distinct from, Presbyters; or, by Presbyters, any order but that of Bishops.
Does he, in one place, when speaking of the succession in the church of Rome,
particularly name Linus, Anacletus, Clemens, etc. as being Bishops, as having
obtained the Episcopate there? In another, while speaking of the same
succession, and in the same single persons, he as expressly calls them
Presbyters; yea, he gives no higher a style to the predecessors of Victor, the
then Bishop of Rome, than that of Presbyters; and he applies the same name to
those who preceeded Eleutherius, another Bishop of this same church. Does he
affirm, "that the apostolic doctrine was handed down through the succession of
Bishops?" He as peremptorily declares, "that it was preserved in the church,
through the succession of Presbyters." Does he make mention of Bishops "as
constituted in the churches by the Apostles?" He expresses the same sentiment,
when he says, "the Presbyters in the church have succession from the Apostles:"
nor can we mistake his meaning, if we only consider, that, in the immediately
following words, he calls this very succession, "the succession of the
Episcopate;" and, in another place, makes the remark, "such Presbyters the
church nourishes;" and introduces the Prophet saying, "I will give you Princes
in peace, and Bishops in righteousness." In vain must it be to look for a
succession of Bishops, in Irenaeus's writings, distinct from Presbyters, and
vested with superior powers, when he attributes not only "the succession," but
"the succession in Episcopacy," to Presbyters; indifferently calling the single
persons he reckons in the succession, Bishops and Presbyters. It would spoil
his reasoning, render it inconsistent, weak, confused, and fallacious, to
suppose he should mean by Bishops a different order of officers in the church
from Presbyters, when he so often uses these names promiscuously, and
indifferently derives the succession from the Apostles in a line of Bishops, or
Presbyters, meaning, by both words, the same officers.

IT may be pertinently observed yet further, the succession Irenaeus has in
view, is not a succession of POWER, but of DOCTRINE. This will be obvious, at
first sight, by looking over the foregoing quotations from him. His dispute is
with the heretics of that day; and the use he makes of the argument from
succession is, to prove that they had departed from that DOCTRINE, which had
been handed down, in the churches, even from the Apostles to that time. This is
his grand point, and he keeps to it; never mentioning the succession, but in
order to show, how, and from what original source, the DOCTRINE of Christ had
come down, and been preserved in its purity to his day. To seek therefore for a
succession of POWER, in Irenaeus, is to seek for the living among the dead. He
no where reasons from the succession in the churches, in favor of any
peculiarity of power in Bishops beyond Presbyters, but confines his argument
SOLELY to the head of DOCTRINE. So that, it is impossible to make any valid use
of what he has said upon succession, to prove a succession of power; much less
a superioriry of power, appropriated to Bishops in distinction from Presbyters.
It must be previously laid down as a postulatum, or else sufficiently made
evident, that the apostolic doctrine could not have been handed down pure and
incorrupt, but in a line of such Bishops as were of an order in the church
superior to Presbyters; or any argument from Irenaeus's succession will be
essentially lame and defective. It will not be allowed, before it has been
validly proved, that Bishops, in the appropriated sense, could be the only
conveyers of apostolic truth. It is possible, at least we may be permitted to
think it is so, until we are convinced of the contrary, that this truth might
as well be handed down by Bishops that are of one and the same order with
Presbyters.

IT may add weight to what has been said upon these testimonies, if it be
subjoined, that the Gallican churches, who sent Irenaeus to Rome with an
epistle to Eleutherius, Bishop of the church there, had no idea of that
superiority of Bishops to Presbyters, which is now so much talked of. For, in
this letter, while speaking in commendation of him, they give him no higher a
title than that of PRESBYTER. Eusebius. H. E. lib. v. cap. 4.
Blondel has been very large and learned, the most so of any writer I have
seen, in proving, Apol. pro senten. Hi^^on, p. 23, 32.
that this letter was sent nine years after the death of Pothinus, who was soon
succeeded by Irenaeus, Bishop of the church of Lions; that is, their Praeses,
or Prime-Presbyter. It cannot therefore be supposed, with any shadow of reason,
that the churches, in whose name this letter was wrote, imagined that
Presbyters were an order distinct from, and inferior to, that of Bishops. They
would not, in this case, have spoken of him, and in the recommendatory part of
their letter, as their Presbyter. This would have been rather a debasement,
than recommendation of him. Bishop Stillingfleet has argued here with great
cogency. Says he, Iren. p. 312.
Irenaeus is sent by the church of Lions on a message to the Bishop of Rome,
when, notwithstanding his being Bishop* they call him Presbyter of that church.
What could any one imagine, but that the Bishop was nothing but the senior
Presbyter, or one that had a primacy of order among, but no divine right to a
power of jurisdiction over, his fellow Presbyters? And this reasoning will
"appear still more forcible, if it be added, that, in this very letter, he is
mentioned by the other Presbyters, as their "brother and colleague." So the
words are in Eusebius, who has quoted them. H. E. Lib. iv. cap. 5.
"Father Eleutherius! we wish you health in all things, and always in God. We
have requested Irenaeus, our brother and colleague, [ ton adelphon emon, kai
koinonon] to deliver you these letters." -- They could not, with any manner of
propriety, have thus spoken of him, if he had been a Bishop, meaning hereby an
officer of a superior order in the church to that of Presbyters.

ONLY one plea more, that I know of, is fetched from Irenaeus in favor of the
episcopal cause. It is his using that mode of speech, "Bishops and Presbyters;"
which; say the prelatists, evidently imports a distinction of officers, and
gives the superiority to Bishops.

IT is acknowledged, this mode of diction is once used by Irenaeus. But how
does he use it? Not as his own, but the language rather of the Apostle Paul.
The passage, in which the words are to be found, runs thus: "He [Paul] applied
himself to the Bishops and Presbyters convened at Miletus, who were of Ephesus,
and the neighboring towns, because he was going to Jerusalem." -- These words,
"Bishops and Presbyters," which Irenaeus has alluded to, or rather quoted from
Acts xx, are used synonimously by the Apostle Paul. And of this there is no
room for dispute. For, it is expressly declared, that, from Miletus, he sent to
Ephesus, and called the Elders [ Presbuterous] of the church. And in v. 28, in
his exhortation to these very Elders, he as expressly calls them [ Episcopous]
Bishops. I would now ask, is it not quite easy and natural to suppose, that
Irenaeus uses the phrase, "Bishops and Presbyters," in allusion to the 17th and
28th verse of the just mentioned xxth of Acts, in the former of which Paul uses
the word, "Presbyters;" and in the latter, the word, "Bishops?" And as Paul
most certainly used them synonimically; is it not reasonable to think, that
Irenaeus used them in the like sense? Especially, as, in every other passage
throughout his writings, instead of connecting Bishops and Presbyters, so as
that it might seem as if he intended to make a distinction between them, he has
used the words invariably in the synonimous sense, indifferently and
promiscuously meaning by Bishops, Presbyters; and by Presbyters, Bishops. This
is so plain a case, that it might be thought impertinent to say any thing more
upon it.

IT may, upon the whole, be said with real truth, not only that Irenaeus is a
full and positive witness against the episcopal cause, but a positive and full
one in favor of our's. He says not a word in evidence of those POWERS that are
made ESSENTIAL to the EPISCOPATE; but as much as we could desire, in proof of
the SAMENESS of the ORDER, or OFFICE, of Bishops and Presbyters.

VICTOR, POLYCRATES, THEOPHILUS, BACHYLLUS, HERACLITUS, MAXIMUS, APPION,
CANDIDUS, SEXTUS, JUDAS, ARABIANUS, SERAPION, RHODON, PANTAENUS.
I HAVE followed Du-pin in placing these writers between Irenaeus, and Clement
of Alexandria. They all flourished about the same time, or, in other words,
toward the latter end of the second century. A few fragments of some of their
works have been preserved; but, for the greater part, they are totally lost.
Victor wrote some pieces about the "time of keeping easter." Theophilus of
Caesaria, with some other Bishops, joined in writing "an epistle," as a
council, with orders to have it published, with reference to the "day on which
easter should be observed." Bachyllus of Corinth wrote an "epistle," in the
name of the Bishop of Achaia, upon the same subject. Heraclitus wrote
"commentaries upon the Apostle Paul;" Maximus, on "the original of evil," and
on "the creation of matter;" Appion, and Candidus, "commentaries on the
hexameron;" Sextus, a "discourse on the resurrection;" Judas, a treatise on
"Daniel's weeks;" Pantaenus, master of the school at Alexandria, and a famous
preacher of the gospel," commentaries on the bible;" but these are all buried
in the ruins of time. Of the works of Arabianus, and several other writers,
about this time, whose names are not mentioned by Eusebius, there were no
signs, or traces, even so far back as his day. Rhodon, once a disciple of
Tatian, wrote many books. Two only are mentioned by Eusebius, one against "the
heresy of Marcion;" the other, on "the hexameron," or "the six days work." He
has given us a quotation, of some length, from the first of these books; but
there is nothing in it relative to the point we are upon.

SERAPION. It is very probable, (says Eusebius,) H. E. Lib. vi. cap. 12.
that many of his epistles" are in the hands of others; but those only have
come to our knowledge, which he wrote unto one "Domnus," who renounced the
faith in time of persecution, and fell to Jewish (...); and to "Ponticus, and
Caricus," ecclesiastical persons; and "epistles" also to other men, and
likewise a book concerning the gospel called after Peter," which he wrote to
confute the falsehood specified therein. A fragment of this book has been
preserved by Eusebius; but there is nothing in it to our present purpose. In
his "epistle to Caricus and Ponticus," the design of which was to confute the
Phrygian heresy, he has these words, as quoted by Eusebius, H. E. Lib. v. cap.
18.
And that ye may know also, that the operation of this deceitful doctrine,
called the "new prophesy," is condemned as execrable of all the churches in
Christendom, I have sent unto you the learned writings of Claudius Apollinaris,
that holy Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia. Eusebius adds, In this "epistle," of
Serapion, there are subscriptions of many Bishops, of whom one subscribeth
thus, "I, Aurelius Cyrenius Martyr, wish you health." Another thus; Aelius
Publius Julius, Bishop of Debeltum, a city of Thracia, as sure as the Lord
lives in heaven, when as holy Zotas, of Anchia, would have cast out the devil
which spoke in Priscilla, the dissembling hypocrites would not permit it." And
many other Bishops gave the same censure, and subscribed with their own hands
to the said epistle.

POLYCRATES. In his "epistle to Victor, and the church of Rome," he says, with
reference to the day on which easter ought to be observed, as his words are
recorded by Eusebius, H. E. lib. v. cap. 24.
Philip, one of the twelve Apostles; -- again, John, who lay on our Lord's
breast; -- moreover, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna; -- Thraceas, an Eumenian, and
a Bishop; -- what shall I speak of Sagaris, both a Bishop and Martyr? Also of
blessed Papirius, and Melito an Eunuch, who was guided in all that he did by
the Holy Ghost? -- All these celebrated the feast of easter, according to the
gospel, on the fourteenth moon, not varying, but steadily observing the rule of
faith. To be short, and I, Polycrates, the meanest of you all, do retain the
tradition of my fore fathers, which also I have imitated. There were seven
Bishops before me, and I am the eighth, who have always celebrated the feast of
easter on that day in which the people removed the leven from among them. I
therefore, my brethren, who have now lived threescore and five years in the
Lord, have conferred with the brethren throughout the world, and have read, and
again read, the holy scriptures, will not be at all moved at those things which
are made to terrify us. -- I could mention the Bishops who were present, whom
you requested me to assemble, whom also I have assembled together, whose names,
if I should write, would grow unto a great number: they have visited me, a
simple soul, and a man of small account, and have consented unto this epistle.
They also know, that I bear not these gray hairs in vain, but have always had
my conversation in Christ Jesus.

I NEED only observe, with reference to these testimonies, that, though they
mention Bishops, they say nothing of their POWERS as an ORDER in the church
DISTINCT FROM, and SUPERIOR TO, Presbyters. And as to Polycrates, it cannot be
validly argued, that his ESSENTIAL powers, as an officer in the kingdom of
Christ, were such as could not be justly exercised by Presbyters, because he
was now Bishop of Ephesus, and there had been "seven before him." For both he,
and his predecessors might have been precisely the same ecclesiastical officers
in point of ORDER, however they might, in some respects, differ in regard of
DEGREE. This point has been largely spoken to, in answer to the testimonies
from Irenaeus, upon the head of succession in single persons; to which the
reader is referred for satisfaction, if he needs it.

CLEMENT of Alexandria.
His character, writings, testimonies from them, with observations and remarks.
TITUS FLAVIUS CLEMENS, or CLEMENT of ALEXANDRIA, the name by which he is more
commonly distinguished, was probably of heathenish extract; and some say, a
native of Athens. Epiphanius tells us, "he was called by some Clement of
Alexandria; by others Clement of Athens;" and supposes from hence, "that Athens
was the place of his birth; Alexandria, of his after residence, and constant
employment." It is altogether uncertain, when he first professed himself a
Christian, and by what means he was induced to do so. He flourished, says Dr.
Lardener, in the reign of Severus, and his son Antoninus Caracella, that is,
between 192 and 217. Du-pin says, he reached the time of Heliogabulus, and did
not die before the year 220.

HE had early a strong thirst after knowledge, and by diligent study, under the
advantage of valuable natural endowments, especially a most tenacious memory,
and the best means of indoctrination the world was favored with in that day,
he acquired the reputation of having attained to an extraordinary height in all
sorts of learning. He was a student under several masters. As he himself tells
us, in his first book of stromes, he had "two in Greece, the one a
Caelo-Syrian, the other an Egyptian; two more in the east, one an Assyrian, the
other of Palestine: and that at last he found one in Egypt, who was far more
excellent than all the rest." This was Pantaenus, of whom he speaks with great
respect, and in his institutions expressly calls "his master." The names of the
first four are not mentioned. Baronius thinks the Assyrian was Bardesanes, and
he of Palestine Theophilus of Caesaria. Valesius, with greater probability,
supposes Tatian to have been the Assyrian, and Theodotus the Hebrew, under
whose name there is a "fragment" of the "institutions" at the end of the works
of Clement.

BUT though he studied under these several masters, he did not implicitly
swallow their dictates, but chose, as it was fit he should do, to judge for
himself. He accordingly says, in the first book of his stromata, "I espoused
not this, or that philosophy, neither the stoic, nor the platonic, nor the
epicurean, nor that of Aristotle; but whatever any of these sects had said that
was right and just, all that, being selected, I call philosophy." This
notwithstanding, as Dr. Cave observes, "he came nearest to the stoics, as
appears from his discoursing by way of paradoxes, and his affected novelty of
words, two things peculiar to the men of that way. And I doubt not but he was
peculiarly disposed toward this sect by the instructions of his master
Pantaenus, so great and professed an admirer of the stoical philosophy." This
Pantaenus was master of the school or academy at Alexandria, for the
instruction of catechumens, that is, new converts from heathenism, or the
children of believers grown up to a capacity of indoctrination, especially such
of them as were intended for the service of the church of Christ. The language
and liberal arts, it is said, were taught here, as well as the grounds and
principles of the Christian religion. Hanmer says, "Pantaenus read in
Alexandria divinity and philosophy, from whence it is thought the orders of
instituting universities first began in Christendom." Clement, it is probable,
taught in this catechetical school with Pantaenus, and supplied his place while
gone to preach the gospel in India. It is certain, he succeeded him upon his
death, in this office; and he continued in it a long time, to the end of his
life; ever conducting with honor to himself, and great advantage to those who
attended on his instructions. Some of the most eminent men, in that age, were
educated under his care; such as Origin, Alexander, afterward Bishop of
Jerusalem, and many others. Not a great way from the beginning of Severus's
reign, he sustained the office of a Presbyter in the church of Alexandria,
besides this of a catechist there; for in this character Eusebius speaks of him
in the year 195. And being a man of great piety, as well as learning, and
eminently zealous to promote the honor of God, and the advancement of religion,
he did much service by his preaching, not only in Alexandria, but in Jerusalem,
and Antioch, to which places he occasionally went, confirming many in the
faith, and recovering others who had been seduced by false teachers. Eusebius
H. E. lib. vi. cap. 11.
brings in Alexander, at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, thus speaking of him,
in his epistle to the church at Antioch, "This letter I send you by Clement,
the blessed Presbyter, a man virtuous and approved, whom ye both know, and
shall more fully know; who, coming hither by the good providence of God, has
established, and increased, the church of the Lord."

HE was greatly useful by his pen, as well as catechetical instructions, and
public preaching. His writings are numerous; though most of them are lost. A
few only have reached the present day.

HIS lost writings, as we have the account of them, from Eusebius, Jerome, and
others, are these.

LOST WRITINGS.
A TRACT concerning "easter." A discourse concerning "fasting." Another, of
"slander." An "exhortation to patience," designed for the use of such as were
newly baptized. An "ecclesiastical canon," or a discourse "against jewdaising."
A discourse "of the resurrection." Another, "of continence." Another, "of
marriage." These three he himself mentions in his stromata; and particularly
speaks of the last, in his paedagogus, lib. iii. cap. 8. where he gives a
summary of the contents of it. Trithemius De Scriptoribus.
says, he wrote "many epistles." Eusebius informs us, H. E. Lib. vi. cap. 1^.
that he "promised a commentary upon Genesis." Whether he ever wrote it, is not
now known. Besides all these, Eusebius often mentions, and sometimes quotes, a
volume, called "hypotyposes," or "eight books of institutions." In this work,
according to Photius, "he goes over the main body of the scriptures in a brief
commentary, or exposition; not omitting some books that were generally rejected
as apocryphal." This learned critic observes further, in common with others,
that, in this performance, there are "some things very erroneous and fabulous.
Du-pin supposes this work must needs have been composed by St. Clement before
he was thoroughly instructed in the Christian religion, and had quitted the
opinions of Plato; or while he was half a Platonist, and half a Christian. Dr.
Cave rather falls in with the opinion of Photius, which was, that probably
these things were inserted by another hand; as Ruffinus expressly assures us,
that heresies had corrupted Clement his writings. Certainly, says he, had these
books been infected with these profane and poisonous dogmata in Eusebius's
time, he would have given us, at least, some obscure intimations of it. And
considerable it is, that these things are not countenanced by his other books;
nay, many of them are plainly contradicted by them.

SPURIOUS.
Dr. Cave mentions the following pieces as attributed to this Clement, but
calls them supposititious. "Short commentaries on the first canonical epistle
of Peter, the epistle of Jude, and the three epistles of John the Apostle."

EXTANT GENUINE WRITINGS.
THE remaining, and commonly received, works of Clement, besides a small tract,
more lately published, entitled, "what rich man shall be saved?" are these
three. His "exhortation to the Gentiles," in one book. His "paedagogue," or
schoolmaster, in three books. His "stromes," in eight books; so called,
because they contain a collection of matter, so put together as to make a
variety not unlike that in Turkey-worked-carpets. The word, stromaties, says
Erasmus, is taken from pictured carpets, or tapestry." It is used here, says
Du-pin, "for that mixture we see in tapestry, and imports as much as
miscellaneous commentaries, or discourses." Clement himself gives us this idea
of his work of stromes. "These books, says he, are stored with varieties, as
their name imports. We pass on continually from one thing to another." He also
calls them, "a variegated contexture of discourses;" which he compares "to a
meadow, a tract of land, or a garden, wherein one may find all sorts of herbs,
flowers, and fruits, of which we may gather as we please." And such, in truth,
are these books called, stromata. They are as a mixed composition, and contain
as great a variety of all sorts of learning as could well be put together.

IN his "exhortation to the Gentiles," he strongly represents, and largely
exposes, the folly, and impiety, of the Pagan-idolatry; and then, with great
cogency, urges to the profession of Christianity, and the worship of the one
only living and true God.

IN his "paedagogue," he tutors and instructs the newly initiated converts to
Christianity; prescribing many wisely adapted rules to promote their increase
in grace, until they attain to the "fullness of the stature of men in Christ."

IN his "stromata," he administers "strong meat" to them who are of "full age,"
and have "their senses exercised to discern both good and evil;" endeavoring
to lead this kind of persons into a more close and intimate acquaintance with
the mysteries of religion. He tells us himself, that he purposely wrote these
books, so as that these mysteries might not be clearly discovered to those who
were not as yet initiated; while others, who were, might understand them to
their advantage. "Our design, (says he) was, (as Du-pin translates him) to
conceal, and, if I may so say, to embroil things, that so none but the
intelligent, and those who will take pains to inform themselves, may be able to
comprehend them." In agreement with this account, it is the truth of fact, that
he often writes in a manner so obscure, as not to be easily understood. He
observes frequently no order in these books. They are rather a collection of
incoherent varieties, than an exact methodical composure.

PERHAPS, no one of the Fathers has been more highly celebrated than this
Clement, either by ancient, or more modern writers. Alexander, Bishop of
Jerusalem, and contemporary with him, in his "epistle to Origin," calls him the
"sacred Clement;" and says, "he was "his master, and had been profitable to
him." Eusebius, in his cronicle, makes mention of him as "an excellent master
of the Christian philosophy," and one "eminent for his writings." He elsewhere
more than once calls him "the admirable Clement." Jerome, in his catalogue of
illustrious men, says of his works, "they are full of erudition, borrowed from
the treasures of the divine scripture, and secular literature:" and, in his
epistle to Magnus, declares it as his opinion, that "Clement was the most
learned of all men." And, having mentioned the chief of his works, adds, "what
is there in them unlearned? What, not taken out of the very depths of
philosophy?" He is honored, by more modern writers, with the titles of a "most
excellent, most learned, most eloquent man;" one who "exceeded all others in
incredible knowledge." The learned Daille says of him, What can you name more
mixed, and fuller of variety than his stromata, as he calls them, and his other
works? which are throughout interlaced with historical allusions, opinions,
sentences, and proverbs, out of all sorts of writers, both sacred and profane;
heightened here with rich lightsome colors, then shaded with darkness, in such
sort as that it is a vain thing for an ignorant person to hope ever to reach
his meaning. The greatest encomium of him we meet with in Gentianus Heroetius,
In epis. ante oper. Clem.
who, among others, translated his works into Latin; but this is too long to be
inserted here.

THE highest strains in which Clement has been commended, are not, as I
imagine, too great, as they respect his learning. This, as Dr. Lardner's
expression is, was "prodigious." And it is really wonderful, as the invention
of the art of printing is much below his day, and it was therefore in his power
to read only manuscript copies of the works of others, how he could find ways
to come at the sight of such a multitude of them, as he seems to have been
perfectly acquainted with. There was scarce a pagan philosopher, poet, or
historian, however near or distant from the age in which he lived, but he made
himself master of their works. And the same may be said of all Christian
writers, whether they were orthodox or heretical; whether they flourished in
the apostolic, or succeeding age, or about the time in which he lived.
Considering his constant employment as a catechetical instructor, and his
attending together herewith, for some years, the work of a Presbyter of the
church at Alexandria, it is amazing to think, after he had procured such an
immense variety of manuscripts, how he could find time to read them; much more,
how he could write such a number of books, in which he could make so easy and
ready a use of them! He must have been a miracle of diligence, not loosing one
inch of his time. But though I am astonished at his learning, I cannot think he
was eminently great in regard of judgment. It will not be disowned, by any who
have read his works, that his reasoning too often will not bear examination;
which cannot easily be accounted for, if he had been as judicious as he was
learned. And if I should add, that his religious sentiments, in some points,
were not agreeable to truth, it would not be disputed. -- But his abundant
labors, in the cause of God, while living, and the usefulness of his writings,
in many respects, since his death, are more than enough to weigh down the
mistakes that may have dropped from his pen.

TESTIMONIES from CLEMENT of Alexandria.
PAEDOG. lib. i. p, 120. edit. pott. We have here the following incidental
passage, "If we, who have rule [ proegoumenoi ton ekklesion] over the churches
are Shepherds, or Pastors [ poimenes] after the image of the good Shepherd." --

Ib. lib. iii. p. 291. In proof the impiety of women's wearing foreign hair,
among other arguments, he uses this, "On whom or what [ tini] will the
Presbyter [ Presbuteros] impose his hand? To whom, or what, will he give his
blessing? not to the woman, who is adorned, but to strange locks of hair, and
through them to another's head."

Ib. lib. ib. p. 309. Having mentioned a variety of scripture precepts, well
adapted to discountenance iniquity, he goes on, and says, "Very many other
commands, appertaining to select persons, are written in the sacred books, some
to Presbyters [ Presbuterois;] some to Bishops [ Episkopois;] some to Deacons [
Diakonois;] and some to widows."

STROM. lib, iii. p. 546. In discoursing upon the doctrine of continence and
marriage, he occasionally brings in these words, "Again, says he, [the Apostle
Paul] those are to be appointed Bishops [ Episkopous dei kathistasthai,] who,
from ruling their own house, are exercised to the knowledge of ruling the whole
church."

IB. lib. ib. p. 552. Having cited that apostolic direction, 1. Tim. v. 14, 15,
"I will that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully," he adds, "but he must be the
husband of one wife only, whether he be a Presbyter [ Presbyteros,] or Deacon [
Diakonos] or Layman, if he would use matrimony without reprehension."

IN. lib. ib. p. 561. Having mentioned a number of passages, in one or another
of Paul's epistles, in vindication of marriage, he goes on, "What can they say
to these things, who inveigh against marriage?" and adds this consideration
further, "since he [this same Apostle] enjoins, that the Bishop [ Episkopos] to
be set over the church [ tes ekklesias aphegeisthai] be one who rules his own
house well."

IB. lib. vi. p. 793. "He therefore who has moderated his affections in the
first place, and by carefully exercising himself to subdue his passions, has
obtained the mastery of them, and has grown up to the beneficence of Gnostic
perfection, advances indeed from thence to an equal rank with the Angels. And
now being full of light, and shining like the sun in acts of goodness, he
hastens, by a righteous knowledge, through the love of God, to the holy
mansion, in like manner as the Apostles: not that they became Apostles from any
excelling peculiarity of their nature since Judas was chosen with them, but
such became Apostles, being chosen by him who foresees even the ends. He
therefore who was not elected together with them, Matthias, when he had showed
himself worthy to be an Apostle, was put in the place of Judas. It is now
therefore allowable for those also who have exercised themselves in the divine
commandments, and have perfectly and gnostically lived according to the gospel,
to be ascribed into the number of the Apostles. This man is in reality a
Presbyter [ Presbyteros,] and a true Deacon [ Diakonos] of the purpose of God,
if he does, and teaches, the things of the Lord: not ordained of men, nor
because a Presbyter [ Presbyteros] therefore esteemed a righteous man; but
because a righteous man, therefore now reckoned in the Presbytery [ en
Presbyterio kat alegomenos:] and though here upon earth he has not been
honored with the chief seat [ protokathedria,] yet he shall set down among the
four and twenty thrones, judging the people, as John says in the Revelation.
For the scheme of salvation is, in reality, ONE, reaching from the beginning of
the world down to us, though supposed to be different in its bestowment,
according to different generations and times. For it is fit and congruous, that
there should be one immutable bestowment of salvation, by one God, through one
Lord, in diverse manners profitable: on account whereof the middle-partition is
taken away, which divided the Greek from the Jew, that they might be a peculiar
people, and so both come into unity of faith: and from both there is one
election; and of the chosen, some, he says, are more chosen. These are the
twenty-four, who are Judges and Rulers, from among the Jews and Greeks equally,
the grace being doubled, who, for their perfect knowledge, have been plucked,
like a garland of sweet flowers, from the church itself, and honored with most
distinguished glory. Now in the church here, the progressions [ prokopai,
processions, advancements,] of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, [ episkopon,
Presbyteron, Diakonon] I take to be imitations of the evangelical glory, and of
that dispensation, which, the scriptures tell us, they look for, who, following
the steps of the Apostles, have lived according to the gospel in the perfection
of righteousness. These men, the Apostle writes, being taken up into the
clouds, shall first minister as Deacons [ Diakonesein,] then be admitted to a
rank in the Presbytery [ to Presbyterio] according to the progression in glory,
(for one glory differs from another) until they grow up to a perfect man."

IN. lib. vii. p. 830. "Of that service of God about which men are conversant,
one is [ beltiotike] that which makes them better; the other [ uperetike] that
which is ministerial. Medicine make the body [ beltiotiken] better; philosophy
the soul: but the service which is due to parents from their children, and to
Rulers from those who are subject to them, is [ uperetike] ministerial.In like
manner, in the church, the Presbyters [ oi Presbyteroi] maintain [ ten
beltiotiken ^ikona] the form of that kind which makes men better; and the
Deacons, [ ten beltiotiken, oi diakonoi] that which is ministerial. 'In BOTH
THESE MINISTRIES, the ANGELS, serve God in the dispensation of earthly things."
--

IN lib. "quis dives salvandus sit"? p. 959. "Hear a fable, and yet not a
fable, but a true story, reported of John the Apostle, delivered to us, and
kept in memory. After the death of the tyrant, when he (John) had returned to
Ephesus, out of the isle of Patmos, being desired, he went to the neighboring
nations, where he appointed Bishops [ episkopois katasteson,] where he set in
order whole cities, and where he chose by lot, unto the ecclesiastical
function, of those who had been pointed out by the spirit as by name. When he
was come to a certain city, not far distant, the name of which some mention,
and, among other things, had refreshed the brethren; beholding a young man of a
portly body, a gracious countenance, and fervent mind, he looked upon the
Bishop who was set over all [ epi pasi to kathestoti episkopo,] and said, I
commit this young man to thy custody, with the deepest intention of mind, in
presence of the church, and Christ bearing me witness. When he had received the
charge, and promised the performance of all things relative to it, John again
urged, and made protestation of the same thing. He afterward returned to
Ephesus. And the Presbyter [ o de Presbuteros] taking the young man, brought
him to his own house, nourished, comforted, and cherished him; and at length
baptized him." -- As this romance If Clement had either suppressed this story,
or related it as a fabulous one, not worthy of credit, he would, perhaps, have
discovered more judgment. This, I am apt to think, will be the opinion of
those, who may be at the pains to read it over. Eusebius, it is true, has given
the whole of it a place in his "ecclesiastical history;" and inserts it as a
true report. But this is no infallible argument that it is so. For there are,
in this work of his, many instances, besides this, wherein he discovers a mind
too fond of strange stories.
(for so I take the whole story to be) goes on, the young man proved very
dissolute. Upon which the Bishop is represented as sending for the Apostle
John, who, when he was come, said to him, "O Bishop! restore to us the charge,
which I, and thy Savior, committed to thee, the church over which thou art set
bearing witness. -- Then the old man [ o Presbytes] groaning deeply, and with
tears in his eyes, said, he is dead;" that is, to God," as it is afterward
explained.

REMARKS and OBSERVATIONS on the foregoing TESTIMONIES.
IT is obvious, upon the slightest view of the above offered testimonies, that
Clement, no more than the writers before him, can, with the least shadow of
reason, be produced as witnessing to the FACTS that are the grand subject under
consideration. He says not a word, from whence it can be so much as collected
by remote consequence, that he thought Bishops had an EXCLUSIVE RIGHT to confer
HOLY ORDERS; nor has he any where hinted, that it was ever the PRACTICE, in his
day, or at any other time, for Bishops, as a DISTINCT ORDER of gospel officers,
to perform the work of ORDINATION. The same may be said of their exclusive
right to GOVERN THE CHURCH. It is observable, in paedag. p. 120, though a
PRESBYTER of the church of Alexandria, he includes himself in the number of
those proegoumenoi, or chief leaders, who are esteemed Shepherds. "We, says he,
who have rule in the churches, ton ekklesion proegoumenoi." And as to
CONFIRMATION, he no where mentions it, unless "the imposition of the hand,"
paedog. p. 291, may be supposed to refer to this custom. If this should be the
truth, it is the first hint we have, in all primititive antiquity, of such a
practice in the church. But then, it deserves particular notice, this testimony
can be of no service to the episcopal claim; for, not the Bishop, but the
PRESBYTER, is represented as "laying on his hand." It could not therefore be,
according to Clement, the appropriate work of a Bishop, a peculium of his
office as such.

IT is acknowledged, Clement once uses that mode of diction, "Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons;" and once more thus varied, "Presbyters, Bishops,
Deacons:" and he is the first writer, Ignatius only excepted, if he is supposed
to be the writer of the epistles ascribed to him, that ever used this manner of
speaking. But his thus writing is an insufficient ground on which to represent
him as a witness, that Bishops were, in his day, an order of officers in the
church distinct from, and superior to, that of Presbyters. The term, Bishop,
may properly be used as a distinguishing name, though it should import no
essential superiority of office between him and a Presbyter. Archbishop is an
appellation that distinguishes the person to whom it is applied from one that
is a Bishop only, and is ever used to this purpose; and yet, Archbishop and
Bishop are one and the same order of officers in the church, Episcopalians
themselves being judges. So the name, Rector, points out a difference between
the persons called by this name, and those that are called Curates; and yet,
they both partake of the same essential powers of preaching, baptising, and
administering the Lord's supper. It might, about this time, begin to be a
custom, not to have a Praeses, or Head-Presbyter in the church, but to
distinguish him by appropriating to him the name of Bishop. And this might be
the only reason of Clement's speaking in that mode, "Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons." Most certainly, it could not be, because he thought there were three
distinct orders in the church, and that Bishops were, as Christ's officers,
vested with essential powers superior to Presbyters, as Presbyters are with
powers essentially superior to Deacons; and for the following considerations.

I. IN paedag. lib. iii. p. 309, his enumeration runs thus, "Presbyters,
Bishops, Deacons;" which cannot easily be accounted for, if he had supposed
Bishops to have been an order in the church superior to that of Presbyters, as
Presbyters are to that of Deacons. He no where, in speaking of Presbyters and
Deacons, places Deacons before Presbyters; but, as Presbyters are a superior
order of officers, he always mentions them first. And there is no imaginable
reason to think, but he would have done the same by Bishops, if, in his
apprehension, they had been officers in the church superior in their order to
Presbyters. It is worthy of observation, Ignatius does not give us the
enumeration in this form; but places Bishops before Presbyters. And it is
questionable, whether an instance can be produced, after Bishops were looked
upon as officers in the church of a superior order to Presbyters, from any
writer, who favored this opinion, wherein he places Presbyters before Bishops
in an enumeration of church officers. But this I barely mention as not unworthy
of notice.

II. IT is a consideration of more weight that in his book "quis dives
salvandus sit?" the church officer he speaks of under the name of BISHOP, he
likewise calls PRESBYTER. His words are, "He [the Apostle John] looked upon the
BISHOP, who had been set over the whole church, and said, I commit this young
man to thy care." It follows a few lines after, "and the PRESBYTER, [ o
Presbyter] taking the young Man, brought him home." -- It is not in any degree
probable, if, by the word, Bishop, Clement meant an officer in the church of a
superior order to that of Presbyters, he would have indifferently used the
terms, Bishop and Presbyter, to point him out. Had the word, Bishop, been with
him the known certainly APPROPRIATED term to distinguish the first or highest
of three orders of officers in the church, there would be an impropriety, not
to say absurdity, in his calling that officer a PRESBYTER, who was a Bishop:
nor ought it to be supposed, that he would have been guilty of so gross a
reflection on the Bishop of a church.

IT is said, in answer, this Bishop, who is pointed out by the term Presbyter [
Presbyteros,] in the above cited place, is afterward, in this very story,
spoken of in that style, o Presbytes, "the old man." Upon which the plea is,
that he might be called Presbyteros, not on account of his being a Presbyter,
but an elderly person. It is confessed the word, Presbyteros, is sometimes to
be understood as meaning nothing more than an aged man; but this meaning can be
given to it, only when the connection of the discourse, where it is used, makes
it necessary: otherwise, it is, with all the Fathers, an appropriated term, and
not used by any of them, either before, or after, Clement, but to denote an
officer in the church of Christ. And, what may be worthy of special notice, it
is never used by Clement, relative to an officer of the church, to signify
merely, or only, his being "a man in years." Why then should he be thought to
use it in this sense, in the passage under consideration? And, had he intended
to convey the idea of nothing more than "an old man," why did he not use the
word Presbytes? He might, with equal ease, and more propriety, have used this
word, in both passages that have been brought to view; and his not doing it,
plainly indicates, that he intended, in the first of them, to lead us into the
thought, that, by Presbyteros, he meant the same officer in the church, he had
just before called Bishop, Episkopos; and in the second, to signify that he was
an "elderly person." And there might be a special propriety in his speaking of
him, in this second passage, as an "elderly person;" as this would aggravate
his fault in not taking better care of "the young man that had been deposited
with him as his charge."

IT will add weight to what has been offered, in defense of Clement's
promiscuously using the words, Bishop and Presbyter, in that part of his story
relating to the Apostle John, we have been considering, if we compare his use
of the words here, with the use of them in strom. lib, iii. p. 556, and strom.
ib. p. 552. In the former of these pages he says, "those ought to be appointed
BISHOPS, who, from ruling their own house, have been exercised to rule the
whole church." In the latter of them, his words are these, "He must be the
husband of one wife only, whether he be a PRESBYTER, or Deacon, or Laic, if he
would use marriage without blame." Let it now be observed, these directions,
respecting a "BISHOP'S ruling his own house," and a "PRESBYTER'S having but one
wife," are both taken, or rather cited, from the Apostle Paul's first epistle
to Timothy, iiid chapter 2d and 4th v. where the words are these, "A Bishop must be
the husband of one wife,"'- and "one that rules well his own house." Now, that
very officer in the church, which the Apostle Paul calls a BISHOP, is called by
Clement, in one of the above passages, a BISHOP; and, in the other, a
PRESBYTER. He must certainly mean, by PRESBYTER, precisely the same officer,
both he himself, and the Apostle Paul, meant by BISHOP: or there would be no
pertinency in his application of these texts. This, I should think, must be
sufficient to put it beyond all reasonable dispute, that the word, Presbyteros,
in Clement's story of the Apostle John, is used in its APPROPRIATED sense, to
signify an officer in the church; and, as this officer, who is called a
PRESBYTER, is also called a BISHOP, tho words must be considered as
promiscuously used to mean one and the same ecclesiastical officer: so the
words are used, in the places we have compared with this; and no better reason
can be given for their not being so used here, than that of serving an
hypothesis.

3. IT is of still more important consideration, that Clement, in strom. vii.
p. 830, evidently appears to have had no knowledge of more than TWO ORDERS of
officers in the Christian church, that of Presbyters, and that of Deacons. For,
when he is purposely speaking of the sacred ecclesiastical functions, he
particularly mentions these TWO, and NO MORE. One, he considers as superior,
calling it beltiotike, because intended and adapted to "make men better:" the
other he represents as inferior, calling it uperetike, because designed for a
lower kind of ministry. The superior office he appropriates to PRESBYTERS; the
inferior one to DEACONS: not giving the least hint of any other, or higher
office in the christian church. Can this be accounted for, if he knew of any
ORDER in the church higher than that, in which Presbyters are placed? Surely,
if Bishops were officers in the church of a superior and higher order than
Presbyters, he would not have passed over this order of men in total silence,
while he is particular in taking notice of the TWO LOWER ORDERS, that of
Presbyters, and that of Deacons. It is observable, he thought it proper, even
in the very passage we are upon, to ascend to heaven in comtemplation, that he
might bring in the Angels of God as employed in the TWO KINDS of ministry he
had been treating of; and yet, though Bishops were, in his opinion, (as
Episcopalians would have us believe) the most exalted order of church officers
Christ had upon earth, he says not a word about them, or any service they had
to do; while, at the same time, he takes particular notice both of Presbyters
and Deacons, so much below Bishops as not (comparatively) to deserve being
mentioned at all. This is truly astonishing! And Clement must be voted
inexcusable, unless we suppose, (what I take to be the certain truth) that with
him, Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same order of men in the church,
and might properly be spoken of under the name, either of Bishop, or Presbyter.
And in this view of the matter, there is a consistency, propriety, and cogency,
in this discourse of Clement: otherwise, it is, to say the least, strange and
altogether unaccountable.

IV. IN the last place, it is further evident, from what Clement has said, in
strom. vi. p. 793, that he had no notion of more than TWO ORDERS of officers in
the church of Christ; or, in other words, of Bishops as the first and most
superior of THREE ORDERS. I have purposely given the reader the whole 13th
section of this 6th book, that he might be able to take a complete view of what
he has offered upon this head. And if he is pleased to attend to what is
contained in this section, he will find, that neither Apostles, Presbyters
Deacons, or Laymen, are esteemed, by Clement, excellent here, or interested in
felicity hereafter, but in proportion to their christian knowledge, wisdom, and
goodness; that is, their being more or less perfect gnostics. In illustration
of this, he says, he is in reality a PRESBYTER in the church, and he is a true
DEACON, who does, and teaches, the things of the Lord: -- not accounted a
righteous man, because a Presbyter; but because a righteous man therefore
chosen into the Presbytery: and though he be not honored with the FIRST SEAT A
friend of mine, well skilled in the Greek, and who has particularly acquainted
himself with the writings of this Clement, is clearly of the mind, that the
PROTOKATHEDRIA, he here speaks of, does not mean the FIRST CHAIR, SEAT, or
PLACE in the PRESBYTERY, but the FIRST SESSION in the church here on earth, as
well as in heaven. He had been saying, in the immediately preceding words, a
man's being "truly righteous" was the reason, in God's account, why he was
"chosen into the Presbytery"; and though he should not be honored, here on
earth, with the PROTOKATHEDRIA, the FIRST SESSION, he should hereafter set down
on the twenty-four thrones," the HIGHEST ADVANCEMENT of the Saints in glory. He
is rather more explicit, upon this head, a little onwards, in this same
section; where, speaking of the "PROGRESSIONS of those who have lived,
according to the gospel, in the perfection of righteousness, he says, "these
men, being taken up into the clouds, shall FIRST minister as DEACONS, THEN be
admitted to a RANK IN THE PRESBYTERY; which means the same thing with what he
had, a little before, spoken of as "being honored with the PROTOKATHEDRIA, the
FIRST or HIGHEST SESSION in the church, in the future state of glory." I see
not but this criticism of my friend is just: it certainly falls in with the
method of reasoning, Clement has gone into, throughout this whole paragraph.
However, I was not willing to depart from that sense of the word, in which it
is universally taken (so far as my knowledge extends) by episcopal writers. In
this sense I have considered it; and offered that upon it which is, as I
imagine, too forceable to be set aside. The argument is much stronger upon the
interpretation of my friend. If this exhibits the truth, it is put beyond all
possible dispute, that Clement knew of no HIGHER ORDER in the church than that
of PRESBYTERS.
on earth, yet shall hereafter sit down on the twenty-four thrones, judging the
people. It is at first sight obvious, that Clement here makes mention of TWO
ORDERS only in the church, that of PRESBYTERS, and that of DEACONS. And it is
equally evident, that the first seat, he speaks of, relates to the PRESBYTERY,
and is the place of one, who is a constituent member, in common with the other
Presbyters, of this senate, or ecclesiastical body. But, what does he mean by
this first seat? One, not biassed in his mind, would easily and naturally be
led to understand, by it, the seat of the Head-Presbyter, or Praeses of the
Presbytery. It cannot reasonably be thought, that Clement meant by it a seat
that was proper, not to a constituent member of the Presbyterate, but to an
officer in the church of another order, distinct from, and superior to, that of
Presbyters. This would be to make him speak very improperly. For the first seat
in a Presbytery obviously and certainly imports a parity of essential powers in
the persons that constitute this body; though one of them may, in some
respects, for prudential* reasons, have the precedence, or superiority, so as
to be seated in the first chair.

THIS will appear in a yet fuller light, if we examine what Clement has
offered, in this same section, upon the progressions in the church here, and in
glory hereafter. "Says he, These progressions in the church here, of Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, I take to be imitations of the angelical glory, and of
that dispensation, which the scriptures tell us, they look for, who, following
the steps of the Apostles, have lived, according to the gospel, in the
perfection of righteousness: these men, being taken up into the clouds, shall
first minister as Deacons, then be admitted to a rank in the Presbytery
according to the procession of glory, (for one glory differs from another)
until they grow up to a perfect man.

THIS passage, I am sensible, Episcopalians bring as the strongest testimony,
from Clement, in favor of a threefold order in the church, under the specified
names of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. But such a construction of the words
will not at all consist, either with the passage itself, or what he has
elsewhere said upon this same subject. For, let it be observed,

HE speaks of these "progressions, as "imitations of the angelic glory." Upon
which Sir Peter King, in his "enquiry into the constitution of the primitive
church," p. 100, makes the following remark, in support of the opinion, that
only two ecclesiastical orders, viz. Bishops and Deacons, or Presbyters and
Deacons, are noticed by Clement, namely, that "these orders are here resembled
by the angelic orders. Now, the scripture mentions but two orders, viz.
Archangels and Angels; the Archangels presiding over the Angels, and the
Angels obeying, and attending on the Archangels. According to this
resemblance, therefore, there must be but two ecclesiastical orders in the
church, which are Bishops or Presbyters presiding and governing, with the
Deacons attending and obeying." This passage has often been quoted from Sir
Peter, as carrying conviction with it. But it does not appear to me, that
Clement here intended to suggest, that there were no more than two orders of
Angels, or that he at all made this thought the ground of the "imitation of the
angelical glory," he speaks of. You will then ask, what does he ground it upon?
This may be readily known by comparing his words here, with what he says in
strom. vii. p. 830: where, having treated of the sacred functions in TWO ORDERS
only; the one superior, which he appropriates to Presbyters; the other
inferior, which he makes proper to Deacons, he then adds, that by BOTH THESE
MINISTRIES the ANGELS serve God in the dispensation of the affairs of this
earth." Having, in this place, spoken of the Angels, as employed in TWO KINDS
of ministry, the one analogous to that of Presbyters, the other to that of
Deacons, it should seem obvious and natural, when he speaks, in the passage
under consideration, of the "progressions in the church, as imitations of the
angelical glory," to understand by these progressions, the passing from the
lower ministry in the church, that of Deacons, to the highest which is a rank
among Presbyters. And let it be remembered here, it is the glory of the Angels
in Heaven to serve God in ministering to our earth; and their progression in
glory, so far as it respects their ministry in the TWO KINDS particularly
mentioned by Clement, will be higher or lower according to the higher or lower
nature of the TWO MINISTRIES in which they serve God in the dispensation of the
things of this earth. And, in this view, the "progressions in the church" are
"imitations of the evangelical glory." And thus it is explained even by Clement
himself. For, says he, those, who treading in the steps of the Apostles, have
lived in evangelical perfection of righteousness, being taken up into the
clouds, shall first minister as DEACONS, then be admitted to a rank in the
PRESBYTERY, according to the procession in glory. Observe, their first
advancement is their ministering as DEACONS; their next and highest procession
is their being admitted into the PRESBYTERATE: though it should be noticed
here, there is a progression in degree even in the Presbyterate. For Clement,
in this very section, has told us of a FIRST SEAT in the Presbytery; which, if
filled with a Praeses, or Head-Presbyter, under the name of Bishop, will
exactly answer the progressions of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons here spoken of:
nor can they be answered any other way, in consistency with Clement's discourse
upon this subject, wherever he treats upon it. He speaks in this section, and
very particularly in strom. vii. p. 830, of the two different orders of
church officers, that of Presbyters, and that of Deacons, and mentions no more.
Bishops therefore, with him, could not be officers in the church of an order
superior to that of Presbyters; though they might be officers having a
precedence, a superiority, in degree: as the Praeses of a Presbytery, though of
the same order, is yet in degree above the rest. And Clement has most obviously
led us to conceive of Bishops in this light, that is, as nothing more than the
first, the chief, the highest, in degree among the members that constitute what
he calls the Presbytery. And, as he no where mentions any higher ecclesiastical
senate, or body of men, or any higher order of officers in the Christian
church, we are unavoidably constrained to understand, by his Bishop, the
Praeses, Chairman, or he that occupies the first seat in the Presbytery.

I SHALL only add, the works of Clement we have extracted from are the last
extant, within the second century: nor did he write these, until nearly the end
of it. Dodwell says, between the beginning of the year 193, and the end of the
year 195. Du-pin places this Clement the first among the Fathers of the third
century. And yet, he cannot be brought as a WITNESS, in favor of the GRAND
FACTS pleaded for by Episcopalians. Yea, in the times after him, when there was
a distinction in fact between Bishops and Presbyters, it is no easy matter to
point out precisely wherein it consisted. It is with me, past all doubt, that
the idea of a Bishop, as distinguished from a Presbyter, continually varied as
corruption increased, until, by degrees, there was placed over the church an
UNIVERSAL BISHOP, under the name of THE POPE OF ROME. -- But I must not go
beyond the times to which this work is confined.

CONCLUSION.
I HAVE now, at the expense of considerable time and pains, brought to view,
and considered, according to the plan laid down at first, all that is said, by
all the genuine writers, until toward the going out of the second century, (so
far as their writings, either in whole, or in part, have reached us) relative
to Episcopacy. And, upon a review of what has been offered, I cannot but
express my surprise at the assurance, with which some prelatical authors affirm
it to be a FACT, UNIVERSALLY witnessed to, even from the EARLIEST AGES, that
Bishops were officers in the church of an ORDER distinct from, and superior to,
Presbyters, in whom were lodged the exclusive powers of GOVERNMENT, and
ORDINATION. Says one of these writers, Dr. Scot's Christian Life, vol. ii, p.
406.
"The Christian church, in the ages next succeeding the Apostles, asserts with
one universal consent, the universal derivation of a superior order of
ecclesiastic officers from the Apostles to preside over the church." And again,
P. 421.
"If any credit may be given, either to those writers that lived in the
apostolic age, or those who immediately succeeded them, it is evident, that
Episcopacy is nothing else but only the apostolical superiority derived from
the hands of the Apostles, in a continued succession from generation to
generation." Says another of these writers, The invalidity of the dissenting
Ministry," in answer to a sermon of Mr. Pierce's, p. 23.
"The standing maxim of the episcopal scheme [namely, that ordaining power is
appropriated to Bishops, as an order in the church superior to Presbyters] has
the earliest records of the church to support it; and there was scarce any
article of faith more firmly believed." And again, P. ^3.
"We have the same evidence, that Episcopacy (that is, Bishops as distinct
from, and superior to, Presbyters) was the government of the primitive church,
in the purest ages of Christianity, that we have for the CANON OF SCRIPTURE."
Another author still has these words, "Brief defense of episcopal ordination,"
p. 9.
"The Apostles leaving the power of ORDAINING PRESBYTERS in the hands of FIXED
BISHOPS, being a matter of fact passed many years ago, the only method by which
we can come to the knowledge of it is, the testimony of writers, who lived in
the apostolical and following ages." And this testimony he puts upon the fame
foot with that we have for the sacred scriptures.

CAN it be supposed, that these writers had acquainted themselves with the
records of the ages that next succeeded the Apostles? Had this been the case,
it should seem impossible, however biassed in their minds, that they could have
delivered their sentiments in language so replete with positive assurance.
Surely, they would not have put the testimonies in favor of Episcopacy, upon a
par with the testimonies in proof of the authority of the sacred books of
scripture. This must have been the effect, not only of deeply rooted prejudice,
but of an hearsay-knowledge only of the most ancient and truly primitive
writings. It cannot easily be accounted for in any other way.

AS the reader has had laid before him a full view of what is said, upon the
doctrine of Episcopacy, from the first hundred and ninety years, so far as it
can be collected from the extant writings of the Fathers within this period, or
the remaining fragments of their writings, he may, from ocular inspection, make
a satisfactory judgment in relation to this Episcopacy. Only, he should keep in
mind the GRAND POINT in question, which is, what is the truth of FACT, in the
records of the ages next to the Apostles, with respect to the ORDER, and
OFFICE-POWER, of Bishops? For the dispute is not about the NAME of Episcopacy,
but the THING intended by it. Prelatists say, the FACT universally handed down
is, that Bishops are an ORDER of officers in the church distinct from, and
superior to, Presbyters; and that the powers of GOVERNMENT, ORDINATION, and
CONFIRMATION, are appropriated to them: insomuch, that Presbyters no more
exercised these powers, than Deacons baptized, or administered the Lord's
supper. Let the reader have this constantly in his view, as it may reasonably
be expected he should, while he considers the testimonies that have been
produced; and I may venture to say, with the highest assurance, that he will be
in no danger of calling in question the authority of the new-testament-books,
for want of testimonies in their behalf, though he should utterly reject
EPISCOPACY, in the impleaded sense, as having no support, either in point of
RIGHT, or PRACTICE, from any thing he may have met with in the writers within
the two first ages of the Christian church. He is accordingly appealed to, and
let him be judge; taking care to act his part, in this character, upon a fair,
impartial, and thorough examination of the evidence that has been held out to
his view.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to correct the following Errata.
PAGE 5, line 22, read substitute; p. 9, l. 9, r. from; p. 34, l. 9, r. says;
p. 38, l. 1, marg. r. omni; p. 42, las^ l. r. Episcopi; p. 68, last l. r.
makes; p. 82, l. 18, r. imposture; p. 90, l. 19, r. Exorcists; p. 92, last l.
marg. r. interpolators; p. 126, l. 14, af. plead r. from; p. 144, r. EPINOMEEN;
p. 217, l. 24, r. he; p. 228, l. 1, marg. r. propter; p. 234, l. 14, af. being
dele as; p. 245, l. 14, r. epistles; p. 256, l. 17, r. exhort; p. 334, r.
adepts; p. 335, l. 17, r. change; p. 345, l. 2, r. scholastical; p. 369, l. 5.
r. elegance; l. 11, r. Autolycus; p. 381, l. 21, r. him; p. 383, l. 13, r.
delusions; p, 390, l. 24, r. Epiphanius; p. 392, l. 6, r. modestly; p. 3^9, l.
4, marg. r. ecclesiis, and in last l. r. Magisterii; p. 403, l. 4, marg. 1.
confessionis tumore; p. 407, last l. r. apostolical; p. 418, l. 8, r. easter;
p. 433, last l. r. Caracalla, p. 439, l. 6, r. heretics; p. 440, l. 9, r.
stromateus.

GENERAL CONTENTS.
AFter the Title Page, follows the Preface, consisting of P. 10 INTRODUCTION,
of 14 The ancient Writers are introduced at 15 1 BARNABAS, the first. Showed
not to be the scripture Barnabas, from 15 In his epistle no mention of Bishops
or Presbyters. 25
2 DIONYSIUS, the Areopagite: the writings, called his, proved not genuine. 27,
etc. 3 HERMAS, and his writings; his pastor, with the judgment of the ancients
and moderns; it makes Bishops and Presbyters one and the same order of church
officers. 36, etc. 4 CLEMENT of Rome's character and writings, with testimonies
of them, from 65 His epistle to the Corinthians genuine. 75, etc. The occasion
of his writing it. 77 The time of his writing it. 79 Clement's doubtful
writing. 82 Pieces spurious ascribed to him. 82 The constitutions, called
apostolic, spurious. 84, etc. Canons, called apostolical, not genuine. 92, etc.
The recognitions allowed spurious. 102 Passages from Clement's first epistle
admitted; and proofs from him, that Bishops and Presbyters are the same. 103
etc.
5 POLYCARP, his character, and his writings, with testimonies from them, etc.
155 He not a Bishop superior to Presbyters; nor owning such an one. 157 His
death. 169 Epistles mentioned as his, not extant. 170 His epistle to the church
at Philippi. ib. The inscription of it. 171 Passages from it. 172, etc. Remarks
on those passages. 175, etc. No Bishop distinct from Presbyter in him. 176
6 IGNATIUS's character, writings, etc. 187 He a Bishop, or Pastor, or
Presbyter. 191 The manner and circumstances of his death. 19^ His writings,
epistolical. 194 The editions of them. 196 His epistles, their being his
questioned. 198, etc. Writers taking no notice of them. 203, etc. Writers
supposed to refer to them considered. 214, etc. His epistle to Romans not
serving the Episcopalians. 233 Ignatian epistles, if not spurious, yet corrupt.
249 Fraudulent and impudent treatment of Ignatius. 250 True sentiments of
Ignatius not given us under his name. 253 Testimonies from Ignatius. 270
Remarks on those testimonies. His Bishops not diocesan. 289 Of the peculiar
episcopal powers, government, ordination, and confirmation, neither of which
are said by Ignatius to belong to Bishops in distinction from Presbyters. 303,
etc. His Bishops, upon the whole, parochial, and what he says about them not so
favorable to the episcopal, as Presbyters cause 317
7 PAPIAS: book said to be wrote by him. 319 His character. 320, etc. No Bishop
besides an Elder in him. 321
8 QUADRATUS; his character, and only writing. 323, 324 9 ARISTIDES; his
character, and apology. 325 10 AGRIPPA, surnamed Castor, his character. 326 He
wrote one book; no remains of it. 326, 327
11 HEGESIPPUS, supposed a convert from Judaism. 328 His history: only
fragments of it remain. ib. The history of the Jewish wars not his. 329
Extracts from a fragment of his. 330 Nothing in him in proof of the fact in
dispute. 331, etc.
12 JUSTIN MARTYR. 333 Learned: an adept in philosophy. 334 His conversion. 335
His apologies for christians. 337 Crescens, the cynic, his enemy, procuring his
death. 341 Justin's character. 342 His writings. 343, etc. His habit. ib. His
genuine works, and lost. 344 Works, supposititious. 345 From him no evidence
for Episcopalians. 354 A collection of Fathers named. 357
13 MELITO, of Sardis, an Eunuch, his genius. works, etc. 358 14 TATIAN. 361 15
ATHENAGORAS. 364 16 HERMIAS. 367 17 THEOPHILUS. ib. 18 APOLLINARIUS, or
Apollinaris. 371 19 DIONYSIUS of Corinth. 372 20 PINYTUS. 374 21 PHILIPPUS and
Modestus. 375 22 23 MUSANUS. ib. 24 BARDESANES. ib. 25 EPISTLE of the churches
of Vienne and Lions. 376 N. B. From Melito to this epistle, there is nothing in
the authors mentioned relative to the Episcopalian controversy.
26 IRENAEUS, his character, writings, etc. 379 His acquaintance with Polycarp,
and the sayings of those who conversed with the Apostles. 380, 381 Chosen
Bishop, or prime Presbyter. 382 His writing to two perverting Presbyters. 383
Easter controversy revived. ib. Irenaeus answering to his name. 385 His
praises. 386, 395 His writings. 387 His creed. 392 His book against heresies,
when wrote, -- his death. 397 Testimonies from him. 398 Observations on those
testimonies. 409 No proof of Episcopal claims to be found in him, but the
contrary. 411, etc.
27 ELEVEN Fathers mentioning nothing of the point in dispute. 427 28 SERAPION,
a fragment from him. 429 29 POLYCRATES, a fragment of his. 430 Remarks upon
these fragments. ib.
30 CLEMENT of Alexandria, his character, etc. 433 His lost writings. 437
Spurious writings. 439 Extant genuine writings. A general abstract of them. 441
He is mentioned with honor both by the ancients and moderns. 442 -- Testimonies
from Clement. 445 Remarks upon these testimonies, in which it is shown, that he
knew of no distinction between the order of Bishops and Presbyters. 453, --
Conclusion. 470


