A LETTER To the Reverend Nathaniel Whitaker, D. D. Wherein some of his gross
Misrepresentations of Mr. Hart's Doctrines in his Dialogue, entitled, A brief
Examination, etc. and his false and injurious Charges against him, contained in
his Appendix and Postscript to his Discourses on 2 Cor. 5.19. lately reprinted
at Salem, are detected, and justly censured. With REMARKS on sundry Doctrines,
tending to illustrate and confirm the Truth, and expose the contrary Errors
taught by the Doctor.

By the Author of that Dialogue.

How forcible are right Words! But what does your arguing reprove? -- Cannot my
Taste discern perverse Things?

JOB. Bread of Deceit is sweet to a Man: But afterward his Mouth shall be
filled with Gravel.

SOLOMON. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1771.

A LETTER, etc.
REVEREND SIR,
WHEN I heard you was writing in answer to me, in the heat of your spirit, and
that your papers had passed through Mr. Hopkins's hands, I did not expect a calm,
fair, equitable examination of things, and I do not find it. It Is most evident
that you did not write under the influence of that wisdom which is without
partiality, but hearkened, a great deal too much, to the counsels of the wisdom
which is of men; which has caused you to wander far out of the way of truth,
equity and honor, to my injury and your own hurt.

I shall not point out and reprove all your faults in what you have written
against me: that would swell this letter into a large volume: but some things I
must tell you. If thy brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault. -- A
few things only, I briefly mention in the first part, and hasten to your
appendix.

You say (p. 19) Does it not deserve a smile to see Mr. H. quoting President
Edwards's answer to Tailor, in confutation of my opinion? -- He is so fully of
my sentiments on this head, that I am bold to say, Mr. H. never read him, or
does not understand him, or else injured his conscience in quoting him. Neither
of these is true, Doctor. I read that book many years since, and have now in my
possession a manuscript, wrote A.D. 1762, in which I observe some of that great
man's doctrinal inconsistencies, and show the falsehood and absurdity of his
notion of personal identity, and of Adam and all his children being one complex
moral person or moral whole. If you are disposed to publish it, it is at your
service. It will enable you to judge whether I understand the book; and perhaps
may give you a clearer understanding of it -- As to injuring my conscience in
quoting him, this is a wonderful thought, Doctor I quoted these words from you,
This contrariety to God is innate and interwoven with the very frame of our
hearts. and then added, 'Is this consistent with Mr. Edwards's doctrine? He
says, There is not the least need of supposing any evil quality infused,
implanted or wro^t into the nature of man, by any positive cause or influence
whatever; or of supposing that man is conceived and born with a fountain of
evil in his heart, such as is any thing properly positive, in order to account
for a sinful corruption of nature. See the Dialogue, p 15. I did not add one
word more. In what was my conscience injured in this? Was it in asking that
wicked question? or in quoting the words? Are the words, or the doctrine they
contain, wicked, and unlawful to be transcribed? I believe, Doctor, all the
fault lies in the direct opposition of Mr. E^s doctrine, contained in these
words, to yours, and this, you know, is not my fault, but yours, or his.

Speaking of the perverse Jews, you say, It was as difficult to persuade them
that they hated God, and were the children of Satan, as it is to persuade Mr. H
that carnal men naturally hate moral good, and perhaps for the same reason.
When Christ told them they were the children of the devil, they in return, told
him he had a devil; pretty much as Mr. H. has served me for saying, man is
turned devil. (p 25). 'Ti^ you, Sir, that intimate concerning me, that I have a
devil; I bro^t no such 'railing accusation' against you. I mention this as one
of the things by which you dishonor yourself, both as a gentleman and a
christian, and of which you ought seriously to repent.

You say, in your sermon (p 40.41, 2d edit.) Sinners laugh at his (God's)
counsels and despise all his reproof; and so they will do till the arm of God's
power is revealed to make them willing [by creating them anew in Christ Jesus]
I compared this with another passage in your sermon, viz No moral arguments
except the terrors of the Lord, are adapted to influence carnal sinners to
attend to their salvation, and observed the inconsistence. You now endeavor to
reconcile yourself with yourself thus, Where is the inconsistency? In both I
show that no arguments of any hind are sufficient to renew and reconcile carnal
sinners to God. Yet I say, the terrors of the Lord are adapted to influence
them to seek deliverance from hell by working on their principle of self love
-- Is this hard to be understood? No, Doctor, it is not. But it is hard to be
understood how these terrors should thus work on this principle, so long as the
sinner laughs at and despises them. You had better have said nothing. You must
give up one of the propositions: they will always quarrel.

You say (p. 46 of your sermon.) A realizing view and perception of the moral
beauty and glory of God is that which is the motive that first prevails with
the [ renewed] sinner to return and be reconciled to him. In the note you say,
I ask Mr. H's pardon for leaving out the word [ renewed] which I have now
inserted. You, Sir, had more need to ask pardon for inserting it now; which,
had you done so, I could not have granted, but upon the condition of your
throwing it out again. The proposition, as it stood before was true, and as
such I quoted it to your honor; but as it now stands, it is foolish and absurd,
and a monster which devours itself. The true and scriptural idea of a sinner
renewed, is one morally changed, and conformed to God in the holiness of his
heart or prevailing temper. And thus you sometimes describe this renewal; I
don't mean exactly in these words, but to the same sense. And yet you here
represent this renewal as affecting no such change. The renewed sinner,
considered simply as renewed, is not yet persuaded to return and be reconciled
to God. This is effected by a different, and afterwork of the Spirit of God,
giving the renewed sinner 'a realizing view,' and so the sinner is renewed, and
not renewed at the same time: for such a renewal of the spirit of the mind as
does not reconcile the man to God is nothing. Why, Doctor, do you so trifle
with, and abuse scriptural terms and phrases? I don't mention this absurdity as
peculiar to you, it is common to all who teach a physical regeneration, without
any influence from light and truth. But will numbers keep such absurdities in
countenance? -- Doctor, your sermons need a third edition, with numerous
additional corrections.

Now, Doctor, let us a little examine your Appendix. In doing which we shall
both have need of patience; I in suffering your unjust censures, you in
suffering my just vindication and apology.

I. The first thing I notice is your perverse misrepresentation of my doctrine
relating to the moral sense or taste natural and essential to man as a moral
agent, and to all moral agents, as such. You say 'Mr. Hart's -- fundamental
error, I take to be this, 'viz. that all beings endowed with natural conscience
have necessarily a taste for moral excellency, i. e. approve and LOVE that
which appears to the understanding or conscience to be morally good, and HATE
what appears morally evil.' (p. 63, 64.) Here, Doctor, you represent that
approbation which reason and conscience, or the moral sense gives to actions
and characters morally good, when presented to the mind in a true light (which
I spoke of as natural and essential to moral agents, as such) as the same with
the love of the heart, or their being chosen and embraced by the will in
preference to all that stands in competition with them. -- I did not do so, but
kept these clearly distinguished. You might have perceived it if your mind had
not been biased by evil passions, unless your understanding is more defective
than I have thought it. -- This, Sir, is your fundamental error, or mistake and
blunder, and runs through all you have said upon this subject, to my injury, and
to your own dishonor.

Quoting a passage from my dialogue (p. 52) which concludes thus, 'On this,' i.
e. on the moral faculty of discerning between moral good and evil, etc. is
founded the principle and power of natural conscience, you paraphrase or
expound the words thus, On this ready perception of the beauty of morally good,
and hatefulness of morally evil objects, i. e. on a LOVE for holiness and
HATRED of sin, is founded the principle and power of natural conscience; by
which you certainly mean a gracious and holy love to spiritual things, and holy
hatred of their contraries. (p. 65.) Doctor, if you thus essentially
misrepresented the obvious sense of my words, through weakness, I pity you; if
you did it wilfully, which you have given great reason to suspect, the heavens
frown upon you.

You go on in your way, and draw many dreadful consequences from your
fundamental blunder, which you charge upon me, and injuriously lay them at my
door; and by partial quotations, and perverse constructions endeavor to fasten
them on me: see your two first sections. -- You say in particular, Mr. H.
believes that unrenewed men see and LOVE virtue in its own light, (p. 70.) He
largely insists that moral beings necessarily LOVE God and objects morally good
or holy as soon as they see them, and takes it for granted, again and again,
that they can see them in a true light, as amiable and excellent, worthy of
esteem and honor, and are affected accordingly; that they cannot hate God, but
when they view him as a morally evil and contemptible being. (p. 163.) This,
Doctor, is your short summary of what you have been laboring to persuade your
readers I believe and teach, at the expense of almost an hundred pages, by a
variety of partial quotations, arbitrary and artful misrepresentations, and
foolish and perverse reasonings. But after all, you are only beering false
witness against your neighbor, as I shall show you presently. But first, let
us see what you tell your readers I believe, relating to the nature of the
enmity of vicious beings to God.

II. I will represent the matter in your own words. You say, He (Mr. H.) shows
his opinion to be this, that all men really love God's true character, and
never hate him but when he is viewed by them in false and odious colors; --
and therefore that their hearts are right, holy and good, (p. 74.) Are there
not many (beings) who are allowed by all, except Mr. H. to be totally destitute
of true virtue or love to God, even all the devils? Mr. H. indeed supposes that
they do not, cannot hate God, considered in himself, but only a false character
of him, which is not God. -- But whatever high opinion Mr. H. may have of the
piety of devils, -- I shall take it for granted that devils are very wicked
beings, (p. 77.) They are indeed so, Doctor; they abode not in the truth, and
they falsely accuse those that do. God forbid that we should be like them. --
You say you 'could fill whole pages to show that Mr. Heart considers this enmity
'to God as a very trifling evil, (93) No, Doctor, you cannot produce one passage
that intimates any such thing; but might have quoted many which show the
contrary.

Please to turn your eye on your 90, 91, 92 and 93 page -- You will there see
such an instance of unjust and infamous misrepresentation, and ill bred
perverseness as is scarcely to be equalled by the whole society of Jesuits.
Doctor, is not this paragraph like the young prophet's ax? I have good reason
to think it is, and several others.

Doctor, you represent this as my doctrine, It is not the true, but a false
God, a morally evil or sinful being, that they (wicked men) always, universally
hate, and that because he appears to them wicked, and as acting contrary to the
moral law, which they naturally approve. And therefore it is impossible for
them to hate the true God. -- By Mr. H's own account, there is no need that the
spirit of enmity should be mortified, and a better and holy temper introduced
into the heart (of the carnal men) because the temper is already holy, and
needs nothing to remove its enmity to God, but just speculative notions of his
character. This is Mr. H's notion of enmity to God, in a short view. (p. 97.98)
I could quote much more to this purpose, but these are sufficient to give the
reader an idea of the doctrine you charge, and endeavor to fasten upon me.

III. Let us now search the Dialogue that we may see whether these things are
so, or are only false and railing accusations which you have bro't against your
brother. -- Doctor, I desire you will attend with a good and honest heart,
willing to see things as they really are. -- I said, There is in man a natural
faculty whereby he is rendered capable of discerning and distinguishing between
moral good and evil -- and readily perceives the one to be right, amiable, and
worthy of esteem and honor; the other wrong, hateful, and blameworthy -- as
soon as these objects are seen by the mind in their true light, or as being
what they really are, without any further reasoning about them, (D p 52) --
This, Doctor, you have represented as implying a holy love to the one, and
hatred to the other: but suffer me to ask you a few questions. What are
characters and actions morally good in themselves? Are they not really right,
amiable, worthy of esteem and honor? Are not their contraries really wrong,
hateful, blameworthy? If the mind sees these objects as 'being what they are,'
does she not perceive them to be so, i. e. to be what she sees them to be? And
if the mind perceives the morally good to be right, etc. and the morally evil
to be wrong, etc. does she not, in this view of them, in her judgment and
conscience, approve the one as right, etc. and because it is so, and disapprove
the other as wrong, etc. and because it is so? Does not the natural sense
pronounce this right judgment concerning them? Can the mind, at the same time,
approve a morally good action or character as being right and because it is
right, and disapprove it because it is right, or as being wrong? Or can she
approve that as right, which at the same time she disapproves as wrong? Or can
she both approve and disapprove it because she sees it to be wrong and
blameworthy? -- If the heart hates and rejects that which the understanding
and conscience see and approve as right and worthy of esteem, and loves and
chooses that which these see to be wrong, blameworthy, and proper objects of
moral hatred, and disapprove as such; (which is often the case) does the heart
thus counteract the conscience and moral sense, from the same views of the
objects, which determine the judgment of the conscience? Is it not because the
heart is interested and rendered partial and perverse by her attachment to
particular lusts, the indulgence whereof is inconsistent with moral truth and
right, and for the sake of which, as best beloved, she hates and rejects the
truth and right, embraces the evil and wrong? The mind approves the moral
truth, viewing it as it is in itself, the heart rejects and hates it,
relatively considered, or as opposing her lusts, from interested views. When
this is the case, is not the man condemned of himself, in that which he allows
in heart and practice? Does he not act inconsistently with himself, as well as
with the rule of right, and do violence to the moral constitution of his
nature? When Judas betrayed his Master, did he not act from the heart, under
the influence of covetousness and foolish resentment, in opposition to his
judgment or conscience? And when he afterward said, I have sinned in that I
have betrayed innocent blood, did he not speak the language of the moral sense?
Do you think, Doctor, that he now discovered any thing of a spiritual taste or
holy temper of heart? Peter was an accurate divine. He says, Balaam loved the
wages of unrighteousness 2 Pet. 2.15.
For the sake of these he forsook the right way, knowing of it such, and went
astray in the ways of unrighteousness. And the apostle Jude speaking of some
christian apostates, says, They have ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward. Jude 11.
This Balaam forsook the right way, and went astray in the way of error and
unrighteousness, with his eyes open. Was it because the way of error and
unrighteousness appeared to him a more excellent, or amiable and pleasant way,
in itself, simply considered as such, than the contrary way? Was it because he
hated right and loved wrong for its own sake? Your doctrine says it was: but
you see Peter and Jude have decided the case against you. This wicked man loved
the wages of unrighteousness, and ran in that way as greedy of the reward of
iniquity. Was not his hatred of the right way and love of the wrong, an
interested and partial affection, a secondary passion, a consequence and result
of his love and greedy desire of the reward?

Doctor, think enough to answer all these questions right; and then read over
the second part of my dialogue again, with perfect calmness, not in the spirit
of a perverse disputer of this world, interested in misrepresenting its sense,
but as an impartial, upright judge, as under his eye who sees all the artful
windings of the crooked serpent, and approves the way of the upright; and I
trust the mist will vanish from before your eyes, and that you will see clearly
that you have essentially misrepresented my doctrine, and greatly wronged your
brother, and, as you say, havi^ ^ arguing to no purpose, at least have not
confuted M^ but only a doctrine I have palmed on him, and which he has not
taught. (p. 157) This, Sir, is the very truth. I must help you a little more,
that you may see it clearly.

In my account of the moral sense natural and essential to man as a moral
agent, you think you find a good definition of a spiritual taste, or holy love
to spiritual good: But in this you ^r. That approbation which reason and the
moral sense give to things morally good, which I spoke of, as quoted above, is
not the same thing with a supreme love and preferring choice of them by the
heart; which is essential to true virtue. The first may exist while the other
does not; which is often the case with men. You say to this purpose, that this
approving perception of the mind implies true love of the heart, or at least
necessarily draws it. But you are mistaken in this. The approbation of
conscience or of the moral sense, and the ruling affection and choice of the
heart, are frequently as far asunder, in sinful beings, as the city of God and
the kingdom of Satan. -- You also say to this purpose, that no natural man can
see things morally good in a true light, or perceive their moral amlableness
and excellence; and so says the writer of the notes in your appendix. I will
allow you two things, Doctor; first, that men must have these things presented
to their view by God's teaching, before they can perceive their moral
excellence. Secondly, that natural men cannot see them in so clear and realizing
a light as holy men ^o, and yet remain carnal: but they may have their
understanding so far enlightened, as to see them to be right, amiable in
themselves, and worthy of esteem and honor, and approve them as such, and yet
their heart be pr^ingaged, and continue attached to other objects less worthy,
and ^istent with these. This is enough to justify all I have said upon this
subject in the dialogue.

Mr Edwards admits the distinction between the taste and approbation of moral
good or true virtue, by the conscience or moral sense, and that by a spiritual
sense. He freely own that the mind of the unrenewed man, if duly enlightened,
may see, and by the moral sense approve a real beauty, excellence and
amiableness in true virtue. This indeed he calls a secondary beauty, but says
it belongs to moral things. This is not the less a real and true moral beauty
because he calls it a secondary beauty. He was a great man, but not so great as
to alter the nature of things by a dash of his pen; nor so great as to be
exempted ^om the universal infirmity. He could err as well as you and I. If you
should ever see my remarks on his piece upon true virtue, you will meet with
some thoughts, which, perhaps, may do you no hurt.

But I here present you with a short passage or two from that piece. Mr.
Edwards says, Natural conscience, if well informed will approve of true virtue,
and disapprove the want of it and opposition to it -- Yea if men's consciences
were ^ully enlightenen -- they would approve nothing but true virtue, Edwards
on Virtue, p. 164, 165.
There is a moral taste, or sense of moral good and evil, natural to all which
does not properly arise out of self-love. ib. p. 166.
This moral sense, If the understanding be well informed -- approves the very
same things, which a spiritual and divine sense approves, and those things
only; though not on the same grounds, nor with the same kind of approbation. ib.
188.


In the dialogue, p. 61, 62, you may find these words, viz. I observed above,
that the enmity of sinful souls against God's true character is directed
against it, only relatively considered, and is a secondary passion, which
arises in the heart in consequence of men's indulgence of particular lusts,
which first lead them into a practical opposition to the law and righteous will
of God* When the light of truth manifests their deeds to be evil and reproves
them, and kindly calls them back into the right way, if they submit to the
reproof, and obey the merciful call, their opposition to God ceases, no higher
enmity can rise in their hearts; their enmity is turned against their own
lusts: but if they refuse to receive reproof, and persist in their sins against
light, the light becomes offensive, and they hate it as reproving them. The
scorner hates him that reproves him.

After having offered some things in confirmation of this account of the nature
and spring of this wicked enmity. I say (p. 64) This doctrine concerning the
enmity of carnal men against God, is further confirmed by this observation,
which holds universally true in fact, viz. That men who hate God, his ways, and
righteous servants, always misrepresent their characters to themselves, paint
them in false and odious colors, and place them in such a wrong view as to
make them appear either contemptible or morally evil: This is the method they
always take to justify to THEMSELVES, as well as to others their enmity to
them: which they would not do if moral rectitude wisdom, righteousness and
goodness, were, in themselves objects of their natural hatred; but their hatred
would point itself directly against them, as being what they really are; as in
the case of natural aversions to some particular kinds of food. This hatred of
wicked men against God is then an interested and partial affection, taken up in
aid and support of some carnal lusts and interests is they are devoted to. --
Doctor, the sense of this paragraph is fixed and very obvious. It Is manifest as
the light, that I speak of wicked men's misrepresenting God's character, etc.
to themselves as the method they take to justify to themselves their partial,
unjust enmity to them. They do this to guard their wicked hearts, as far as
they can, against the conde^mina reproaches of their reasonable minds, and the
severe reproofs of their conscience or moral sense; which, when allowed to
spe^ts own sense of things freely, under the influence of light is the
understanding, justifies God and his ways, and freely co^m^s this unnatural
enmity. This is agreeable to what I say, dialogue, p 66 N^ ever did speak evil
of God's ways, viewing them as they (...) y^a^, as equitable and good; but as
placing the a wrong ^ight to themselves When they are obliged to see them as
they truly are they are reduced to silence, and can object nothing to them: but
justify and approve them as RIGHT, and condemn themselves. -- Poor creatures,
they can enjoy no self approbation and quiet but under the gloomy shade of
perverse misrepresentation. Hence it is that men obstinately bent upon sin,
close their own eyes stop their ears make their hearts gross, lest they should
see hear and understand; when they do if they do not return, they are, like the
discovered thief, in the terrors of the shadow of death.

Let us next observe, Doctor, how you have forced these passages into your
service; for indeed you have constrained them to serve in a state of cruel
bondage, contrary to their nature, and wholly against their will. You often
quote part of both of them, as in the pages referred to in the margin, P. 71,
72, 74, 90, 132.
but have never once, as I have observed, quoted any part of what I have now
put in Italics, nor given your readers the least hint of any such clauses,
which fix the sense of the whole, (though you must have observed them yourself)
but keep them out of sight: you could not pervert them. I desire you, and all
who read this, will turn your eyes back on these extracts, and observe the
parts printed in Italics, and then compare them with your quotations referred to
below, and observe the use you make of what you venture to show your readers --
it may give an edifying blush -- The things you have quoted, you so artfully
weave in with your own misrepresentations as to make them look a little
favorable to them, to a careless reader. But whoever will give himself the
trouble to compare as I have requested, will very easily discover the
imposition that is practiced upon him. The sense you constantly put upon these
passages is this. That men and all moral beings, have naturally a holy love to
Gods true character, and never do or can hate him, but as he is viewed by the
mind in a false and odious character, either as a morally evil or contemptible
being. It would be an affront to the reader's understanding to say any thing
more to convince him that the passages given above fully condemn you; they
speak for themselves. Doctor, in this shameful misrepresentation of my
doctrine, you have greatly injured me, abused and misled your readers, and
dishonored yourself.

Let us examine another passage which you have made great use of, and observe
how you have perverted and abused it. After I had finished what I designed upon
the doctrine of the enmity of wicked men against God, in opposition (...) you
wrong notions of it, I just mentioned another kind of enmity, in properly
called enmity to God's character or real works, which is sometimes found in
good men, who by the grace of God, are cured of that kind of enmity which rises
out of the perverseness of a wicked heart, These were my words. Since we are
upon the melancholy subject of the enmity of poor sinners against God, I will
just mention one thing more.

Many very honest and good people have often complained of the workings of a
secret enmity and hard thoughts of God, and quarrellings against him; which
does n^ like that we have been discoursing upon, arise out of the WICKEDNESS of
the heart, but is wholly occasioned by misrepresentations of the character and
ways of God to the mind, and false and wrong views of him, which have unhappily
gotten possession of the mind, and are supposed through ignorance and wrong
instruction, to be the true and genuine views of his character and works. In
the light wherein they view them they appear morally evil, wrong, and objects
of just hatred. The enmity which the ^ind conceives against them, viewed in
this wrong light, is, in a proper sense, a natural enmity, i e it arises (...)
he moral frame of the mind, and the innate sense of the hatefulness of actions
and characters morally evil and wrong: and if the heart is gracious this sense
is greatly heightened. This kind of enmity is, in no true construction, a
hatred of God's true character, which may he heartily approved and loved at the
same time; but only of a really bad character, falsely ascribed to him, merely
through ignorance, mistake and misinformation. This may be illustrated by the
case of a child educated abroad, who has lust^'d into his mind perhaps by the
foolish tattle of his ^urse or schoolmaster, very wrong and injurious notions
of his father's character ^en pe^ and designs toward him; representing him as
very (...) ^ona^ble, arbitrary and cruel, or ^a^d hypocritical toward him ^
whereas in truth he is quite the reverse This wrong view raises in the child
disa^tion, hard and blaming thoughts* His father, who knows the case, p^ties
him, considering it ^ignorance and error, not malice against his (...). The
true and effectual cure of this kind o^ ^n^i^, is accomplished by correcting
these unhappy ^apprehensions and giving the ^i^ a just view of the true
character of God, and setting his action^ and dispensations in that true ^ight
wherein he himself has placed them. (D p. 68.69)

Doctor, you secquently quote passages from this paragraph, and misrepresent
their sense in a most pe^ manner You n^ where give your renders the least him
that I am here speaking of a case of an entirely different nature from that of
the vicious enmity of the ungodly, which ^ses out of the wickedness of the
heart, and which I have been discoursing of before, though you could not but know
that I was; but you constantly represent me to your readers as speaking of the
vicious enmity, and apply what I say upon this improper enmity, to that of the
wicked as my account of the nature and source of their enmity against God, his
truth and ways. The manner of my introducing this paragraph, and these words,
referring to that kind of enmity I was here describing, viz which does not like
that we have been discoursing upon, arise o^t of the wickedness of the heart,
fix the scufe and application of the whole, and fully evidence your injustice
and extreme unfairness in your application of this to the enmity of the wicked,
in the manner you do. -- Such as are curious to see your quotations from this
paragraph, and the perverse abuse of them, may consult the pages referred to in
the margin. -- You quote me as saying, 'many 'very honest and good sort of
people. These words, sort of, you have added to the text, and give as many
words. I should not have mentioned so small a thing, if you had not repeated
them afterward two or three times, and played upon them with a view to render
me contemptible in your readers eye.

P. 7^ 72, 73, 74.
In general, Doctor, you have improved the quotations you make from the
paragraph given above, to persuade your readers that I admit no other kind or
worse sort of enmity against God, in the wickedest men and even in devils
themselves, than that improper enmity there described; and that I hold that
wicked men and devils have at bottom, a temper of heart disposed to love God,
and only want to have their ignorance removed, and their wrong speculative
notions concerning him rectified, in order to their love showing itself in
actual exercise. -- You say in particular. It appears, according to Mr. H. that
the only difference between the hatred of God which is in the righteous and
wicked, lies in this, viz. the wicked misrepresent God's character to
themselves, and so are the cause of the misrepresentation (though on his
principles, they do it without any hatred of God) while the righteous, or very
good [ sort of] people (quoted again as my words, with a contemptuous sneer --
the contempt be to whom it belongs) have him misrepresented to them, by wrong
instructions, and so are not the active cause of affixing this false character
to God; but yet after the false representation is made, they both have the same
enmity to it, only the gracious heart will hate it in a higher degree And you
say, 'this (kind of enmity) 'is ALL and the WORST that can be found in any man,
(p 73.) i. e. according to my doctrine. -- Can any thing be said more foolish,
false, perversely injurious? If your reader makes his judgment of my doctrines
from your account of them, he will be totally deceived. Surely your turning
things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potter's clay.

Two or three passages more, I take a little notice of, and then close this
scene.

You tells us (p. 98) Mr. H. says, God considered simply i^ himself cannot be
hated; yet relatively considered he possibly may; and say, Mr. H puts the
change on his readers by the words, relatively considered. Just as though to
consider God as related to us, as our Creator and Lord, were different from
considering him as he is in himself. (Why do you drop the word simply? Are you
not putting the change upon your readers?) ^s not God in himself our sovereign
creator and governor?' If you had dropped the word in, as well as, simply
considered, I should have answered, Yes. I will state the question as you
should have done, if you meant to say any thing to the purpose, and do you
answer it. Is not God considered simply in himself, our creator and governor?
Thus (...) he is viewed only in respect to his essential character, to his
nature, not in his words ^nt himself, and his consequent relations to the works
of his hands simply considered he is regarded only as being what he is in
himself what he was before he began creation. Was God our creator etc before we
were created? Is it essential to his nature to create us? If so, God had not in
himself all that is essential to hi^ nature till you and I came into existence.
-- You put more puzzling questions. Does it not essentially belong to him to
create and govern his creatures? I suspect you had no ideas here. If you mean
that the works and relations of God as creator and governor, belong to the
divine essence, you have your answer above If you mean that God having created,
it is essential to his relativ^ character of creator that he did create the
creatures he has created, and that it belongs to him, as their maker, to care
for, an^ govern them; it is doubtless so. If you don't mean one of these you
mean nothing. If you mean either, or both, your question is nothing to the
purpose -- You add, Is it not essential t^ the divine nature to oppose our
particular lusts and private interests, which are contrary to his nature? Is
not God essentially as he is in himself, necessarily opposite to every sin? His
ho^ nature is essentially opposed to all moral evil or unrighteousnes^ You say,
If it is, then to consider him as opposing some particul^ lusts of ours, or
some of our private interests, is to consider him (...) he is in himself. If
what you mean by this, is, that this is ^ consider him as acting in character,
or in a manner which is tru^ agreeable to his holy nature; I agree with you.
But what ha^ you gained? What have you proved by this? Just nothing ^ all. Thus
to consider God, is not to consider him simply himself, but relatively, as
opposing some of our lusts, or priva^ interests; i. e. as opposing us in our
evil ways, menacing or i^flicting punishment therefore This, Doctor, is just
that relativ^ interesting view of God, of his moral perfections in act and
exe^cise, in relation to the sinner, in which view of him. I said ^ possibly
may be hated, and in fact is, and necessarily so, unl^ the sinner turns at his
reproof Doctor, I wonder you did not^ this. -- We are now prepared for your
next question, v^ Does not Mr. H then make a distinction where there is no
difference? No, Doctor, I do not. Don't you see the difference? When you
consider God's moral characters of truth equity, goodness, simply as such, or
in an abstracted view, without any regard to their aspect upon you, your
reason, your nat^ral moral sense, will pronounce them right, and approve them ^
worthy of esteem and honor: In this simple uninterested view them, you cannot
hate them: but if you should come to see the God, in the exercise of these
divine virtues, frowns upon you for your great unfairness and injustice in
perverting my doctrine in the manner you have done, and your manifold abuses of
me in your piece, essentially contrary to the spirit of goodness and justice,
you would certainly, necessarily, be displeased, either with him or yourself;
if with God for opposing you, your heart would gender hatred Your wrong doings
are, even now, practical opposition, or enmity if you please, against his h^,
law and will. When you see this. I hope your displeasure will turn into the
right channel, and that the divine frown will then give place to the gracious
smile.

Notwithstanding all the noise you make about my distinguishing between a
simple and relative view of God's character, etc. you sometimes go into it
yourself: the distinction is so natural you fall into it, even while you are
cen^aring it in me. I give you one instance. You tell us (p 100) Mr. H. thinks
he has fully proved that the worst of men love the truth considered in itself,
because the pharisees condemned the conduct of the husbandmen who slew their
lord's servants and son, till they saw their own face in the glass. No, Doctor,
I did not say, or undertake to prove, that they love truth or righteousness, as
you understand love to imply virtuous love. I said, and bro^t this example to
prove that sinners, by the moral faculty, may see, and seeing do approve
righteousness and moral good, as a right thing, amiable in itself, and worthy
of esteem and honor; and that they hate it only relatively considered, and from
interested views: and it does fully prove this. And you, in attempting to
invalidate this evidence, confirm it, and even make it prove more than I desire
it should. Your words are these, Let us see what his witness proves. Why, it
very plainly proves, (1) That the worst of men have a conscience capable of
perceiving the truth. (2) That when they see themselves concerned in it, they
love or HATE it, according as it agrees or disagrees with what is, in their
view, their own interest and will treat it accordingly. (3) Therefore that mere
selfishness will lead the worst of men to love or hate the same truth, as it
appears to favor or oppose them. -- Don't you see, Doctor, that you have here
conceded all that I brought this example to prove; that the hatred of vicious
beings against moral truth is an interested partial thing, opposed to their
moral sense of what this truth deserves? How glorious is your opposition to me,
for saying the same thing that you do! But, Doctor, you err a little, even
here. I no where called this interested regard to moral truth and
righteousness, love to them. It is unworthy the name; for it never ingages the
hearts of the wicked in the service: but their hatred to these, though it takes
its rise from interested views and vicious passions, as you plainly confess,
yet (...) becomes, in the impenitent and obstinate, a fixed and governing
passion, and a source of infinite wickedness, mischief and misery. Besides, you
had no warrant from this example of the malicious pharisees, to say any thing
about this false love to moral truth. For the righteous judgment, upon the
parabolical story, which the Lord drew them in to give, did not spring from,
was not dictated by self love, or any regard to private interest: their hasty
reversal of this judgment only, proceeded from thence. They did not apprehend
themselves at all interested or concerned in the case till the Lord applied
their judgment. This judgment was dictated by that moral discernment and moral
sense which is essential to all moral beings and which no degree of wickedness
can destroy. The judgment of this sense is impartial and disinterested. When
the light flows in upon it, and it is allowed to speak its own sense freely, it
judges impartially, in every soul, of his own actions, as of other men's,
without fear or favor: it only regards the right of the case. Hence the
endeavors of wicked minds to blind and deceive themselves: hence their hatred
and dread of the light. -- I said, Enmity to God is a secondary passion. In the
note, p. 102, you say, This he explains thus: A consequence and result of wrong
affections indulged in opposition to the law and will of God. But are not wrong
affections, especially when indulged, -- thus, themselves enmity to God, in the
scripture sense? Mr. H. in the next breath answers, YES; for any particular
wrong affection -- thus indulged is (practical opposition or) ' enmity to the
law of God.' You suppressed the words I now put in a parenthesis, I suppose,
that you might represent me as inconsistent with myself; for you immediately
add, How the^ is enmity a consequence and result of these wrong affections
indulged? I told you how, in the next words following those you last quoted,
viz. 'These' (wrong affections, which indulged, I said are practical opposition
or enmity to the law of God) These, persisted in against light, will draw after
them a higher and more malignant kind of enmity against God, as standing in the
way of such indulged lusts. D. p. 60. I also said, p. 61, Particular lusts --
first lead men into a practical opposition to the law and righteous will of
God. When the light of truth manifests their deeds to be evil, reproves -- and
calls them back -- if they submit to the reproof, and obey the merciful call,
their opposition for God ceases, no higher enmity can rise in their hearts. But
if they refuse to receive reproof, and persist in their sins against light, the
light becomes offensive, and they hate it as reproving them: The scorner hates
him that reproves him.

Doctor, you certainly saw these passages; but it was not for your purpose to
show them to your reader: if would have ruined your design. -- In p. 103, you
ask this question, Are not wrong affections and carnal lusts something like
enmity to God? and seem to think this a confounding stroke. Do you mean such
affections and lusts, considered as indulged by the man, in opposition to God's
will? If so, I had told you before, that they are 'practical enmity to God's
law. But if you mean here to consider them as not indulged, but restrained and
over ruled by the mind, as I suspect you do; I desire you to answer me one
question, which may help you to answer yours right. You think your self some
way injured by your brother: resentment rises, a motion tending to revenge; the
devil whispers such a though it into your ^ear: the tendency of this though it and
motion is to enmity: you instantly perceive its evil nature; you don't indulge
it at all, but ^mmediately resist, reject and suppress it with displeasure in
the ^ear of God. Do you in this 'look something like' one who has a heart of '
enmity to God,' or of dutiful conformity to him? Doctor, you say, p. 103. note,
Those who have never been convinced that, not only actual sins, but even their
very best tempers, in their best frames, while unregenerate, are nothing but
opposition and enmity to God's true character have never had a just and
scriptural view of God's character, but are still ignorant of the true God and
of themselves -- This is Mr. Hopkins's doctrine, the height and perfection of
it: by a lopting this doctrine, you are become answerable for it: let us
examine it a little -- Unregenerate men, in their best frames, under the
influence of common grace, are sometimes in such tempers or dispositions, or
have such motions and actings of soul as these, viz. They are greatly afraid of
God's wrath; they with for his mercy to sa^e them from it, they see so much of
the wrongness, folly, baseness, and destructive tendency of their former evil
ways, of some of them at least, as that they really blame themselves, feel
ashamed, are sorry, and wish they had not done as they have done. I don't
suppose these are holly exercises -- But how will you prove that there is
nothing in these inward motions and frames of their hearts but opposition and
enmity to God's true character? What is there in this character, which these
are in opposition and enmity to? Do they oppose his truth, or justice, or
goodness, or mercy? Does not the truth of their case justify their fear and
shame? Is this truth opposite to the truth of God? Do they not justly blame
themselves? Is this enmity against God's justice or goodness? Is their desire
that God will have mercy upon them, in enmity to the merciful nature of God? If
these are nothing but opposition to God's true character, he is in opposition
to them, and hates and disallows them, and they are forbid by some law of God.
Can you show any such law? If God hates these, he cannot hate their contraries,
unless his character is made up of contradictions, like your scheme, which, I
don't believe: But he does have their contraries, and blames his people for
them Fear ye not me? When they had committed abominations they could not blush,
neither were they ashamed -- Ye are they that justify yourselves. Doctor, if
you have formed a character of God, which is opposition and enmity to these
frames and motions, stirred up in the hearts of sinners, by the teachings and
common influence of the Spirit of God, you have undoubtedly, in your
imagination, changed the glory of the incorruptible God into a monstrous image.
But ^ rather think you have taken up this absurd doctrine, and others without
reflection. If so, I trust you will renounce it again. I know what may be said
for it in a caviling way; but stick to your text. According to that, your
business is to prove tha^ there is nothing positive in the very best tempers of
sinners, i^ their best frames, under the highest influences of common grace*
but what is 'opposition and enmity to God's true character.' T^ tell of their
deficiencies, and what is wanting to render them tru^ gracious exercises, is
nothing to the purpose.

I just mention another of your wrong headed errors. You say 'Every real
penitent sees that he grows worse.' p. 118. Doctor you are strangely regardless
of what you say.




Whatever was the cause, the fact is certain and very evident; you have
essentially altered and misrepresented the doctrines taught in the dialogue,
relating to the moral sense, and the nature and source of the enmity of the
wicked against God A very worthy gentleman, and venerable father in the
min^stry, in his letter to me, after he had read your piece, taking notic^ of
this, says, It seems he is so far from engaging fairly in the dispute, that he
shifts the dispute by adopting an issue that su^ him, to give himself the
advantage of overcoming. Overcomin^ what? Why an opponent that he himself has
made: so much given to dispute that he will make his own antagonist rath^ than
not have business.
I have showed this to you, in regard to your good, as well as to my own
vindication from the scandalous heresies you have charged me with, as you
desired your reader to do, if he found this the case, that you might have the
honor of retracting your error, (p. 107.) And now, Doctor, I expect you will do
yourself the honor, and me the justice publicly to retract these false and
injurious charges. If you do so, I will forgive you this wrong, and desire the
churches to whom you dedicated your false accusations will do so too. -- But I
have other matters to settle with you, Doctor.

IV. I shall next attend to what you say upon that paragraph, wherein I mention
the silencing the blasphemy of reprobate souls, by the force of truth. These
are my words, viz. Any particular sinful affection indulged in opposition to
the will of God, is practical opposition or enmity to the law of God. These
persisted in against light, will draw after them a higher and more malignant
kind of enmity against God, as standing in the way of such indulged lusts And
in this case, if the sense of God's righteousness in opposing and condemning
the sinner in his evil ways is weak, and the sense of his own faultiness low
and dull, this enmity may flame out dreadfully, and work up to blasphemy and
cursing. This is the present state of devils, and in a sad degree the case of
some men. But it is a great mistake to suppose and teach that things will
remain in this horrid confusion in wicked minds, forever, as too many do. --
When God comes near to judgment he will reveal his righteousness from heaven,
and impress upon all wicked souls, both of men and devils, such a clear,
convincing, strong sense of the equity, fairness, and real kindness of his
dispensations toward them in their former state of trial, of the heinousness
of their offenses, and of the justice and moral necessity of his present
sentence of condemnation (which impression will never be suffered to wear off,
any more) as will so far overbalance their natural self love, as to oblige them
to justify God's character, conduct and judgment, in word and mind; and forever
silence all murmurings, injurious reflections and hard speeches against him,
and all blasphemy and cursings of their maker; their rage will turn inward
against themselves, as the flame of a reverberating furnace falls with all its
force upon the melting metal. (D. p. 60, 61.) You tell us, Doctor, that the
thoughts in this long passage appear to you quite new, (p. 81) and you appear
quite frighted, and see as many specter rising up before you, as a timorous
girl ever does in the dark; and you endeavor to alarm your readers by your
pokerish descriptions of the creatures of your imagination; such as these, That
the damned at the day of judgment will love God's true character -- that they
will necessarily love, and cannot hate him -- that the minds of the damned
shall be calmed, and suited to their state -- that there will be a happy ae^a
for devils and reprobate souls, etc. (p. 81, 82, 83.)

But let us try, Doctor, if we cannot lay these evil spirits, which so haunt and
terrify you. -- The though is which you own to be quite new to you, are not so to
all the world. Mr. Edwards expresses himself much to the same purpose -- He
says, Christians have the greatest reason to believe, from the scriptures, that
in the future day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, when
sinners shall be called to answer before their judge, and all their wickedness,
in all its aggravations clearly manifested in the perfect light of that day,
and God will reprove them, and set their sins in order before them, their
consciences will be greatly awakened and convinced, their mouths will be
STOPPED -- their consciences will approve the dreadful sentence of their judge;
and seeing that they have deserved so great a punishment, will join with the
judge in condemning them -- He adds, Their wickedness will then be bro't to
perfection. Edwards on Virtue, p. 166, 167.
Which is true. I did not imagine any one would have understood me as
intimating that they will then be converted to the holy love of God. I only
said what is implied in Mr. Edwards's words, and that their rage and reproaches
will then turn against themselves: which is the natural result of a full
conviction that God is perfectly good and perfectly just, and they themselves
the authors of their own ruin, in a state of final condemnation and despair.

The truths, Doctor, which are impressed upon the minds of the condemned, at
the time of Judgment, are not fitted in their nature as they respect them, to
quicken and sanctify their hearts, but to kill them; to justify God in his ways
and judgment upon them, and to extort from them a permanent justification of
him, a true confession before him, of his faithfulness and equity, of their
evil desert, and a condemnation of themselves, all which necessarily turn their
wrath and their reproaches against themselves; which instead of lessening,
Increases their torment -- This conviction is not willingly admitted, but
forced upon them, by the force of the two edged sword which proceeds out of his
mouth. If they could, they would throw it off, and return to the miserable
expedient of misrepresenting to themselves, and reviling God's ways and
judgments as unequal, as some poor relief from the torment of the^ own self
condemning reflections. But it is now impossible. This conviction of the truth,
respecting them, is fixed, and riveted in their souls forever.

Self-love, Doctor, in wicked and rejected souls, still works as a desire of
self esteem, and of esteem from others, as a desire of life and happiness. And
as the truth of their case obstructs the way of these motions, this self love
springs rancorous hatred of this truth; and, as its only remaining resource,
falls to misrepresenting and blaspheming the truth and the God of truth, laying
the blame of its disappointment on God, or any where, rather than on self. But
the truth, as impressed by God on the mind, is of power sufficient to bear down
this spring of blasphemy, and carry away all resistance before it, and will do
this, when God comes near to judgment. This spirit, thus shut up from this
opening, will necessarily fall upon the sinner himself with the whole force of
its disappointed passions, as the true cause of his own undoing; and his
remaining and eternal quarrel will be against himself, and the wicked helpers
of his ruin. Self hatred, and killing sorrow, and fruitless repentance,
lamentation and woe, will be his everlasting portion; which our Lord describes
by weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. How great this misery! Doctor,
don't imagine again that I am giving the condemned holy tempers. This self
hatred, repentance, and revenge against self, do not spring from love to truth,
but from self-love fatally disappointed by self folly, and self destroying
wickedness. This you may see in Judas: He repented, and went and hanged himself.
-- In this sense Doctor, not in that you suggest, the minds of the condemned
will be suited to their state. The more suited the more miserable.

God will get the victory at last, when he comes with ten thousands of his
saints to -- convince all that are ungodly -- of all their ungodly deeds, and
of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him Jude
14.15.
Then every mouth shall be stopped, and every tongue confess to God: And the
wicked, who, now while God is departed, and hides himself from them, set the^^
mouth against the heavens, Psalm. 73.^.
shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves Psalm. 64.8.
-- But as you, Doctor, and too many others, represent the case, the victory of
God over his incorrigible enemies, never will be complete: the victory of
authority and power over their persons is indeed so. in subjecting them to a
state of just punishment; but the victory of truth over their minds never is so
Don't misapprehend me, Sir, I don't mean the saving truth, but the condemning,
silencing, killing truth, which concerns them at the time of judgment. If they
stand before their judge, and go away from the judgment feat, blaspheming and
cursing their maker and their judge, it is evident the condemning truth has not
gained its rightful dominion over their minds: but if this killing sword sticks
fast in their souls, and compels them to think and speak now and always, the
things that are just and true concerning God and themselves, the victory of God
is complete, and their misery is complete; and God is glorified to the utmost,
in this dreadful catastrophe of wickedness. -- This is undoubtedly the truth.
By a contrary manner of representing the matter, God is really dishonored, though
without design. If these tho'ts seem strange and wrong, it is from want of
close and just reflection on the subject, on the holy scriptures relating to
this subject, and on moral nature.

I just mention two of your observations on the passage above transcribed.
First, you say, The damned, if we may believe Mr. H. will not be in so horrid
confusion always as they now are No! the happy time is coming when their
confusion shall not be so horrible and dreadful; but if their minds shall be
calmed, and every murmur silenced, their minds shall be suited to their state
-- Happy era! (p. 81.) Doctor, you cannot understand any thing that I say. The
horrid confusion which I said should not last forever, respects only the
blasphemous rage against God. I there used the word confusion in the same sense
that God uses it in the law, where speaking of some unnatural, monstrous sins,
he says, they are ' confusion,' i. e. totally confound the order of nature;
just as a wicked wretch does, when instead of condemning himself he condemns
his maker. As to that confusion of face and mind, which is the natural result
of sin, it will then be complete, when this other kind of confusion is
silenced. -- No, no, Doctor, the minds of the wicked will never be calmed, but
the storm dreadfully heightened, at the time of judgment; only the wind will
then blow in a contrary direction: and whereas the raging waves before
sometimes broke against the heavens, now they break and discharge their whole
force upon the miserable criminal himself; for God now rules the storm. There
is order, in this confusion; the order of the governing truth and righteousness
of God: it answers to the true nature of things, and in its way is praise to
him. But can blasphemy ever be praise to God? Doctor, do think.

2. You say, I believe no one besides Mr. H. ever taught that a weak sense of
God's righteousness in opposing the sinner in his evil way, and a low and dull
sense of the sinners own faultiness or ill desert, was, is, or can be the CAUSE
of their rage, blasphemy and cursing God, (p. 81, 82.) Nor he neither. Doctor,
you blunder perpetually, and stumble at noon day as in the night. Please to
turn your eye back on the passage you here refer to I there assigned the
sinner's wilfulness in sinning on against light, as the cause or source of his
blasphemous enmity against God; and his perceiving God's opposition to him in
his evil way, as the occasion of its flaming out. I only mention a weak sense
of etc. and a low and dull sense of, etc. as insufficient to restrain the flow
of this cursed passion; insufficient because weak, low, and dull -- Doctor,
what I said is almost in direct opposition to what you suggest. Don't you see
that I consider this sense as having a natural tendency to restrain the sinner
from blaspheming God, and insufficient to effect it, only from its being too
weak and low? I am sorry to see you continually expose yourself as you do: you
leave your intelligent reader no other option but pity or contempt.

Almost all your reasonings against me, are founded upon a misapprehension and
wrong representation of my doctrines and sentiments: For this reason I take
little notice of them. So are those of your friend in the notes in your
appendix. I call them so because I think you wrote few of them. Perhaps I am
mistaken: if I am it is no great fault: you are not robbed of any glory.

V. Let us now, Doctor, open a new scene -- You say (p 117) 'He that carefully
reads and attends to what he' (Mr. H) says in his dialogue, especially in p.
30, -- 36 must see that he has no conception of salvation by free grace alone,
but makes works and the sinners endeavors the moral GROUND or reason why God
bestows on him renewing and pardoning mercy. No, Doctor, such an one will see
no such thing: no such thing exists. Indeed they that read with your passion
and prejudice may possibly imagine and say such a thing. You add, I will point
out a few things. Mr, H supposes that the awakened, unrenewed sinner takes
pains to become better, etc. etc. (p. 118) Here, Doctor, you quote a few scraps
of sentences, picked up here and there, and patch them together with your usual
art. Some you have given right, some wrong, and some you have made yourself,
and given to your reader as mine, as you have done many other things; for which
I neither thank not honor you: this is one, Mr. H. supposes that the awakened,
unrenewed sinner, truly repents, (p. 118*)

Doctor, you and Mr. Hopkins have greatly misrepresented my doctrine relating
to the influence of common grace, and the actions of awakened sinners under it,
and both much alike. Why did you not act like honest men, and state my doctrine
fairly, and if you had objections to it, offer them clearly? Another method
pleased you better. -- You, Doctor, misrepresent and aggravate things to the
utmost. You say, Mr. H. supposes that the awakened, unrenewed sinner grows
better under conviction, and therefore is more likely to obtain mercy, and that
there is no encouragement at all for sinners to strive or hope, if this is not
the case. Thus, according to him, the sinner's growing better is the ONLY
GOSPEL GROUND of his hope. -- Thrice admirable! No comment can illustrate the
absurdity of this (p. 118.) Doctor, you have made your comment already, and
entirely perverted the text. Your boldness in falsely accusing is very
wonderful -- But let us hear you further. Mr. H's reasoning, p 30. -- 36,
amounts to this, viz. That awakened sinners should be taught that they really
grow better, really please God in their conduct, and are less guilty than when
secure, and that this is a ground and reason why they should partake of the
divine favor rather than others, (p. 119) The only way to keep sinners from
discouragement, and prompt them to -- constancy in seeking after salvation, is
to persuade them that they really grow better, and may hope, by their further
increase in goodness, to obtain the favor they need, (p. 120.) After much more
to this purpose in the same spirit of false representation, you become so
inflamed with your own imaginations as to cry out in a transport of absur^
zeal, Such is Mr. H's religion, such his views of the way of salvation by
Christ, (p. 122.) Doctor, if you had spoken the language of truth in your
exclamation, you would have said Such is the religion I have palmed upon Mr. H.
though he never taught it, such are the views I give of his notions concerning
the way of salvation by Christ, though he has not given the same himself, nor any
thing like them: But I am wrathful mad with him for censuring some of my false
doctrines, and see every thing he says, in a wrong light. -- You proceed thus,
No word that I know of can sufficiently describe the wickedness, impiety and
absurdity of this opinion, except those of St. Paul, Gal. 1 8, 9. But if we, or
an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel than that we have preached, let
him be accursed. If we ever discover zeal, surely it may be shown on an
occasion lik^ this, (p. 122. Doctor, you are like a bear bereaved of h^ whelps:
But be calm, I beseech you; stand still and consider In your folly you have
cast the apostolic curse at my head, be have taken your aim wrong. You only
curse your own misrepresentations. I have not taught, nor believed the
scandalous doctrines you curse me for: you cannot support your charge: you
greatly abuse both me and your readers. The wine you here set before the
churches, is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.

I have critically re examined the pages you refer to and find nothing that
gives the least hint of the wicked doctrines you charge me with. I verily
believe, if you was to be prosecuted before the church for defamation, as you
justly might be, you would be wholly at a loss what passages in the dialogue to
fix upon for your justification, and might as easily support your charge by
quoting these words of our Lord, Men shall revile you, and speak all manner of
evil against you, falsely, as by any thing I said.

I censured some of yours and Mr. Hopkin's corrupt doctrines, and now you have
executed an unrighteous and unmanly revenge. The doctrines I opposed to your
errors, rightly understood, are above just censure. You could make no figure in
opposing them, as fairly stated. You have declined the combat on this ground,
and thereby implicitly justified my doctrine. You have brought upon the stage a
set of doctrines which are no more mine than those of yours that I opposed,
doctrines really very bad; and pretending you had found them in my dialogue,
raise a loud cry against me as an abominable heretic, and most dangerous,
wicked man, and endeavor to alarm the churches. But they have no great cause of
fear from this quarter: Your imaginary heresies will do them no harm, unless
they believe them real. -- Doctor, has Caiaphas been in your counsel? Have you
heard the outcry against Paul the great heretic? Away with such a fellow from
the earth; for it is not fit that he should live -- They threw dust into the
air. -- You have thrown dust into your readers eyes.

I observe, Doctor, you renew many of Mr. Hopkins's trifling complaints, as his
echo. Among others, you speak of my writing against one of his doctrines before
I had seen his book, and his defense of it, not then published, and apply these
words, He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame
unto him, (p. 129) Doctor, you knew I had seen all I remarked upon, and more.
And I understood, and fairly represented the doctrine. But you, after having my
dialogue in your hands many months, have undertaken to answer it, and yet
appear not to have understood it, and have essentially misrepresented my
doctrines, and foolishly wasted your time, and diverted your readers, by
attacking the creatures of your own imagination. This, Doctor, is answering a
matter before it is heard, according to the true sense of the proverb.

You say, Doctor, I appear angry, in my letter to Mr. Hopkins. I was not angry,
in the sense you intend; nor am I with you. But I saw his great unfairness,
perverse misrepresentations, and want of honor in his writing; and see the same
in yours, and in a higher degree. I resent such things, and have a ju^
abhorrence and contempt of them; and hope you will see them in a true light,
and abhor them in yourself, and renounce them forever. If you do, you will
honor yourself in the eyes of the wise and good.

VI. Suffer me, Doctor, to turn your eye upon another object. You quote me as
saying, Is the present frame of human nature such, so totally inverted that God
is ha^ed as being thus excellent and morally perfect? Are righteousness,
equity, goodness, kindness, etc. hateful in our view of them, till we are new
made? If so, doubtless we naturally approve the contrary vices; they are
beautiful, excellent, and amiable characters, in our view of them, (D. p 16) To
this you answer, ' Doubtless this is true. What absurdity then is this? Do not
unregenerate men view and taste a beauty, amiableness and sweetness in these
contrary vices? Do they not roll iniquity as a sweet morsel under their tongue?
Do they not take pleasure in unrighteousness? (p 70) Yes Doctor, they sometimes
do, for the sake of the profit and advantage they make by it for the
gratification of their lusts; as Balaam ran greedily after the wages of
unrighteousness. But they never take pleasure in it for its own sake, as what
is, in its own nature, beautiful, amiable and sweet, in their view and taste of
it. Vicious men's love of unrighteousness, like their hatred to righteousness,
is an interested, partial affection, and directly inconsistent with their
natural, moral sense or taste; which pronounces these things evil, and worthy
to be hated. Doctor, you discover very wrong notions of moral nature, and talk
as one that has never made any observations on human nature, as discovered in
life, but has taken up his notions of it only from imagination and arbitrary
conjecture, just as the old philosophers did their philosophic doctrines.
Doctor, I am deceived in you. I really thought my questions, and the inference
from the affirmation of them, would have stumbled you: I am half discouraged
about you, and should be wholly, but that I consider you wrote this in the heat
of your spirit; so I hope now you are calm, you will give a wiser answer.

VII. Doctor, I observe you here and there touch upon the doctrine of total
depravity, and say, that I sometimes seem to own the doctrine, and at other
times to deny it. The controversy I had against you, in my dialogue, respected
the nature and source of the enmity of vicious beings against God, not the
extent of moral corruption: so I said nothing particularly upon this, as I
remember. The subject did not lead me to it, or at least, I did not apprehend
that it did. In my letter to Mr. Hopkins p 5, 6, note, I stated what I
apprehended to be the sentiments of the most moderate Calvinists relating to
the general doctrine of total corruption and declared my agreement therein. I
believe I have said nothing, either in the dialogue or letter, so determinate
relating to my thoughts upon that subject. My words are these, viz. The most
moderate believe that the grand principle of true piety, and heavenly virtue is
dead, and its root (by which I mean the true knowledge and love of God) perished
in the hearts of fallen men, and that it cannot be revived, but by a new
plantation of the sacred seed sent down from heaven, by Jesus Christ, and
planted in the heart by the gracious influences of the holy Spirit and
supernatural grace of God, administered by the gospel, (not without the word of
truth. Doctor, as you teach; God forbid that I should say so) and that there
are certain seeds of sin in the hearts of all men, or natural principles and
springs of action, which, left to themselves, uncontrouled and ungoverned by
grace will infallibly produce actual sin, and bring forth fruit unto death, and
that some or other of the passions or lusts of sin have, in fact the ascendant
in every heart of man till the heavenly seed of virtue or true holiness is
planted by the spirit of grace. All this is undoubtedly true. -- This, Doctor,
is my belief: you may receive it upon the testimony of an honest man. Whether
you will call it a belief of total, or partial corruption, little concerns me.

I observe you tell your readers that in my letter to Mr. Hopkins I discover a
great concern to be thought a Calvinist. Some o^s, Doctor, have though it I showed
a good deal of indifference what you call me. I should choose indeed to have my
sentiments tr^ represented by gentlemen who undertake to tell the churches who
I believe and teach. If they would do me this justice they might give them what
name they please. No honest man will desire greater liberty than this.

Doctor, you express a desire to know what I mean by moral corruption. I mean
by it a disorder o^ irregularity in the tendency, direction and exercise of the
moral faculties and passions, which is justly chargeable on the agent as his
fault, his misuse or abuse of the moral powers and passions God has planted in
his nature, or deviation from the moral law which is adapted to moral nature as
the rule to which its motions and exercises ought of night to be conformed. --
As you represent the matter, the fundamental fault or disorder of human nature
is not of the moral kind If a man, through some wrongness or defect in his
natural relish, cannot taste any agreeable sweetness in honey, but loathes it,
this is no fault in him, and a law requiring him to be pleased with its taste,
would be a very unjust and immoral law. And if human nature is so framed that
men have naturally no capacity of seeing any moral excellence, or of tasting
any thing amiable and worthy of esteem and honor in God's character, and in
moral truth, be the mind ever so much enlightened, but these objects appear
ugly and hateful in themselves; this is not a moral corruption, for which the
man is blameable, but a physical wrongness in the natural constitution of human
nature. Your doctrine says this is the character of human nature. You say,
Unregenerate men cannot see God's beauty and excellency -- they do not see the
beauty and excellency of God's perfections -- unregenerate men can never see
this, (i. e. as I suppose you mean, in any degree, through any inlightning they
are capable of, till after they are new made by a physical operation upon them,
without the word of truth. You add) They may, and often do see those
perfections that compose that character that is beautiful in itself, such as
his power, righteousness, etc. -- They see the true character of God, (i. e. if
I understand you, they see him to be most wise, righteous, true, faithful,
good, merciful,) 'but they see no beauty in him,' (i. e. no moral excellence in
these perfections of God) for that which renders him beautiful to all holy
beings, even that is the object of their hatred; and if so, then the beauty of
God's character is the thing they hate, (p. 69, note) That is, as you most be
understood, they see the wisdom, righteousness, truth, goodness and
compassionate good will of God to be what the^ are; they see him to be most
wise, equitable, true, good and gracious, and as such they hate him, for these
are hateful things in their view, and taste bitter as gall, and are their
abomination. If God appeared to them under the character of a foolish, false,
unjust, cruel tyrant, they would love him and esteem him very beautiful, and
full of excellency, and adore him, and exalt his name with praise. Whence is
this, Doctor? You say such a false taste and monstrous hatred is interwove in
the very frame of the heart of man, ever since the fall. Doctor, I must tell
you again, you make man look much worse than a devil -- But let us hear you
further. You say, p. 70, note, No excellency, viewed as such, ever was, or can
be hated: but then I AFFIRM human nature is so totally inverted, that it can
discern no moral excellency in God, -- till it is renewed; and if ever the
unrenewed sinner sees any beauty in a God, it is in one formed to suit his own
depraved taste, and not in the true God. This is such a total inversion of
human nature as wholly destroys its character as moral. If your account of
human nature is true, its corruption is not of the moral kind; and men are
under a natural, physical impossibility of loving God, or ceasing to hate him,
till their hearts are physically changed, and endowed with a new moral faculty
or taste, which is now wanting. These hints are more enlarged upon in my piece
in answer to Mr. Edwards on the nature of virtue. -- Doctor, I am sorry to see
your understanding so inverted, and your tho'ts so confounded as that you
mistake darkness for light. By your doctrine you subvert the foundation and
obligation of natural religion, so far as natural men have any concern therein.
And the kingdom of God, or gospel dispensation, according to your doctrine, is
as a man who made a great feast of sugared and honey'd things, and sent forth
his servants to invite and bring in to his feast, all his vassals, who, through
some fault in the natural construction of their organs of taste, known to him,
and wholly incurable by them, hate and abhor these things, requiring them to
taste his provisions with good relish and delight; and because they nauseate,
and so refuse to eat them, he sends forth his army and destroys them all, as a
company of ungrateful, rebellious miscreants; except a few, whom he
miraculously works a physical change upon, giving them a new gust. You will say
the cases are not similar, because the sinner's antipathy is of his heart or
will. But remember, it is, according to you, a natural, inwro't, incurable
antipathy to things morally good, as such; a natural, essential wrongness and
inversion of the moral taste, incurable, but by God's physical power. There is
no moral faultiness in either: The cases are similar. -- Doctor, I cannot endure
that abominable blasphemy against the gospel of God which is the necessary
result of your doctrines. I wonder you don't see it: I hope you will by the
time you have read, and thoroughly weighed all that I write to you, and make no
delay to renounce them with just abhorrence, and cast them to the moles and to
the bats. I said, D. p. 45. Human nature is so weakened and corrupted since the
fall, that men neither will nor can so believe and realize gospel truth, as to
be renewed by its influence, unless the Spirit of truth accompany the word and
speak it, as it were, to the heart, and impress it by his powerful energy. You
say this doctrine is as liable to the charge of consequential blasphemy against
God and the gospel of Jesus Christ, as yours; and that yours can be vindicated
from this charge as easily and fully as mine, p 110, 111. -- Doctor, you labor
under a very great mistake in this. The gospel is a ministration of
supernatural truth and grace, fitted in its nature to work in the mind as a
vital seed, and sacred leaven; and the mind of man is naturally capable of
being influenced and changed or spiritualized by it, when firmly believed and
realized. The holy Spirit of God accompanies this ministration of the word of
life, with some degree of his influence, as a common grace If sinners improve
this, and the outward helps they have by the gospel, as far as they are
improvable by them I believe he will crown his common influence with special
and effectual, leading them on to saving faith, and so regenerate them: If they
do not, but continually resist and rebel against the motions of the Spirit, and
so provoke God to withdraw his Spirit and give them up to final blindness and
hardness of heart, the grace of the gospel is vindicated, and they perish as
despisers of it. This belief is consistent with my doctrine above.
Don't you remember the words of the apostle, (Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.) Those who have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, (i. e. of the
gospel dispensation) if they shall fall away, etc. implying that a man may have
an approving moral taste of the truth and moral excellency of the gospel, in
some degree, though his heart is not thoroughly attached to it. -- But I think
you may be convinced out of your own mouth. You say (p. 75) Mr. H. and I agree
in this, That there is in all moral beings as such, a faculty of distinguishing
between moral good and evil. -- Surely you don't mean a faculty of discerning
moral good to be right and righteous, and that for this very reason it appears
to men an ugly and hateful object; and a faculty of discerning moral evil to be
wrong and unrighteous, and that, viewing it in this true light, men naturally
esteem it a beautiful, amiable object, and love it as such. This is not a
faculty of distinguishing, but of inverting and confounding moral good and
evil. At this rate you make the faculty of distinguishing moral good and evil a
perfect magic glass, which shows objects inverted and distorted; and represent
the moral nature of man, as bewitched, as much as the children of the scarlet
whore are, by her witchcrafts and sorceries practiced upon them -- Doubtless
you mean here Doctor, to agree with me in acknowleging that by this moral
faculty, the mind of man, discerning a real difference between moral good and
evil, perceives the one to be right, amiable, and worthy of esteem and honor,
and the other wrong worthy of moral h^ed and blame. You should lay this as your
foundation principle and reject all your imaginations which don't agree with
it, if you would be a good moral philosopher, metaphy^cian o^ divine. It is
every where taken for granted in the holy scriptures.

VIII. You quote me as saying. No man ever and speak evil of God's ways,
viewing them as they truly are, a^ equitable and good. Upon this you say, If he
meant seeing their beauty, I readily own i^ (p 132.) I mean, Doctor, seeing
them to be equitable and good. This is not what raises the sinner's hatred to
them, but his perceiving their opposition to his lusts, which he refuses to
give up; and because he cannot but approve them, as viewed in this light, he
perversely misrepresents them as unequal, that he may with some color vent the
malignity of his heart in speaking evil of them -- As to beauty the moral
beauty or excellency of equity consists in its equitableness, the beauty of
goodness in its goodness, the beauty of justice in its justness, of wisdom in
its prudence, so of all other moral perfections. Their moral excellency
consists in their being what they are. The beauty or moral excellency of God's
character consists in, or is the result of all moral and mental perfections, as
united in him, and most harmoniously exercised, all as one. This collection of
moral and mental beauties, all in the highest perfection of their nature, forms
a character, whose light and glory fill the universe, and is the wonder and joy
of all the sons of wisdom, in all worlds. Honor and majesty are before him:
strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

But you. Doctor, give us no distinct Ideas of what you mean by moral beauty,
and the moral excellency of God's character: perhaps you have none. You
doubtless mean something wholly of a different kind from that kind of beauty I
mentioned above: for you say, men may see those perfections that compose that
character that is beautiful in itself, yea, see that very character of God
which is the perfection of beauty, and yet not see its beauty, nor have the
least glimpse or idea of its true moral excellency. And all your writers talk
in the same strain. This, Doctor, is a downright contradiction: and you have no
way to escape but by essentially changing the idea of moral beauty, and
introducing a new and imaginary notion of moral excellency, and placing virtue
on a false foundation. This is what Mr. Edwards has done in his dissertation on
the nature of true virtue. Doubtless you have adopted his distinction between
the primary and secondary beauty of moral things and characters. The beauty I
spoke of above, I suppose you would call after him, a secondary beauty,
altogether of the same kind with the beauty of a chess board, or piece of
beautifully slower'd chints or brocade, which, consider^d simply in itself, has
nothing of the nature of true virtue and moral beauty in it, any more than
those things have; and that you would say, all moral excellency, or true moral
beauty consists in what he calls the primary beauty of moral things, which is
entirely of a different nature or kind, and which no unregenerate man can see,
which the moral sense cannot taste, and has no relish for.

This I suppose to be your secret meaning; though for some reason or other, you
don't clearly explain yourselves. This is the key which explains your
mysterious talk about seeing the perfections and character of God without
discerning any thing of their moral beauty or excellency. But I don't enlarge
here, having particularly examined these notions, and shown them to be
arbitrary and false, in my remarks on that piece of Mr. Edwards's.

You say, Doctor, a perception of beauty is love, or necessarily engages it.
No, it necessarily engages the mind to approve the object as amiable and worthy
to be loved. Indeed the perception of the moral beauty of God's character may
be so full, clear and realizing as to draw the heart off from all its
adulterous loves, and fix it on God. He can give such a sense. But the views
men generally have of God's moral excellency and glory, are so imperfect,
obscure and unrealizing, that they don't draw the heart to the choice of him,
in preference to all other objects of desire.

IX. In your seventh sect. Doctor, I observe you endeavor to persuade your
readers that my scheme of doctrines agrees with Mr. Sandeman's. If I was to
take the same liberty in altering your doctrines, as you do in respect to mine,
I could make you appear to agree with the author of Christianity not founded on
argument. I need not pervert some of them half so much as you do mine, to give
such an appearance. It Is an avowed and leading principle in your scheme, that
the moral change of the heart is not founded on argument, nor effected by any
influence of gospel light and truth upon either the understanding or will. But
if I should spend five or six pages in making out this agreement, you would
think it but an ungracious business. You ought to think your own so. -- Your
scheme nearly agrees with Sandeman's, in many things, though you differ from him
in some. For this reason I sometimes loosely called your scheme Sandemanian, as
it then had no distinguishing name. But as it has since gained the name of
Hopkintonian, which is more proper, I am content that the other should be no
more applied.

You say, In support of his (Mr ^s) notion he quotes these words, We love him
because he first loved us. This, he thinks, proves that when the sinner sees
God's character, not only as amiable in itself, -- but also how it bears a
be^ign aspect on his happiness, then he will love God to good purpose.
Sandeman's scheme to perfection, who says, the gospel reconciles men to the
just God, by showing him to be a SAVIOR. p. 124. I should not have taken any
notice of this, had you not hereby thrown infamous contempt on the gospel of
Jesus Christ. Every reader will see at once, that you treat the sentiments you
offer as mine and Sandeman's with contempt. In this you have despised not man
but God You might as well have cried out, The gospel scheme to perfection. This
though it, The gospel reconciles men to the just God, by showing him to be a
savior, runs through the whole gospel, and is its distinguishing glory, and that
which merits and gives it the name of gospel or good news. It was a
manifestation and sight of the just God as a SAVIOR that revived the
despairing hearts of your poor first parents, and reconciled them to God, and
melted their hearts into filial repentance. But for this, you, if you had ever
seen the light of life, would have been a poor, forsaken, miserable wretch It
was by showing the just God a savior that the apostles of Jesus Christ
ministerially reconciled the world. This is their voice which cries in city
and country, and through the world God was, in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them -- Now then -- We beseech you,
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God: for he has made him sin for us
-- that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Every sinner that
ever was, is, or shall be reconciled to God, is reconciled by seeing the just
God a savior. Doctor, I readily agree with you, and Sandeman too, wherein you
agree with the truth; for I have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
respect to persons, but to the truth. But I am very far from approving either
your scheme or his; for both run wide of the line of truth. The father of error
knows how to turn both to his advantage.

X. In your 8th section, Doctor, you endeavor to prove by a number of
quotations from old writers, that your divinity is not new. I never though it or
said that all the doctrines you gentlemen, in the new scheme teach, are new;
but some of them are. Mr. Hopkins calls them 'an improvement of sound
Calvinism.' If instead of improvement, he had said a corruption, he would have
come nearer the truth -- Before the dialogue appeared, your fra^ernity swel^ed
a ^le in the though it of your having made ^me new discoveries, and further
improvements. Now you seem willing to give up this glory and end ^o^ to shelter
yourselves under the wings of a number of old ^ines. But they are too narrow
wholly to cover your nakedness. -- Some of the old divines talk^d of a physi^al
operation of the Spirit in generating the sinner, and distinguish between
active and p^ssive conversion: But in the pa^ss^e pa^ wherein the Spirit is the
agent and ^he mind the patient they generally, it not always include the
c^mmunication of a saving illumination of the understanding, together with a
change of the bent of the will D. VanMa^i^t is very exp^icit in this; so is the
We^n ins^e^ assembly. Mr Edwards, whom you glory in as your pa^ron and
justifier, condemns you, while he says, 'Whatever is a motive,' (i. e to choice
or vo^ition) must be something that is extant in the view or apprehension of
the understanding or perceiving faculty. Nothing can induce or inv^e the ^in^
to will or act any thing, any further than it is perceived, or is some way or
other in the mind's view; for what is wholly unfe^cerved and perfectly out of
the mind's view, cannot affect the mind ^t all. (on the will, p. 8.) This is a
maxim of true philosophic and metaphysic science.

Doctor, you quote these words from my Dialogue, with an introduction worthy of
yourself; All judicious Calvinist divines, who understand themselves,
constantly ass^rt that conversion or regeneration is wro^t by light, by the
moral power of divine truth and love, as believ^d and realized On this you say.
If this is true it follows, either (1) that the Westminster assembly of
divines, and others I have quoted, were not Calvinists or (2) did not
understand themselves. (p 151) Suppose Doctor, I should grant you the second,
would this be a betraying the foundation of our faith? But I presume you did
not fully understand, either me or them, when you wrote this: be this as it
will You add, I think Mr H greatly misrepresents and injures the Calvinists in
the above assertion, though I acknowledge that many who are sound in other points
generally called Calvinistic have run into this opinion; particularly the Rev.
JONATHAN DICKISSON on the five points -- By running I suppose you m^an
departing from the true Calvinistic doctrine, relating to this point. If this
is your meaning. it is you that have run, not they that you complain of, Calvin
himself hold and taught the doctrine you represent as the doctrine of the
runaways. Speaking of the inward teaching of the holy Spirit, accompanying the
outward teaching by the word, and rendering that effectual, he says, In vain
should the light show itself to the blind, unless the same spirit of
understanding should open the eyes of their mind: so as a man may rightly call
the Holy Spirit the key by which the treasures of the heavenly kingdom are
opened unto us; and may call his enlightening the eye sight of our mind to see.
Therefore does Paul so much commend the ministry of the Spirit, because
teachers should cry without profiting, unless Christ himself, the inward
master, should draw them by his Spirit. -- Therefore, as we have said that
perfect salvation is found in the person of Christ; so, that we may be made
partakers thereof, he does baptize us in the holy Spirit -- lightening us into
the faith of his gospel and SO NEW BEGETTING US, that we may renew creatures.
(see his Institutions, b. 3 ch 1. at the close I here use Norton's
translation.) You may see much more to the same purpose in the two next
chapters I give you two or three passages. As for them that think that
repentance does rather go before says, than slow or spring forth of it, as a
fruit out of a tree, they never knew the force thereof, and are moved with too
weak an argument to think so. (ibid. chapter 3 art. 1.) By repentance, here, he
tells us he means to include regeneration, or the renewal of the heart after
the image of God, as well as the consequent change of life. After discoursing
upon this some time, he says, in the 9th article of this chap In one word, I
expound repentance to be regeneration, which has no other mark whereunto it is
directed, but that the image of God, which was, by Adam's offense, foully
defaced, and in a manner wholly blotted out, may be renewed in us. So the
apostle teaches when he says, But we representing (beholding) the glory of
God, wi^h uncovered face, are transformed into the same image, out of glory
into glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord (Here, Doctor, by the way, you may
observe that Calvin understood and applied this text just as I did in the
dialogue. You may take this as an answer to your impertinent remarks upon my
use of it, if you please)

Doctor, you see these passages from Calvin are directly in point. Was Calvin a
sound Calvinist? If he was (and you cannot deny this, without bringing the laugh
of the world upon yourself) I am clearly justified in saying, all sound
Calvinist divines, who understand themselves, constantly assert that conversion
or regeneration is wro't by light, by the moral power of divine truth and love,
as believed and realized, and have not injured them at all: and Mr. Dickinson
and other Calvinists, who, you say, are run into this opinion, and become
unsound Calvinists in this point, have not run at all, but think and teach, in
this, just as you see Calvin did. You Doctor, and your brethren in the new
scheme are the runaways You are convicted out of your own mouth; for you tell
us. p. 151, that in your younger years you was of Mr. Dickinson's opinion, but
his doctrine always appeared confused. Your new opinion, for the sake of which
you have given up the other, is confusion itself, and if it prevails will
spread darkness over the face of the churches; and yet you are sensible of no
confusion here. How is this to be accounted for?

You mention Van Mastricht as one who justifies your new doctrines. I have seen
the extracts from him lately published He clearly condemns you, Doctor. He
says, Regeneration is a second and spiritual generation, in which the soul
receives spiritual life. The father in this case is God -- the seed is the word
of God -- received by the external call of the Gospel, (p. 17) Doctor, you say
this seed, thus received into the mind of the unregenerate, only inflames
enmity against God; that this change is ^ought without any influence of gospel
truth upon the heart. In this, you see your witness condemns you. Doctor, can
this word be the generating seed of the new creature, and yet the generator
make no use of it, not apply it at all to the heart, in the generating act?
Mastricht also says, This spiritual life, which he calls the immediate effect
of the generating act, animates the whole man, and all the several parts and
faculties of him. -- As it takes place in the understanding, it is called --
spiritual light, and the bestowment of it by regeneration, is called
illumination; -- which light begets in them the saving knowledge of God and the
Mediator, (p 25) This, Doctor, is wholly inconsistent with your new doctrine,
which says, regeneration is wro't without light, and before saving
illumination. In this you are condemned by the scriptures and condemned by
these old writers, to whom you now appeal.

You Gentlemen, by the many quotations you have heaped upon us, from former
writers, have gained two things; first, a proof that some great and good men
before you have though it obscurely, and talked inconsistently, as you also do.
Secondly, That those who approached nearest to you in doctrine, retained so
much truth as clearly to condemn your leading doctrines, and themselves too,
wherein they seem to favor you. -- So that, upon the whole, I think, Doctor,
you must be content to bear the glory of having made some new discoveries, and
' further improvements in Calvinism.' But whence is it that all the errors you
run into are sound Calvinism, and all the truths which let or withstand them,
are Arminianism?

XI. Doctor, I observe that though you sometimes tell your readers what I must
mean by the moral power of the Spirit, moral force, energy, influence, yet at
other times you profess yourself at a loss, and demand of me what I mean by
these and such like phrases. Some others, I perceive, have been in doubt here.
-- To satisfy you and them, I will tell you in a few words By moral power,
force, etc. I intend that kind of influence upon the mind, which is fitted, in
its nature, to produce the designed moral effects or changes, motions or
actions in the mind, as a moral agent. This, you will say, is too general: I
will explain, only take the ideas already suggested, right. -- There is a power
in strong delusions, an efficacy and energy in the spirit of error upon minds
prepared to receive it: but it is not of the physical kind. 2 These. 2.9 -- 11.
And there is a divine power in sacred truth, and a mighty acting force and
energy in divine beauty and love, as applying themselves to, or exerting their
power upon the mind. 'Love is strong as 'death. Cant. 8.6.
'The love of Christ constrains us.' 2 Cor. 5.14.
This power and strength and constraining force is of the moral kind, adapted
in its nature to influence moral agents.

I will now consider the moral power and energy of the holy Spirit, exerted in
morally changing and turning the heart of the sinner from his sin unto God, or
regenerating him. He applies himself to him, for this purpose, in a manner
suited to his nature as a moral being: He presents the quickening truth to the
view of the understanding, or perceiving faculty, and holds it so before the
eye of the mind, and impresses the object with such force, as awakens and fixes
the attention of the mind and by his inward teaching and influence, causes the
mind to see the object as it is, as a real, existing thing, not as an
imagination or mere probability, and as vastly great, excellent, interesting
and important. The truth, or object, thus presented to the view of the
understanding, and entered into the mind by the Spirit of God, is now felt by
the mind in its true weight, and exer^s its moral, constraining force upon the
heart; and being seen and sensed as so infinitely superior, every way, to all
contrary objects, it sweetly and powerfully commands the choice of the will,
attracts and fixes the love of the heart, and engages all the moral passions.
The mind and heart is now morally changed, by a moral power, operation and
energy of the Spirit and truth of God -- I know, Doctor, what you are now
objecting about moral su^sion, unless your present tho'ts are clearer and
juster than they were when you wrote against me: but carry your tho'ts a little
further, first. -- What is this quickening truth, this attracting object,
which, by the ministry of the holy Spirit, is thus bro^t to the view of the
mind, and entered into the heart, and so holly and happily captivates it? It is
God revealed to sinners in Christ, and reconciling them to himself by him. And
when he vouchsafes to make himself thus present to the mind, by his Spirit he
does reconci^e and draw the heart to himself: He is in Christ our center; and
now his divine, moral, attracting force is exerted upon the mind, felt, and
answered by a returning moral motion, tendency and earnest attraction of the
heart toward him -- Doctor you are hunting about in the dark after some latent
principle or spring of this motion or attraction of the heart to God As an
unknown substratum of all these new and holy motions or actings of the soul;
and pretend this is first formed by a creating physical act: but this unknown
something, is really nothing. The soul, as a moral being, is naturally capable
of feeling the impression of God upon it, of being attracted by him, and
answering this felt attraction, by an attraction to him. Gods attracting force
impressed and felt, is the thing that puts the mind in motion t^nding to him,
and controuls and stops its contrary motions to evil objects. In this way he
causes this first beginning motion of the heart toward him; which is the
beginning of holiness in man. You are as unphilosophical in your notion of a
new, holy principle in the heart, prior to the first holy motion of the heart
toward God, and as the imagined cause or secret spring of this first motion,
as you would be if you should say, there must be a new principle of particular
motion put into bodies, before any force exerted upon them can put them in such
motion, or alter the direction of their former motion and reverse it.

Doctor, to talk of a moral change, wro't by a physical operation, as
preceding all this, and preparing the heart to be influenced by the truth and
presence of God in the mind, as you gentlemen do, is to tell of a moral change
preceding itself, or of a moral change which leaves the understanding, will
and moral passions unchanged, unaffected not touched or moved at all; which is
no moral change. Motives presented to the view of the mind, Mr. Edwards says,
are what move the will, and that without the influence of motives, the will
cannot act or choose any thing, one way of another. A physical operation, without
presenting any object of motive to holy volition, to the view of the mind,
cannot then produce a moral change in the heart, or give a new, holy turn and
disposition to the will and moral passions, any more than motives, or moral
force can wind up a watch that is run down, and give it new motion. I observe,
Doctor, you say, Mr. H. makes faith preceed regeneration, and an efficient
cause of it; or, at least, he supposes it makes men fit subjects of it. p. 140.
Neither of the two: you had no warrant to say so. But you was here endeavoring
to persuade your reader that my principles agree with Mr. Sandeman's: and it
was necessary that you should say things that look that way, though I did not.
You say again, p 162, He ascribes faith to the unregenerate. If you mean that
they may have saving faith and yet remain unregenerate, you bear false witness
I neither believe this, nor your contrary doctrine, that a man may be
regenerate and yet have no faith, for some time after it. Faith preceeds
regeneration in the same sense as a man's entering by the door (Christ is the
door) preceeds his being in the fold among the sheep, and one of them. -- You
also say, It is my opinion, that regeneration is effected by objective light,
p. 128, and by moral suasion. I used neither of these phrases. I don't very
well like them: they are become of doubtful signification to most readers, by
being used in different senses.


I must take a little notice of one thing more, before I dismiss this subject.
I observed in the dialogu^ (p. 45, note) that power may be distinguished into
two kinds, physical and moral, that the Spirit of God is possessed of both, and
exerts the one or the other, as he wills to produce a change of the moral or
physical kind Upon this you say, Did ever any one besides Mr. H. imagine that
the same almighty power could not produce effects of entirely different
natures? (No, Doctor, nor he neither. Did not the same power produce fire and
water, the souls and bodies of men? (p. 135) Yes, Doctor, it did. But what is
all this to the purpose? These are, none of them, effects of the moral kind, in
the sense of the phrase as I used it. And besides, you mistake about the
distinction of power, into moral and physical. The distinction don't lie in the
degrees of strength. Both are almighty, as in God; and have, when he pleases to
exert them fully, an irresistible force. But the distinction consists in this,
Gods moral power, in act, is his exertion of the force of moral truth upon
moral beings, upon their moral faculties, giving motion to them, or springing
them into such right, moral action as God wills or commands in his law. These
moral faculties are fitted, by the original constitution of intelligent minds
or moral ha^ur^, to be thus acted upon, influenced and put in motion or action,
by God's exertion of this kind of power or force upon them -- By physical
power, as distinguished from what I call moral I mean that kind of exertion of
the powerful will of God, whereby he produces the designed effects, without any
communication and impression of the light and force of truth upon the object I
don't know, Doctor, whether I express myself with strict propriety; but I hope
you take my ideas. And is there not a foundation, in the nature of things, for
such a kind of distinction? Does God give motion to the heavenly bodies, and
direct and govern their motions, by the same kind of influence and operation o^
force exerted upon them, as that by which he communicates moral motion to the
minds of his holy angels, and di^ects, influences and governs their moral and
holy actions and exercises? Does he manifest his glory and beauty to the sun,
and give it to know his will, and thereby touch an inward moral spring, and so
cause it to rejoice, with understanding, to run its race, and know the time of
its rising and going down? A stream of water falling upon the water wheel, with
a degree of force superior to the resistance, will set the mill in motion: and
a stream of gospel light stowing from the fountain of light, and falling upon
the mind of a sinner, with a degree of force superior to his resistance, will
powerfully compel him to believe; and a blaze of moral beauty, and flow of
divine love into his heart, made manifest by the light which shines within him,
will powerfully draw she heart to God, and kindle the sire of sacred love to
him. Is the force exerted upon the mill, of the same kind with that exerted
upon the moral being? Doctor, do you exert the same kind of power or force in
giving motion to a ball, as in communicating motion to the mind, will and
passions of a man? The common people understand the distinction well enough,
though perhaps their ideas are not connected with the terms I used to express it.
Nothing is more familiar with them than such expressions as these; a strong
man, a man of a strong arm strong arguments, strong reasonings; such a man
preaches powerfully, another fights powerfully They know how to distinguish
here, two different kinds of power, strength and action I wonder, Doctor, you
was at a loss You say, I wish Mr H. would tell us what he means by the moral
power of ^he Spirit, etc. This phrase, to me, appears quite unintelligible and
to be words without ideas. (p 134, 135. note.) Perhaps I did not sufficiently
explain myself; but I though it you would have understood me. The ideas I
communicated relating to these matters, appear to have been new to you, and so
you did not clearly apprehend them, and imagined I had no clearer ideas of
these things than you received in reading the dialogue. It was with you, as
with the man whose eyes were partly opened; he saw man as trees walking I hope.
Sir, you see these things in a clear light now.

XII. I observe, Doctor, you begin to adopt m^ doctrine concerning the nature
and source of the sinners enmity to God and righteousness. You say, (p. 99)
'Enmity' (^e of sinners against God) is not the less wicked and hateful,
because it is interested and partial; for its wickedness lies in its being so.
I can conceive of no wicked enmity, but such as is interested. Such was the
enmity of Cain to Abel; of Esau to Jacob; of Saul to David: and for this reason
it was very wicked. You add, and because selfshness is innate, therefore this
enmity is so too. (This last clause I may consider presently) In the preceding
you assert the same doctrine that I advanced relating to this enmity; only you
insinuate to your re^ders that your notion is essentially different from mine,
in this, that you make the wickedness of this enmity to consist in its being
interested and partial, whereas I considered this as an extenuation of its
faultiness. And this you expressly assert, p 91, where you say. He (Mr H) would
have the sinner know that he is not chargeable with any great fault on account
of this enmity. He calls it, by way of extenuation, an interested, partial
affection, an unnatural passion that does violence to the moral sense planted
in the mind by the hand of the Creator. You here refer to p 57, 58 D^ for your
justification: but it wholly condemns you These are my words, p 58. This enmity
to God is an interested, unnatural passion, and does violence to the moral
sense planted in the mind by the hand of the C^eator; and herein l^es the great
malignity of wilful sin. ^e in the sinner's wilfully sinning against his
conscience or moral sense of what is right, for the sake of his lusts -- What
you tell your readers is in direct opposition to what I said; it is an absolute
falsehood. I think you could not but know it to be so; for you quoted the words
immediately preceding this clause and certainly you have sense enough to see
the opposition between your proposition and mine: It is a very injurious
falsehood -- I could mention a great number of instances wherein you are guilty
of the same kind of sin. You seem, Doctor to have set yourself down to defame
your brother as much as you could, and to have founded your piece against me
upon this maxim of the worst policy, 'Throw dirt plentifully, some will stick.'
By this method of defense, you confess your cause bad. Error can only be
defended by falsehood and misrepresentation. You certainly harkened to very bad
advice and wrote under a very evil influence. I advise you to confess with
David -- When you do, I desire you may hear the same reviving answer.

Now, Doctor, a word or two upon the last clause quoted above, viz. And because
selfishness is innate, therefore this enmity is so too. In this you make this
enmity, not a primary or original passion of human nature, but a secondary
passion only, a consequence and result of one particular wrong affection,
selfishness; you make it so in the order of nature at least.

By selfishness, I suppose, Doctor, you mean more than self-love, or a general
desire of our own good and happiness. I presume you mean by it a vicious and
irregular direction and exercise of the natural passion of love to ourselves or
desire of our own good; a setting up self as the supreme object of our regard,
subordinating God's interest and honor to self, and such a foolish regard to
little self as disposes to trample upon truth, equity and honor, for the sake
of little and false self interests. If this is what you mean by selfishness, it
is a very vicious passion; and enmity to those persons and things that stand in
its way, very easily and naturally arises out of it. And when this monster is
provoked, he lays about him with fury: no weapon comes amiss to him by which he
may offend the objects of his hatred, and defend and avenge dear self. Hence
come wars and fightings, reviling, lying, cursing, blasphemy, or giving false
and injurious characters. This was the true source of all the malicious
falsehoods spoken against our Savior and his apostles. And he foretells that
the same spirit which called the master of the house B^elz^bub will call those
of his household so. -- But you are mistaken. Doctor, if you think all this
innate. The general passion, or principle of self love or desire of our own
good is indeed so. But this, in itself, simply considered, is not evil; the
wrong direction, and irregular and excessive motions of it, only are so. This
is the effect of the wrong ideas and imaginations we receive, and the wrong
judgments we make concerning ourselves and our own good and interest after we
come upon the stage. Indeed, if man is left to himself he will infallibly be
misled his natural p^ssions will take a wrong direction, and fix on wrong
objects: he will be corrupt, wicked and miserable. Nothing but the teaching,
spirit and grace of God can prevent this, and guide the young creature right,
and give a right direction to the natural passions, and fix them on their
proper objects.

You say (p. 108) Surely Mr. H. never read the best writers on ethics. I beg
leave to recommend Edwards on the will. -- Doctor, your advice comes too late.
I read that book many years ago, and have re-examined it lately. There are some
good things in it, and some very wrong. I have made some remarks upon it,
showing the falsehood, and destructive tendency of some of his doctrines. You
may publish this, with the other, if you please, it may possibly enlighten you
a little.

XIII. In your postscript, Doctor, you take notice of my letter to Mr. Hopkins,
and treat it as you did the dialogue, and by partial quotations and wrong
representations, attempt to deceive your readers, and to set the D and L. a
quarrelling. I will give you two instances. You quote me as saying in the
Letter, Men who admit this doctrine (i. e. of total depravity) do and may very
consistently deny your doctrine concerning the nature of the enmity. There is
an essential difference between your doctrine concerning the nature of the
enmity, and their doctrine of the corruption. -- On this you say, But it seems
that he expects us to believe this on his naked assertion; for he has been very
careful not to show wherein the distinction lies, unless we may gather it from
these words; They (i e. all sound Calvinists) believe the corruption is of the
moral kind. But this shows no difference; because -- we believe the enmity we
hold to be of the moral kind (p. 160) Here, Doctor, you have played foul in a
very scandalous manner You have designedly concealed from your reader the chief
difference I mentioned between your doctrine concerning the nature of the
enmity and their doctrine concerning the corruption, and told him I mentioned
no other difference but what you quoted, knowing you did not speak true in this
I here give the passage as it stands in my Letter, p. 7, and put the words you
concealed, in Italics. Let the reader compare and judge for himself. 'Men who
admit this doctrine' (of total depravity) do, and may very consistently deny
your doctrine concerning the nature of the enmity: for they believe the
corruption is of the moral kind; and CURABLE by an application of that
supernatural doctrine of truth and grace which came by Jesus Christ, in such a
manner as the Spirit of God knows how to apply it. There is an essential
difference between your doctrine concerning the enmity -- and their doctrine of
the corruption. -- You know, Doctor, this difference, which you bid under a
covering -- is real and essential. You and Mr. Hopkins assert the direct
contrary concerning the nature of your enmity, viz that it is not curable by
any possible application of gospel truth to the mind. By concealing this
mentioned difference, and telling your readers I have 'been very careful not to
show wherein the difference lies, 'except only by saying, they believe the
corruption is on a moral kind. You have given them just cause to complain of
you and say, 'thou have unworthily deceived us.'

In my letter to Mr. Hopkins, I told him he had put the controversy on a wrong
foot in saying that total depravity is ^a^y the only thing in dispute; that
what I opposed was your doctrine concerning the nature of the enmity -- and
gave this just summary of it, viz. The enmity of man^s heart is levelled
directly against God's whole moral character, as being hateful to the natural
man, in itself or for its own sake; that this enmity is wro't into the very
frame of the human heart, and is of such a nature, and so confirmed a principle
that no possible applications of gospel truths to the mind and heart can subdue
or weaken it: the Spirit of God himself cannot overcome it by applying gospel
truth and the doctrines of grace to the heart: But, on the contrary the more a
natural man sees of the light and truth of God's character the more in
proportion does his hatred of it rise and exert itself -- This doctrine I
opposed in my dialogue, and did so effectually overthrow, that you and Mr
Hopkins both have though it it expedient to shift the controversy, and tell your
readers the dispute is about the doctrine of total corruption. And you have
undertaken to prove that you have stated the controversy right, and that I
shamefully denied the truth of fact in telling Mr. Hopkins he had stated it
wrong. Let us see how you do this.

Having quoted two passages from the dialogue, and made an impertinent remark,
misrepresenting their sense, you add, I could fill whole pages with quotations
of this kind (i e with quotations not at all to your purpose) but shall only
mention one more, where he expressly puts the controversy upon the foot of total
depravity. Having quoted from my sermon the following words, viz. The minds of
men are too full of enmity to be persuaded to love or be reconciled to God, by
any, though the most powerful arguments; therefore I do not think that
regeneration is effected by light, -- but in order to this the power of God
must be exerted, and by this alone men are created anew; he adds, if the
premises are true, the inference is undoubtedly just. And yet in the face of
all this -- he te^ls Mr Hopkins that it is an unwarrantable assertion to say,
the controversy does, by his (Mr. H's) own acknowlegement, turn upon the
doctrine of man's total corruption. (p. 159) More soul play, Doctor, exceeding
soul. What I called the premises, in the passage you refer to, you have
concealed from your readers, and took the inference, your own inference, and
tore it into two pieces and set up one for the premise, and call the other the
inference from it. By this wonderful contrivance you endeavor to deceive your
readers, into a belief that I did really have the controversy as you and Mr.
Hopkins say, and that I was guilty of palpable falsehood in denying it to him.

I don't expect the reader to believe this charge without evidence of its
truth; and therefore must transcribe that passage in the dialogue you refer to.
I^ is in the 25th page.

Gent The Dr lays it down as a just inference from what he had said BEFORE
concerning the NATURE and power of the enmity of man^s heart against the nature
and moral character of God, that men are not converted ^o God by moral suasion.
i e. by any rational arguments, whereby then hearts are influenced to turn from
sin to God. (Ser. p 52 1st edit) This, Doctor, is the inference you draw from
the doctrine concerning the nature and power of the enmity against God, which
you had before laid down in the doctrinal part of your discourse. It is the
head proposition in your second remark, by way of inference from your doctrine
concerning the enmity; a summary whereof I gave you just now. -- The Gent.
quoted some others of your words, in your discourse under this head, in which
you expressed this inference more strongly: The minds of men are too full of
enmity to God, to be persuaded to love and be reconciled to him by any, though
the most powerful arguments, address^d to their understanding or affections;
therefore I don't think that regeneration is effected by light, i. e. by
presenting the things of religion to their minds, or even by opening their eyes
to see them; but in order to this the power of God must be exerted, and by this
alone men are created anew. (p 53. 1st edit.) Your inference from your doctrine
concerning the nature and power of in wro't enmity, before laid down in the
body of your sermon, being now fairly given in your own words, the Clerg
rep^ies. If the premises are true, the inference is undoubtedly just. By the
premises he evidently and certainly means what you had before said in the body
of your discourse concerning the nature and power of the enmity; from which the
Gent. said you drew the inference.

I have also observed your efforts to clear your scheme of doctrine from the
bad consequences I charged upon it But they justly lie at the door, and always
will: I could easily show the utter insufficiency of your (...) ^nings for this
purpose: But I may not now trespass further upon the readers patience, by going
into a critical examination of them. If he is judicious, unbiassed and
furnished with knowledge, he will readily perceive the weakness of your defense.
I don't mean here to intimate any thing dishonorable to your understanding,
Doctor The weakness lies in the cause you have espoused. Error cannot be
defended with real strength, no, not by an angel. Good angels will never
undertake its defense. I wish you would give it up, and leave the doctrine of
errors to be defended by those to whom they properly belong. What have we to do
with them? Our honor is connected with the truth: on the contrary side we gain
nothing but shame: victory there, over the weak and credulous, is it famy and
confusion. The deceived and deceiver are his, and dust shall be the serpent's
food

XIV. The criticisms, Doctor, by which you endeavor to evade the force of the
texts I mentioned as inconsistent with your doctrine, are so manifestly
impertinent as not to need a particular answer. I only mention two, as a
specimen of your skill, and the liberty you take in evading the testimony of
the truth itself. But I must observe one thing you say just before you come to
remark on them.

'He' (Mr. H) supposes that because the word is called the sword of the Spirit,
it has power to regenerate But has a sword any power at all? -- The written
word has no power but what arises from the energy of the Spirit or the
testimony of conscience. (p 125.) Doctor, you know very well that I did not
suppose what you here suggest, but spoke repeatedly of the holy Spirit acting
upon the mind with the word, in producing this change, and expressed my
sentiments very fully that the outward teaching of the written word, without
his concurring influence, cannot effect this holy change. In the place you refer
to, where I call the word of God the sword of the Spirit, I spoke of the Spirit
as the agent using this sword. See the pages refered to below D. p 42, 45, 46,
58.
This very phrase, ' the energy of the Spirit' accompanying the word, which you
here use in a pretended opposition to me, you found in my dialogue. You
repeatedly own what I here represent as my doctrine, to be indeed so. You say,
p. 111, 'He' (Mr. H) owns that men neither will nor can be influenced to
believe savingly, by the most powerful gospel motives, without the powerful
energy of the Spirit. And in p. 113, you say, We agree that the motives have no
power till the Spirit exerts some kind of energy, so that their efficacy is
only with, and never without it. -- We agree in this Thus. Doctor you have
borne witness against yourself, that you testified a known falsehood in the
passage now under censure. Why will you kill yourself in order to throw false
reproach upon me? Instances of the same kind are numerous. You have given full
evidence that you are worthy of no credit as a witness against me.

I now proceed to observe how you evade two of the texts I mentioned as
evidence that God uses and applies the gospel truth to the mind in renewing or
regenerating men. -- I mentioned this text for this purpose, Of his own will
begat he us with the word of truth, (Jam. 1.18) On this you say, But in order
to make this serve his turn, he must prove that the word begat means
regeneration properly taken for the implanting or creating a divine principle
in the heart, as distinguished from active conversion, or the exercise of the
new principle when given: till this is proved the text cannot help his cause,
(p. 126) When it is, you hereby own that it will. I should have thought this
needed no proof. For what you call active conversion, or the exercise of the
new principle, is the act of the man, not of God as a generator, a consequence
or fruit of the work of God in begetting or forming him a new creature: and so
I think you always represent it except here to avoid the force of this text. --
Doctor, when you see a child exercising the life and power he is endowed with,
you don't say his father begat these exercises, but that he begat the child,
and the child does the actions. -- The holy Ghost speaks expressly, and in a
very determinate manner, as foreseeing and guarding against this perversion of
his words in favor of your corrupt doctrines. Of his own will begat he us with
the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures,
i. e. in the new creation: Behold, says the Lord, I create all things new The
souls of men are created anew, renewed in knowledge, after God's image. He has
begotten us; not our actions of the new and holy kind, but ourselves. We are
new begotten by God, and so new born and his children: can the sense of words
be more obvious and fixed? So it is said, God's people shall be trees of
righteousness of the Lord's planting: and our Savior says, make the tree good
that his fruit may be good. God makes the tree good, a tree of righteousness;
which respects the moral change of the mind and heart in regeneration or
conversion; in consequence of which the tree bears good fruit.

But you say, The Greek word (apekuese) rendered begat, may -- be rendered
impregnated; and so Dr Doddridge renders it -- and this is the most natural
meaning of the word in the 15th ver. Sin when it is finished or perpetrate^
brings forth, or rather is impregnated with death. Doctor, sin is here
figuratively represented as a mother, and death as her on^pring. Now a mother
conceives feed, is impregnated, is pregnant, and brings forth her children. But
where did you ever hear it said that the father in the act of begetting
impregnates the child? This word as respecting the father's act as a generator
is rightly rendered beget, and cannot be rendered impregnated, in respect to the
child begotten, without the greatest absurdity. In this text we ourselves are
represented, not as a mother impregnated, but as the creatures or children
begotten.

I only mention one thing more. You seem to think our Lord's parable of the
sower affords prooff that regeneration, or the making the heart good and
honest, is wro't by a mere physical power or operation, without any influence
of gospel truth in the heart. (p. 127) Your reasoning on this parable is not
good: it does not favor your cause Our Lord's manifest design in this parable,
is to point out the causes of the gospel's not producing the fruit of a holy
and good life in so many who hear it, viz. the lusts of their hearts which they
will not part with; and to show that if men are of a good and honest heart,
they will, by the ministration of the gospel to them, be rendered fruitful in
the righteous fruits of a good and christian life. He says nothing here how the
heart is made good. Parables will not endure to be strained beyond their
manifest design, in support of doctrines they are not intended to teach or
explain. Our Lord does not here say, the heart is made good by the influence of
gospel truth upon the mind, neither does he say the contrary, but only says the
gospel prevails to make the life truly good only in those whose hearts are
good. From hence you argue that the heart is made good without any influence of
the word of God. -- Doctor, by taking the same liberty in wandering from the
design of the parable that you do, I can prove that the hearts of good men are
naturally good, and reason full as well as you do; thus, the Lord says nothing
about making the heart good, but rather intimates that when the sower sows his
seed he finds some pieces of ground, some hearts, already good; and we know
some parts of literal ground are naturally good. If you don't like my reasoning
and inference, you ought to dislike your own, for it is less plausible than
mine. Doctor, if you would know how the hearts of men are made good and honest,
you must look for an account of it in those texts that speak of this, not in
those that say nothing about it.

Another text I opposed to this doctrine of yours, you thus introduce and
remark upon. His second evidence he introduces thus, Jesus says to the
unconverted Jews, if ye continue in my word -- ye shall know the truth, And the
truth shall make you free. (John 8.31, 32.) N. B. Mr. H. says these Jews were
unconverted: but let us hear the text; Then Jesus said to those Jews which
believed on him, If ye continue in my word, etc. (p. 126) This is all you say
in the text of your discourse

I suppose, Doctor, after you had wrote this, you reflected that it is most
evident, from the context, that these Jews were really unconverted, and
unregenerate too; that their faith was far from being saving, was nothing more
than a momentary, light persuasion that Jesus was their expected Messiah; which
they were induced to admit from an imagination that he was come to enrich them
with worldly good things, and which they laid down again upon the spot, as soon
as they perceived that he was like to disappoint these carnal hopes; and so,
that I was right in calling them unconverted. Doctor, you know very well that
such was their faith, and such their character; I presume you do. You perceived
that what you said, carried an intimation that you though it these Jews were true
believers, and that this would not be satisfying: and therefore you added in a
note, Whether these Jews were really converts or not, I will not determine. You
cannot but know that the context clearly determines they were not. You dare not
say they were, in the face of such decisive evidence; and you would not say
they were not, because if you admitted this, you could not avoid the evidence
the text gives in that your notions concerning regeneration, are false. So you
gave much such a prudent answer as the parents of the blind man gave, -- 'Who
has opened his eyes, we know not.' -- You think to get rid of this troublesome
text, by saying (and this is all you further say) However, this is certain,
that Christ speaks to them as believers on him: and therefore these words are
nothing to Mr. H's purpose. In this, Doctor, you implicitly acknowledge that if
he had spoken to them as unconverted, they would have been much to my purpose.
Well, but he did speak to them as unconverted, and under the present dominion
of vicious lusts, and points out to them the way and means by which they might
be delivered from them, be regenerated.

XV. Doctor, you tell us you maintain the necessity of a constant, diligent,
careful attendance on all the means of knowledge or of grace which God has
appointed; and that the neglect of them is a grievous sin, highly provoking to
God, hazardous to the soul -- and therefore press people to the diligent use of
them, p. 129. I don't blame you for this. -- I presume you call them 'means of
knowledge or of grace' upon design. For, upon your principles, they are not
means of grace, if by grace is meant any more than knowledge: and when knowledge
is gained by the use of these means even the most that can be gained by the
unregenerate, this is no means of further grace, and can have no possible
influence, as a means or instrument, in renewing and morally changing the
heart; but it necessarily acts as a means of increasing the enmity of the heart
against God, and making it more like a devil. You, and all in your scheme, had
better drop the word grace, and only call them means of increasing such
knowledge as is a means of increasing enmity, and making men worse. You tell us
you 'hold that the motives,' (i. e. by which God in the gospel urges and draws
men to be reconciled to him) are made effectual by a preceding physical
energy, new creating the heart or renewing the will in order that the motives
may have a proper influence, p. 113 Before this imagined physical change, in
which knowledge or faith has no place as an instrument or means, you say, The
clearer the light shines, the more sensibly will the unrenewed sinner's enmity
exert itself p. 124. I told you in the dialogue that if this is the case, it is
to no purpose to address men in the apostle's words, We beseech you to be
reconciled to God; for, etc. i. e. with a view to persuade them to be
reconciled. In your answer you implicitly allow the consequence to be just, and
say, the gospel may answer that dreadful purpose mentioned in Isaiah, Hear ye
indeed but understand not, see ye indeed, but perceive not. p. 125. i. e in
plain language, it is adapted to make such creatures as unrenewed men are, more
wicked and miserable, but not to make them better. Accordingly you reject, with
scorn, the though it of a man's being at all prepared or predisposed to receive the
kingdom of God, or to become a new creature, till the moment in which he is
made so, by physical power, by any influence of the gospel and Spirit of Christ
upon him; but, on the contrary, teach that under the highest illuminations and
influences of common grace he remains wholly indisposed to it, and is more at
enmity to it than he was in his uninlightened state, p. 114. Do you think,
Doctor, Elias was sent to prepare the way of the Lord, and make the people
ready to receive him, by blowing up their enmity into a flame? Agreeably to
your own doctrine you represent the most enlightened and earnest seekers of
God's special grace, under the highest influences of common grace, as ' devout
pharisees;' and intimate that a Mary Magdalen, with all her devils in her, or
publicans and harlots in the midst of their wickedness, are as near to the
kingdom of God, or as well disposed to receive the renewing influence of the
Spirit as these. See your 130th page. The pharisees, Doctor, were distinguished
from harlots, and common, open, ignorant sinners in these things, (1) They had
more knowledge. (2) Greater enmity to God and his truth. (3) They were more
devout in outward show, and were more hypocritical. And your awakened,
enlightened, earnest, reforming seekers of God's mercy and grace, are,
according to your doctrines and notion of them, like the pharisees in these
respects for which reason. I presume, you, after Sandeman, give them the
respectful and encouraging title of devout pharisees. If this is their true
character, you ought to place them in the rear, behind harlots, and open
sinners, who don't trouble themselves about religion, for they are really worse
men, as the old pharisees were, (and so your doctrine says) and to tell them
plainly, as our Lord does their predecessors, that publicans and harlots go
into the kingdom of God before them, because they are more easily bro't to
repen^ance. And when by your teachings and their diligent, earnest endeavors in
the use of means, in compliance with your exhortations, you have completely
formed them devout pharisees, you should say to them. Ye serpents, ye
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Can you bear the
application of your own doctrines?

You say, Doctor, it is hazardous for men to neglect the means of grace. It Is
indeed so: but according to your doctrine, it is in one view more hazardous to
use than to neglect them. Your doctrines defeat your exhortations, and render
them vain and absurd. If the people understood them clearly, and believed them
fully, they would soon be reduced to abhor the offerings of the Lord, and take
up the resolution of the Jewish desperadoes, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we die.

You tell us, Doctor, that you 'press people to use the means of grace --
because this is the way in which God is pseased to work, and out of which there
is no reason to expect he ever will work this blessed change,' regeneration.
This is the way: but if your doctrines were true, it could not be so. Have you
so corrupted in yourself the right sense of God as to imagine that he puts men
upon a course of means and endeavors, which can have no better effect than to
make them devout pharisees, and render them two fold more the children of hell
than they were before, as an ordinarily necessary preliminary to his
regenerating them? Do you think the beauty and moral excellency of God's
character shines gloriously in such a method of procedure? I presume you and
others have been lead to talk in such an unworthy manner of the way of God with
men, as consequentially imputes folly and moral absurdity to him, without
reflecting seriously on the tendency of your doctrines. I hope you will now
reflect, and lay your hand on your mouth.

I only add, that if you write again, I hope you will write with fairness,
equity and honor. If in the same spirit as before, you may answer yourself; for
you will be wholly unworthy the notice of any one else. -- As I have pointed
out to you some of your great offenses against your brother, I presume you are
convinced of them: and I now expect you will publicly retract the many false
and injurious things you have testified against me, before the churches and
world. I expect this as what you owe to me by the will of God; as what you owe
to the churches to whom you dedicated your injurious charges; as what you owe
to the honor of your own character, which you have sorely wounded while
throwing dirt upon me; as what you owe to the honor of the gospel. -- If you do
this in a christian manner, I will as readily give you the due honor of it as
the best friend you have in the world: who am,

Rev. Sir, Your greatly injured, yet placable brother, WILLIAM HEART.
Say Brook, in Connecticut, March 26, 1771.
POSTSCRIPT.
DOCTOR, one thing which merits notice I have reserved for this place. You
mention this text as favoring your doctrine, and seem to triumph in it, as all
in your scheme do, viz The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor
11.14, 15. On this you say, By natural man is evidently meant the unregenerate
man. Now it is here affirmed of this natural man, that he discerns not the
things of the Spirit of God. (No, Doctor, the apostle says, receives In your
quotation of the text you also threw out the apostle's word, receives, and
took in the word discerns, which sounds more favorably for you. I hope,
Doctor, you did it in advertantly.
) Whatever knowledge he may have, he discerns nothing of the spiritual glory and
beauty of divine objects, i. e. he has no taste for moral excellency. And the
reason is given, viz. They are foolishness to him, i. e. in his view of them:
and if so, they must be abhorred; for what appears foolish -- must be hateful,
in this view of it. Here then is a full proof that the natural man sees no
beauty in, but really loathes the things of God, and therefore has no taste for
moral excellency. q. e. p. (p. 88.) q. e. p. which was to be proved. Doctor,
you have proved nothing but that you don't understand the text at all. I
observe two or three things.

1. The apostle says the natural man receives not, and cannot know the things
of the Spirit of God. You allow he may know them, but say he cannot discern
their spiritual glory and beauty; i. e. has no taste for moral excellency. Your
proposition is not the same in sense with the apostle's, but a very different
one. Yours may be false, and yet his be true.

2. By the things of the Spirit the apostle means those things which belong to
the gospel, as its peculiars. You extend the sense so as to comprehend all
things of a moral nature; and so infer that natural men have no taste for moral
excellency. But you put much more into your premises than the apostle will
support you in. These are moral rules of God's moral government, viz. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself, and do to him whatsoever, etc. With what
measure you meet it shall be measured to you again. Do you think this text
warrants you in saying, No unregenerate man can discern or taste any moral
fitness, beauty, or excellency in these moral rules? If you do, you are sunk
below the standard of common sense: if you do not, you must see your
demonstration fails, and so your q. e. p. remains yet to be proved: it will be
your wisdom never to attempt it again.

3. In endeavoring to prove that natural men have no taste for moral beauty and
excellence, you have proved the contrary. You say, What appears foollish, must
be hateful to the natural man, in this view of it. Why so, Doctor? You must
answer, because moral foolishness is, in its own nature, hateful and
contemptible, as moral wisdom is of an amiable nature. Very true: and so men
have a natural sense or taste for moral worth or excellency. If they saw the
object in a true light they would love it: all that is wanting, according to
this position of yours, is only to give the mind a just view of the object.
This proves too much. A sinful man may possibly see a particular dispensation
of divine government to be wise, and yet hate and oppose it, from interested
views, or through partial regard to his lusts, which interfere with it.

If we would gain a right understanding of this text, we should carefully
examine what the apostle here means, (1) by the things of the Spirit. (2) What
by receiving and knowing them. (3) What by their being spiritually discerned.
(4) What by the natural man. When we have got all his ideas right in respect to
these particulars, we shall see how, and whence it is that the natural man
receives not, etc. I presume when you wrote your comment, you had none of them
right. If we enquire wisely concerning these things, I presume we shall see
clearly, (1) That by the things of the Spirit of God, the apostle intends the
doctrines concerning Jesus Christ, the grace of God toward man by him, and the
salvation of those that believe, through the merit of his cross: which doctrine
concerning the cross, he says, is a stumbling block to the (unbelieving) Jews,
and foolishness to the (infidel) Gentiles, though it is seen to be the wisdom and
power of God, by those that believe, and avails to their salvation. (See 1 Cor.
1.23, 24.) He styles these things, The things that are freely given to us of
God, context, ver. 12 He elsewhere calls these spiritual things. And the reason
of his calling them so, and, The things of the Spirit of God, is that this
Spirit is the revealer and teacher of them, and a witness from God, and for
Jesus Christ, to the truth of them; without which supernatural teaching and
witness, men could not have conceived any idea of these things, and have known
them to be true and from God. As it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things God has prepared
for them that love him. (i. e. any idea or knowledge of them, till God revealed
them) But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. -- Now we have received
-- the Spirit that is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God, cont. ver. 9, 10, 12. See and compare the texts referred to
below. John 16.13 -- 15. Rev. 2.7. Romans 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.11. -- 12.1. -- 14.37.
Col. 1.9. -- Spiritual understanding, i. e. a true understanding of those
things which are freely given to us of God, and revealed by his Spirit, and now
written in his word.


2. By knowing and receiving these things of the Spirit of God the apostle
intends, knowing them to be true and divine, knowing them to be from God and
worthy of him, a divine method of saving sinners, full of wisdom and grace; and
receiving them as such in faith, and thereupon embracing the christian
religion. To receive these things is the same in substance as to receive Jesus
Christ, and become disciples to him. Observe the following texts, John 8.19.
chapter 14. 7, 9, 10, 11. chapter 15.15, 21. chapter 17.7, 8, 25. Col. 1.25 -- 27. 1 John
4.16. Joh 7.17. chapter 8.32. Mat. 10.14, 41. Joh. 3.11. chapter 5.43. chapter 14.17. Acts
22.18. 1 John 5.9. Joh. 1.11, 12. Acts 2.41. chapter 11.1. Col. 2.6. 1 These. 2.13.

3. These spiritual things are spiritually discerned. By discerning them the
apostle means, so examining them as to discern them to be true and divine, from
God, and worthy of him, so as to settle down in the belief of them. The Greek
word anakrino signifies to examine and search out a thing, in order to know
what it really is, and to judge. The apostle uses the word, 1 Cor. 4.4. where
it is rendered judges, (as it is cont. ver. 15) I know nothing by myself, (i.
e. whereby I am self-condemned) but he that judges me (i. e. examineth and
discerns what I really am, and judges me according to the truth of my
character) is the Lord. So the word discern is frequently used by our
translators, as in Genesis 27.23. He discerned him not. Isaac, though he examined
Jacob, yet did not distinguish him, but judged him to be Esau. So in this text,
to discern the things of the Spirit of God, is by examining to discern them to
be of God, true, divine and excellent, to distinguish them with judgment from
the things of men, their cunningly devised fables. -- Now the apostle says they
are spiritually discerned, i. e. thus discerned and distinguished only by the
light, teaching, and testimony of the Spirit of God. This is evidently his
meaning; and this is most true. For these supernatural doctrines concerning our
salvation by the cross of Jesus Christ, owe their very existence, as truths, to
the sovereign good pleasure of God's will; which could never be known to be
such as it is, but by his free revelation of it to men. This revelation he has
made by his Spirit; and by his Spirit they are attested as truths of God: and
men discern them to be such, only in his light, through his teaching, and by
admitting his testimony to their truth, as good and sufficient evidence. On
this testimony gospel faith is founded. It is the Spirit that bears witness
-- If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater -- He that
believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself -- He that believes
not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God
gave of his Son, 1 John 5.6, 9, 10. -- Examine and compare the following texts,
in which the same Greek word is used which is here rendered discerned, viz.
Luke 23.14. Acts 4.9. chapter 17.11. 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. ch 14.24. Acts 25.26.
anakrisis, examination 1 Cor. 9.3. Acts 12.19. Acts 28.18.

Let us next examine what the apostle here means by the natural man. The Greek
word here rendered natural, is psuchikos, which is derived from psuke, which
signifies the soul natural to man as a living man: so the apostle says, Adam
was made a living soul. Psukeen Zosan.

Leigh. in his Critica Saena, thus renders the word, psuchikos animalis.
Animalis ab anima, non ab animali. In the margin he quotes Beza thus, psuchikos
anthropos, i e. homo non alta quam naturali animi luce preditus. A man that
has only natural abilities and perfections. The apostle speak of a natural
body and a spiritual body, and opposes them to each other, just as be here does
the natural and spiritual man. It is sown soma psuchikon, a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.44. i. e The body is sown in the ground such
as we received it by natural generation, without any supernatural improvement
or change, but it is raised a spiritual body, gloriously changed by the
supernatural operation of the Spirit of God. So he says, the first man was made
a living soul. When God breathed into him the breath of life, and endowed him
with a living soul, furnished with its proper, natural faculties, capacities
and passions, he was hereby constituted a complete man. The work of creating
man thus finished, God immediately communicated his Spirit to him, and thereby
breathed into his new formed soul the breath of a spiritual life, superadded to
the natural; or in other words, by his supernatural illumination and influence,
communicated the true knowledge of God, and awakened the new-c^eated soul
instantly into filial and holy dispositions and exercises toward his maker and
father. Thus he was formed a spiritual man -- But in the hour of temptation he
rebelled against the light, and grieved the Spirit, and he forsook his defiled
habitation; and so he became a mere natural man, dead to the spiritual life,
not having the Spirit. This he showed sufficiently by his foolishly endeavoring
to hide himself among the trees from the presence of the Lord, when he
perceived him approaching. -- This forfeited and lost gift of the Spirit, was
restored, and could be restored, only on the foot of a new dispensation of
sovereign grace, freely given through a respect to the sacrifice and mediation of
the Son of God, the destined Redeemer. This grace was now revealed to Adam, and
given on this new foundation, to teach him this supernatural doctrine, and
revive spiritual life in him, through faith of this new and surprising discovery;
and doubtless was thankfully received, and wro't in our first parents immediate
repentance, while they stood before their judge and savior And thus they once
more became spiritual persons, having received the Spirit of God, as given from
the Father, by the Redeemer. -- This restored gift could not consistently be
conveyed to Adam's children, together with those natural gifts which constitute
them men, in the channel of natural generation; or, in other words, could not
be connected with the gift of a living soul to his posterity: For he is not the
covenant head, from whom this supernatural gift of grace flows, but received it
himself from Christ as his covenant head, as all his children must, if they
ever partake of it. -- Therefore the apostle, considering Adam, now fallen, in
relation to his seed, represents him only as a natural man, destitute of the
Spirit: for he can now convey no more to his natural seed, but the gifts which
belong to human nature as such, by which they are formed natural men. The first
man Adam was made a living soul: the last Adam was made a quickening spirit --
Made so to his seed, by the constitution of the new covenant. He quickens both
soul and body; but first the soul, by giving his Spirit; by receiving and
obeying of which, they are rendered spiritual men; are spiritual so far as they
receive, believe and walk in his light, and no farther. -- These observations
will lead us to a clear understanding of many other texts, particularly that
John 3.3, 5, 6, and that we are examining. -- By the spiritual man, the apostle
here intends such as have received the Spirit of God, given by Jesus Christ, as
a teacher; have received his revelation of the things of Christ, and believed
them on the credit of his witness, and so set to their seal that God is true in
what he has spoken and testified concerning his Son by his Spirit. He says, God
has revealed them to us by his Spirit -- and We have received the Spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God --
and so We have the mind of Christ -- and he that is spiritual judges all
things. i e. so far as he has received the light which the Spirit gives,
examining, he discerns and clearly distinguishes the truth and wisdom of God
from the fables and folly of men: As our Lord says, My sheep hear my voice and
follow me: but a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for
they know not the voice of strangers.

I think we cannot now be in doubt what the apostle means by the natural man --
He evidently intends such as have not received the Spirit of God, as their
teacher, in his revelation of the hidden things of God to men, and do not give
credit to his supernatural witness to their truth; but are led and influenced
in their judgment concerning these things, by the spirit that is of the world,
i e. act under the blasing and blinding influence of the spirit of error and
worldly lusts. Such do not receive these things as true and divine, neither can
they know them to be so, so long as they refuse the light and witness of the
Spirit of God; for they are spiritually discerned, are distinguished from false
and foolish things, and perceived to be from God, only by that supernatural
light which is communicated by the Spirit -- Therefore it is said, He that has
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

When Jesus Christ came to the Jewish people, as a teacher sent from God to
reveal the mysteries of his will, the Spirit of God spoke to the people by him,
and witnessed to the truth of his mission and doctrine: but many received him
not, but disbelieved and rejected the witness of the Spirit. These were natural
men, who were led by the spirit of this world, and instead of receiving the
Spirit of God, offering himself as their guide and teacher, they perversely
resisted him, as being stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears. So the
Spirit departed from them, and God gave them over to blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart. But some that heard did believe, and received Jesus Christ;
and in receiving him received his Spirit, and so became spiritual men. Such as
were too strongly attached to their lusts to be persuaded to renounce them by
the light and teaching of Jesus Christ, and the given drawing influence and
witness of his Spirit, and to come out of the world, after Christ, were, after
proper trials to gain them, abandoned, and confirmed as children of this world.
And so it must be; for such cannot receive the Spirit of God -- And to what
purpose is it for the Lord to stand always knocking at their door, when they
will not know his voice and open the door unto him? Jesus Christ says, The
world cannot receive the Spirit of Truth, because it sees him not, neither
knows him, John 14.17. They may, in some measure, see what his doctrine is,
and see his works and witness by the gospel revelation; but they don't see the
Spirit of God in them, don't know that it is he that speaks to them by the
gospel revelation, and bears witness to its truths, by these works; but fatally
(...) in taking him for a false and deceiving spirit. Thus the perverse Jews,
who were wholly of this world, covetous, ambitious and sensual, saw the
doctrine of Christ, and to what it tended, viz. to confound the lusts of this
world, and destroy the works of the devil; and they saw the supernatural works
by which the Spirit of God witnessed to their truth, as from God; but they did
not see him in all this. They plainly saw and acknowleged that a supernatural
spirit attended upon Jesus Christ, ministering to him, and witnessing to what he
said: but they did not know that this was the Spirit of God, but imagined he
was a deceiving spirit, and said, 'He casts out devils by Beelzebub the
prince of devils.' Thus they evaded the evidence, and could not receive the
light and testimony of the Spirit of God witnessing to his Son Jesus. -- But
why could they not see and know this Spirit, in distinction from that of the
devil? They saw the doctrine he witnessed to, militated against their lusts,
and condemned their indulgence of them, and menaced them with destruction,
unless they gave them up: this they were obstinately determined not to do: they
therefore shut their eyes against the light, and wilfully set themselves to
oppose it; and because they could evade the witness of the Spirit to its truth
no other way, they said, 'It is not the Spirit of God that bears witnes^ but
the spirit of devils." All obstinately wicked men, who sin on perversely
against the light and testimony of the Spirit of Jesus Christ are in the same
spirit of this world: all the difference it in the degree of its strength and
malignity -- This, Doctor, and not want of natural capacity to see moral
excellence, and a natural, inwro't, incurable hatred to it, is the true cause
why such men receive not the things of the Spirit of God, and cannot know and
approve them as of God, but esteem them as foolishness.

The conclusion of the whole matter is this; Paul says to this purpose, Men
cannot know the gospel or doctrine concerning Jesus Christ to be of God and
worthy of God, unless they receive the Spirit of God as the revealer of these
things, and admit his witness to them as being of God, not of men, as a true
and divine testimony; that if they, as biassed by lasts, refuse and reject him,
there is no other way of discerning them to be of God; but they, as led by the
spirit of the world, will account them fabulous and foolish: (This has been
verified throughout the whole world, from that day to this) He says, on the
other hand, That if men receive the Spirit, by which God revealed these things
to men, as of God, and credit his testimony, they may, by his teaching, know
them to be of God, and, in his light, distinguish them from the things of men,
and discern their divine excellence and glory. -- You, on the contrary, say to
this purpose, That no ilumination, teaching and testimony of the Spirit which
he can give to men, can enable them to discern any moral or spiritual
excellency and glory in these things, and at all dispose them to receive the
truth in faith and love, unless the Spirit first creates a new gust or faculty
of taste in them, by a physical operation without light. -- Doctor you are very
unlucky in the choice of this text: it clearly condemns your doctrine. Which
ought to have most weight your opinion, or the apostle's doctrine?

Thus, Sir, as you see, I have made myself your servant, for the truth's sake,

WM. HEART.

CONTENTS.
I. THE Doctor's account of Mr. Hart's doctrine concerning the moral sense
essential to moral beings, P. 5 II. Relating to the nature of the enmity of
wicked beings against God, P. 7 III. His account of these doctrines compared
with the dialogue, P. 8 IV. Of the doctrine relating to the silencing the
blasphemy of reprobate sinners, P. 21 V. Concerning the Dr's complaint that
works are made the moral ground of the bestowment of special grace, P. 25 VI.
The Dr's faith, P. 28 VII. Of total corruption, and moral depravity. The Dr.
makes it physical, P. 29 VIII. The Doctor's notion of moral beauty, P. 33 IX.
Of agreement with S^ndeman, P. 34 X. Whether the Dr's divinity is new. It Is not
Calvinism. Calvin, Mastricht, Edwards condemn it, P. 35 XI. What is meant by
moral power, force, energy. How distinguished from physical, P. 39 XII. The Dr.
admits Mr. Hart's doctrine concerning the nature and source of enmity, P. 43
XIII. The Dr. states the controversy wrong, and imposes upon his readers, P. 45
XIV. The Dr. evades scripture evidence, and wrests the scriptures, P. 48 XV.
Exhortations to attend the means of grace rendered vain by the Doctor's
principles, P. 51 POSTSCRIPT. The Doctor perverts the sense of the apostle's
words, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. Their true meaning manifested, P. 55

