The NEW TESTAMENT Interpretation of the OLD, relative to INFANT BAPTISM, as a
special Ground thereof, and Warrant therefore -- Particularly in these Four
leading Points, viz.

I. The Covenant with Abraham. II. Circumcision the Seal of that Covenant. III.
The Jewish Church under the ceremonial Law. IV. The breaking off of the Jews
from their Church State, and the grafting in of the Gentiles.
THE Design of which is to afford Help to the Minds of such-Christians, as need
Help in the affair, as it appears that many do in the present Day, that they
may Prastice herein with Understanding and not give up their Children in
Baptism, in blind Obedience to Custom and Tradition, as it is too evident too
many do, and therefore regret it again afterward, because they never saw the
Scripture Ground of it.

ALSO herein is briefly discovered (...) the (...) of the OLD TESTAMENT differs
much in these Things from the NEW TESTAMENT interpretation thereof; and so the
Grounds of their Mistake in rejecting (...) easily be seen.

Written Letter-wise to Mr. ISAAC BACKUS occasioned by his late Answer to Mr. F
-- 's Letter in favor of Infant Baptism. -- In which Answer Mr. Backus asserts
that we construe the New Testament by the Old, in order to support Infant
Baptism: But the reverse of that is shown to be true.

By ISRAEL HOLLY, Pastor of a Congregational Church in SUFFIELD.

So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham -- That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles. -- And if some of the Branches
were broken off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree were grafted in among them,
and with them partakest of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree.

NEW TESTAMENT. NEW LONDON: Printed by T. GREEN. -- 1771.

PREFACE.
IF the Publication of the following Letter needs any Apology at all, I think
it needs but a very short one. For as there are many Christians who practice
Infant Baptism, not by the force of humane Tradition, but Conscienciously upon
a Scripture Warrant, as their Minds have been lead to understand the Scriptures
-- So both Reason and Religion allow of the Publication and Manifestation of
the same for the Benefit of others: which is the Design of the following
Letter; and not merely to oppose, or ^^upose any different Party among
Christians.

A LETTER, etc.
Mr. BACKUS, Sir,
I TRUST I may say truly, without nauseous sawning, or criminal flattery, by a
little acquaintance with your person, and more with your writings, that I look
upon it that you are favored with some excellent endowments of mind, with a
good and rare rasent, especially in writing; and that for the most part your
pen has been employed in the cause of truth -- Yet however, I observe some
things in your writings which brings an ancient but true observation to my
mind, viz. That the best of men, are but men at the best. -- Therefore, sir,
take it not ill if I point you to one or two of those spots with my pen, since
I can assure you I do not write with a cesire or disposition to contradict,
much less to disgust you or any of your baptist brethren, though I know not but
this may be the event But the aim I have in view, (however ^eeble the effort
may be) is, by the divine blessing to endeavor to rescue some injured truths,
which have suffered abuse by your pen. -- And under this consideration I
undertake it cheerfully, but upon some other accounts it is with reluctance.
For having had the hap to dip a little in one or two public controversies in
time past, I have of late almost come to a determination to let polemic
subjects alone, (unless where the essentials of religion are controverted) and
leave disputes to other people, who have more pleasure and better skill therein
than I, and higher expectations of doing good thereby. -- Disputes seem of late
to be almost fruitless as well as endless; and the more work of this nature
there is done, the more there is to do: and the more laborers there are who
^^ter into this field of dispute, the wider the field g^ows in proportion; and
in consideration hereof, I have almost been ready to say, that the multiplied
numbers of disputants, in ^he^e times, had about as good stand all the day id^e
in th^s market place, as to spend their time as they do -- However, I trust I
am not altogether so superstitious o^ pres^mptuous as to assert, as some have
done, viz. That disput^s never did any good. For I believe the reve^^^ of this
is true, and that some times disputes are really necessary, and were it not for
this, I would lay down my pen. -- But with respect to the dispute in favor of,
and against in^an^ baptism I intended to have been a neuter, (as to public
writing I mean) because I did not look upon it essential to vital religion,
which side a man seteled in his judgment, in this affair, if he was
conscientious, and truly persuaded in his own m^nd, seeing both sides have so
much of a plea, in their favor; and I doubt not but eminently good men are on
both sides of the question.

But, sir, in reading your answer to Mr. F -- 's letter in favor of infant
baptism, I confess you have drawn me a little out from my state of neutrality;
(...) I cannot be quite easy (however catholic) to see things gloss'd
smoothly, and then put off for truth, which are not. -- However, being so very
averse to write upon this subject, I should not have meddled with it, had you
neglected one thing in handling the controversy, and that is, you say, That in
order to maintain infant baptism, we construe and interpret the new ^^stament
by the old, and the old by the new, (p. 58). Now this was so directly the
reverse of the truth respecting my establishment in favor of infant baptism,
that I could not be easy, nor answer a good conscience herein, to let it pass
unnotic'd. And as it was the new testament interpretation of the old that gave
me an establishment concerning infant baptism; so I am ready to think, that if
the baptists would suffer the new testament interpretation of the old, to take
place in their understandings, with their wills subjected to the light of truth
in this particular, they would easily see more grounds for the warrant of (...)
baptism than now they can; for while they have a different way to interpret the
old testament, from the new testament interpretation thereof, it necesla^^ly
hides the truth, and the binding force of it from their minds, in this
particular. And hence they peremtorily conclude that there is nothing in the
scripture to warrant infant baptism because they in these circumstances cannot
see it; but I cannot allow this to be demonstration -- I suppose that it is very
probable, the solid and judicious among the bap^ists, who did not receive the
binding force of their principles by tradition, made their mistake h^re, viz
they took intant baptism upon tradition only, and practiced without
understanding therein, but afterward when they came to be more conscientious
in the point, and could (...) no further in the practice by tradition; and then
they attempted to search whether there were a scripture warrant for the
practice or not, and when they read or heard the scriptures, the arguments, and
interpretations of (...) etc. produced for the support of infant baptism, they
never took the proper ideas belonging thereto, and so could see no proof, where
others who take the ideas as well as the words, can. I know something of this
by experience; for I myself took infant baptism upon tradition, and went on so
for near ten years after I was experimentally acquainted with religion, as I
trust; in which time doctrinal reli^^^^: and, practical godliness, was through
grace, my de^lightful study; but my mind was not turned upon baptism w^^h any
closeness of thought, all that while. -- At length I became a^quainted with a
baptist who was pretty apt to be rigid (...) peremptory in his assertions and
principles, who ^old me there was neither precept nor example in the bible, for
infant baptism, and that there was nothing to warrant the practice but humane
tradition. And moreover he said, that it was nothing but fear of reproach and
singularity that kept multitudes of christians from practicing upon the
baptists prin^^ples. -- Well, I was conscious I did not know much about the
affair. I told him I would endeavor to search into the matter, and if there
was nothing but humane tradition to warrant infant baptism, it was t^me it was
rejected. And as to reproach and singularity I had not much to fear from that
quarter; for by my late embracing and adhearing strictly to what I call
congregational principles, I was already reproached with the odious name of
separate, which was looked upon as a very ridicul^us thing where I then lived.
Moreover I told him I trusted I had set out through grace, to go where truth
and honesty would carry me, and if embracing the truth would make me a baptist,
I hoped I was willing to be one. I further told him I did not like such sudden
stars and changes about the principles of religion as I observed in some men
(...) was willing any man should change his religious traditions, provided he
did it with due consideration deliberation and a scripture warrant, and not
else. If I ever bec^me a baptist, I told him I intended to be so well grounded
in the principle, as not to have occasion to turn-back again, as I observed
some did.

And now I undertook to search the scripture to find what the mind of God
therein was; and I trust with^n si^eere desire to know the truth, in order for
practice^; for I had got a ground about practicing upon infant baptism any
further upon tradition only. I did not think it my duty in searching after the
truth in this matter to pray for* or expect any immediate revelation from God,
to tell me which side (...) will ^ay in the ma^ter. But that by the blessing of
God in the use of proper m^ans, my understanding mig^ be led to see what his
mind and will is; as it is already revealed in his holy word, although more
^arkly in this point, than in some others* And hereupon I read the scriptures,
and authors upon both sides of the question, and conversed with the ablest men
in favor of infant baptism I knew of, to see what could be said to support the
practice, which by this time I very much called in question. The baptists
arguments looked plausible, and for to get light in the affair, I sometimes
espoused the baptist side of the question, when conversing with men who professed
to be clearly established in infant baptism, and it seemed to me they got along
but poorly in proving their infantbaptism-scheme. And my mind hung in suspense
a considerable time, but it rather seemed to be my prevailing tho'^ that the
truth lay on the baptists side. Until, by reading the
new-testament-interpretation of some parts of the old testament, and that in a
light very different from my baptists authors, with that, I though it, it may be
here is something that I had hitherto over^look'd, therefore I will look again;
and while I followed this line, v^z. the new testament interpretation of the
old, the substance of the baptists arguments were overthrown, (at least they
were overthrown in my mind.) And then I began to take the ideas, as well as
words, concerning the grounds of infant baptism. And my mind, I trust, was led
into the nature and spirituality of the veiled dispensation. There appeared
then, more gospel, more grace, and more glory under the ancient and typical
dispensation, than ever I saw before, or any baptist author I ever read, would
allow. The baptists authors indeed do allow, that there was some glory under
that dispensation, as things then typified the spiritual glory of the church in
the gospel day. But as that was a disp^nsation of the covenant of grace, so I
say that there was a spiritual glory then in being and existing^ (...) veiled
with a type. There was then the same sp^ritual good under the type, that there
is now carried in the gospel dispensation without the type. And all who did not
stick in the letter, or as I may say the bark of that dispensation, saw the
spiritual glory, and embraced the spiritual good, carried in the promise of the
covenant of grace, and sealed the same, by those seals which God appointed
therefore, what ever typical use they might answer besides. And, sir, when Mr.
F. in his letter in favor of infant baptism, is speaking of that covenant
which God made, or renewed with Abraham in the 17th of Genesis He says, although we
don't read the word, Christ, nor grace, nor faith, nor new covenant, yet he
supposes that all this was implied, and that Christ and all his benefits were
contained therein. And I say, amen to it! blessed and glorious truth! But you
say (p. 53.) that with his man's wisdom, in so expounding that scripture, that
he contradicts inspiration. But I think that you are quite mistaken, and that
this assertion of his entirely agrees with inspiration, (as I trust will appear
more obvious in the sequel) unless you mean to call the baptists writings
inspiration, then I know it differs.

But to proceed, Now as I said, it was the new testament interpretation of the
old, that was the means which gave my mind the first establishment in favor of
infant baptism, when I had been long hesitating there about. So what I now
design, is to give a few instances of that nature, viz.

The four following, I. The new ^est^ment interpretation of God's covenant with
Abraham. II. Of Circumcision. III. Of the jewish church under the ceremonial
law. IV. O^ the breaking off of the Jews from their church state, and the
grafting in of the Gentiles.


I. Of God's Covenant with Abraham, which we find the first discovery of in
12th chap. of Genesis where God called Abraham and blessed him, and promised
Canaan. And in the 15th chapter of Genesis we find the covenant renewed, a numerous
seed promised, and a renewed promise of Canaan. And in the 17th chapter the
covenant was renewed with Abraham again, and more explicit in some things;
circumcision instituted, directions given for the forming his family into a
church state. And hence an external form of administration of the covenant
commenced according to divine appointment. Now this covenant which God was
pleased, out of self-moving love, to take Abraham into with himself, I call the
covenant of grace, containing spiritual blessings, with such an external form
of administration thereof, and belonging thereto, as God in his infinite wisdom
and sovereignty saw fit to appoint. -- For illustration, I suppose you will
allow, that under the gospel dispensation, where God takes a man savingly into
covenant with himself, there are some externals, called privileges and duties
annexed, and that these are included in, and belong to the external
administration of the covenant of grace, under the gospel dispensation. So in
the covenant with Abraham, there was certain duties and privileges annexed
therewith, and belonged to the external administration of the covenant of
grace, under that ancient dispensation; which were thankfully to be
acknowledged, and cheerfully and punctually complied with, until God should
please to add thereto, more rites and ceremonies, or take them all away, which
were merely positive, and appoint new ones at his pleasure. And yet in every
period we are to acknowledge the covenant of grace, although under a different
form of external administration. -- The Abrahamatical form continued a while.
-- At the Sinai dispensation, the moral law was promulgated, and all the rites
of the ceremonial law were added to the external form of the administration of
the covenant of grace, until the gospel day commenced, and the form of
administration was altered.

But now let us look and see how the new testament interprets God's covenant
with Abraham. I find Paul is speaking directly of this covenant with Abraham,
Gal. 3.17, 18. And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of
God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect. For if the
inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: But God gave it to Abraham
by promise. Here the covenant with Abraham is said to be confirmed in Christ,
and the inheritance given to him by promise. But what inheritance? why the
heavenly inheritance, which is not obtained by the works of the law, but by
free grace. But when did God give the inheritance to Abraham by promise? why in
the promise of Canaan. Again, the new testament tells us Romans 4.3. Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. Now if here was
faith, imputed righteousness, and justification without works, and so Abraham
had not whereof to glory before God, as the apostle shows in this chapter, then
it must certainly be the covenant of grace; for the covenant of works knows of
no faith in a mediator, no imputed righteousness, no justification without
works. And to suppose that the good carried in the promise of the covenant,
which God took Abraham into, consisted solely, or principally, in the temporal
good of the type expressed, is to contradict the new testament explaination of
that covenant, and of the good contained in it, in these following chapters,
which you may read at your leisure, viz. Romans 4. Gal. 3. Heb. 11. Luke 1.

Now let us see whether your interpretation of Abraham's covenant agrees with
the new testament interpretation of it; and I think I find it don't You must
not expect, in a letter so short as I intend this to be, that I make a
collection of the baptist authors in general, and cite their words upon the
point; for if you are as sound and as orthodox, in the point, as they be in
general, then your words may be cited as a specimen of their general notion,
about Abraham's covenant. You say, page 53, The tenor of Abraham's covenant
enjoins conditions and works to be performed by men; the neglect of which
exposed them to be cut off from their people. -- Therefore the letter of it was
do and live. Here sir, are your words, but I don't know what you really think
Abraham's covenant was, notwithstanding. Mr. F. said it was the covenant of
grace, but you oppose him in that, and mean to contradict him, which is evident
to every one who reads your answer. And to me it is evident you contradict the
new testament interpretation of it, whether you mean it or no. You describe the
covenant with Abraham just as the best of divines do the covenant of works made
with innocent man, or Adam before the fall, do and live. And the scripture
describes that ancient covenant of works, or the moral law as a covenant, in
the same manner, He that does them shall live in them. Well then, if you mean
so, that is, if you mean as you say, that the tenor and letter of Abraham's
covenant was works, do and live, then one of these things will certainly
follow, viz that either, 1st. One man is gone to heaven by the covenant of
works, since the fall. Or, 2dly, Abraham is damned; for he never had a better
covenant to go to heaven by than this. The language of it was, I will be thy
God; and Paul says this covenant was confirmed in Christ. But if you don't mean
Adam's severe covenant of works, do and live, requiring perfect holiness as the
condition of life, but some more mild and moderate covenant of works, and yet
distinct in its nature from the covenant of grace, I don't think it worth while
to spend time to talk about it: for if such a covenant ever existed any where,
'twas but in men's imagination, for you never found such a covenant in Genesis;
nor from there to the end of the Revelations. But let us examine the force of
your argument a little: You say, Abraham's covenant enjoins conditions and
works to be performed by men; the neglect of which exposed them to be cut off
from their people. Now by this argument you think to prove that the covenant
with Abraham was not the covenant of grace, but of works. But sir, your
argument proves too much for you, and so just nothing at all. Your argument, if
it was allowed to take place, would deny that God now under the gospel takes
his church into the covenant of grace, but the church is now formed upon the
covenant of works, do and live, for I trust that you yourself will not deny but
that in the external administration of the covenant of grace, even under the
gospel dispensation, God enjoins duties and works to be performed by men, through
grace influencing, as a condition of a visible standing and continuance in
God's visible church, the neglect of which now exposes them to be cut off from
God's people by solemn excommunication; and dying without repentance, must be
cut off by eternal damnation; and what do you find more conditional, awful, and
severe in Abraham's covenant? -- I grant that in the covenant of redemption, or
if it suits you better, the covenant of grace, as it was made with Christ in
the behalf of the elect, Christ only was to perform the condition of their
salvation, by obeying the law, and suffering the penalty thereof, in their room
and stead. And I allow that there were no works done by man, or foreseen, as
the condition of election, but election was free, sovereign and absolute. I
also allow further, that that faith, by which one is united to Christ, and by
which the believer is said to be justified, is the free gift of God, and no
previous conditions are performed by men, as procuring a right and title to
that grace. -- But yet, notwithstanding all this, I think I have a scripture
warrant to say, that in the gospel declarations, and the external
administration of the covenant of grace, there are conditions proposed and
required. Salvation is promised in the gospel, to mankind in general, on the
conditions of faith and repentance; and those who don't through grace, come up
to these conditions, are threatened with eternal damnation. So there are certain
qualifications required, and duties to be performed, as a condition now, as
well as in Abraham's day, of having a standing and continuance in God's visible
church. And what if you should now take the external administration of the
covenant of grace, under the gospel dispensation, which requires conditions,
enjoins duties, annexes penalties, etc. and call it a covenant by itself,
distinct in its nature from the covenant of grace, even the covenant of works;
would not this be a vile abase of the covenant of grace? to rob it of its
external form of administration thus? and yet this would be to do, but just as
you have done, by the covenant of grace, under a different form of
administration, while you say that the covenant with Abraham was the covenant
of works. Because of duties and penalties annexed. But you attempt to give some
further light about Abraham's covenant, and (...) some further proof that it
was not the covenant of grace, by an there particular way of describing of it in
the same 53. p. When you had been considering that in the 17^h of Genesis God had
enjoined circumcision in the flesh upon Abraham and his male children, then you
add, And God said to Abraham, My covenant shall be in your flesh. While he says
in the new covenant, I will put my laws in their mind, and will write them in
their hearts. Here is your pretended illustration of the difference between
Abraham's covenant, and the new covenant, or covenant of grace. One is in the
flesh, and the other is in the heart* But I ask, what is this darkning counsel
for with words without knowledge? You in this same page speak of the seal of
Abraham's covenant, and call circumcision the seal of it. And baptist authors
abundantly say, to cut off infants from baptism, that circumcision was a seal
of the covenant of works. Now it is easy to see that a covenant, and the seal
of it, are two things; the seal may be considered as a token and confirmation
of the covenant, but not the covenant itself. But you seem to try to make it
appear that Abraham's covenant was circumcision itself, and so opposite to, or
at least distinct from the covenant of grace. Therefore you represent God
speaking out the nature of his covenant with Abraham, when he says, My covenant
shall be in your flesh And you laying the emphesis here, think to make us
believe that the covenant did not carry spiritual blessings in it. But if we
let an ancient and approved saying still pass for current, it will frustrate
your attempt herein, viz That the scripture is the best interpretation o^
scripture. And I think it becomes you in modesty, to let the Almighty interpret
his own words, when he says to Abraham, My covenant shall be in your flesh,
which he does in the same chapter 17th Genesis ver. 11. when God had enjoined
circumcision in the flesh upon. Abraham, he then adds, And it shall be a token
of the covenant betwixt me and you. Here observe, there was first a covenant
subsisting between God and Abraham, and secondarily a seal, sign, or token of
that covenant, which was circumcision: and not that circumcision itself was the
covenant, as you try to insinuate. Here was such plain ground to go upon, that
it seems you could not have stumbled, and made this blunder, had you not took
pains for it, or though it to have served a turn by it. But I say Abraham's
covenant has the language of the covenant of grace expressly carried in it. Genesis
17.7 8. Where God says, And I will establish my covenant betwixt me and thee,
and thy seed aster thee, etc. But what does he mean? why he adds, to be a God
unto thee and to thy seed after thee. Now when God says by way of covenant, I
will be thy God, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee, says the
Almighty, in the promise of his gracious covenant with Abraham. But you say,
and other baptist authors, that this was not the covenant of grace, and
spiritual blessings are not included in this promise: But only externally God
would be their God. But sir, by this way of treating God's covenant and promise
therein, you make me think of your own marginal note, where you give an account
of what past in conversation that you had some knowledge of once, when a man
said he believed that one might sincerely keep God's law externally, out of
regard to an idol: which being pinched a little by questions, his opinion, in
the nature of it, amounted to this, viz. that a graceless man, or worshipper of
idols, might love God with all his heart, externally. But such an inconsistent
profession you seemed well to think, might be jeered out of the world. But I
query whether this opinion is not full as inconsistent. That when God said to
Abraham, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed, that spiritual blessings were
not meant; but only that God would be their God externally, and that this was
the good contained in the promise. Then according to this there is just about
as much sincerity, reality and propriety in it, as there is in one's loving God
with all the heart, externally.
or I will be their God, it is evermore new covenant language since the fall of
man. And I will be thy God, implies my attributes and glorious perfections are
made over to thee, Abraham, and to all thy seed after thee, who shall take hold
of my covenant by faith, as thou have done. My mercy shall pardon thee, my
grace shall sanctify thee, my light and truth shall guide thee, my power shall
protect thee, and my alsu^^iciency shall supply you, etc. And although these
spiritual blessings were not so open, and clear, and explicit as they are in
the gospel-day, yet as truly contained; for as we before noted, this covenant
was confirmed of God in Christ. But the baptist often object, and think they
may triumph in so doing, that if that covenant with Abraham, wherein God says,
I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee, was the covenant of grace;
and if believers now under the gospel stand related to God by the same
covenant, for the substance of it, and are under the same promise, I will be a
God to thee and thy seed, as we plead for, and pretend. I say, the baptist
often object and say, why don't we then see the promise fulfilled? Why were not
all Abraham's children converted, and saved? And why are not all the children
of believers now under the gospel, converted and saved? if this be the covenant
of grace, and spiritual blessings are contained in the promise?

To which I answer,

That this promise was fulfilled to Abraham and his seed, according to the
tenor of it, and is a fulfilling daily to believing Gentiles, and their seed
also. For it was by faith that Abraham became interested in the covenant of
grace, and entitled to the spiritual blessings contained in the promise. And
surely God fulfilled the promise of the covenant to him in all the
extensiveness of spiritual blessings comprised in these words I will (...) thy
God. And it was nothing short of faith that any o^ Abraham's seed became
entitled to the spiritual blessing contained in the promise, for says the
apostle, all a^ not Israel, that are of Israel: Implying that it was only by
faith that Abraham's children became entitled to the spiritual blessings
contained in Abraham's covenant, and to all such of his seed the promise has
been punctually ful^lled. The same I may say concerning the G^ntile believers
and their seed; by faith in Christ it is they come to have a covenant interest
in the spiritual blessings carried in the promise of Abraham's covenant, and
the Gentiles by faith come thus to be blessed with faithful Abraham* But there
would be no propriety nor truth in saying that the believing Gentiles are
blessed with faithful Abraham, if Abraham's covenant had not been the covenant
of grace, nor the blessings spiritual carried in the promise of it.

But then observe, as I noted before, how Abraham's covenant is to ^e
considered, viz. That it was the covenant of grace, containing spiritual
blessings in the promise, with such an external form of administration thereof
as God in his wisdom and sovereignty he saw fit to appoint. And that you may
not mistake me herein I will explain myself a little further. Doubtless you
will allow it to be possible, if not in fact the case, that God may, in a way
of sovereign grace, take a man savingly into covenant with himself from the
midst of an heathen land, convey grace into his heart, bring him into union to
Christ, grant him communion with God here, in this world, and eternal life
hereafter; and save him by Christ, in the way of free grace; and yet never
bring him under any external administration of the covenant of grace, bring him
into no visible church, of any form of constitution, give him no external seals
or ordinances, of a possitive nature, etc. And if God in his wisdom and
sovereignty had seen fit to call in all his elect in this wise, by the secret
influences of his Spirit, and never had appointed any external form of
administration to the covenant of grace at all: Must not all creatures have
yielded that God had a right to act his pleasure? when it was his own free
grace he was going to bestow? Ma^n't he do what he will with his own? and as to
the method, take what way he pleases?

But we find God has not always took that method of calling in his elect, if he
did ever; but has been pleased to appoint an external form of administration of
the covenant of grace. And surely God was at liberty to determine what this
form should be, whether it should be always alike, or whether it should differ
in various periods of the church, the latter of which we find to be his will.
Now one of these external forms of the administration of the covenant of grace,
which was to continue a certain period in the church, God was pleased to give
to Abraham. For when God took Abraham savingly into covenant with himself, and
determined a visible and outward dispensation of the covenant of grace should
appear, he had a right also to determine whether any but Abraham, and such as
with him had saving faith, should have any concern herein, or privilege hereby;
and in way of sovereignty God was pleased to connect Abraham's children with
Abraham himself, in the external administration of his gracious covenant. So
that it became Abraham's duty, and his children's privilege, for him to apply
the seal of his faith, and the token or bond of God's gracious covenant to
them. And a great favor it was, if prized and improved as it ought to be, to
stand thus related to God by his own gracious covenant and sovereign
appointment; though not so as to obtain salvation without faith: But here, by way
of eminence, they have the blessed means, and the greatest obligation to faith.

But I am sensible that the objection is not yet fully answered, the pinch of
the objection is here; if it was the covenant of grace, containing spiritual
blessings, in which God said to Abraham, I will be a God to thee and thy seed,
and if God says the same to believers now, why don't all their seed have
spiritual blessings, and be saved? To which I directly answer.

The objection takes that for granted which is not ^ue, viz that this promise,
to thee and thy seed, cannot be (...) covenant of grace, unless all the seed of
believers a (...) saved: whereas it is not so -- God said to Abraham formerly,
and to believers now, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, that is, to thee
and to thy seed indefinitely; i. e. not to be confined to all individuals of
their seed. And in this sense, it was, and is true, that God is a God of
believers and their seed. And in this sense it is, that the apostle clears this
promise of the covenant of grace from falsehood, as you man see Rom 3.3. What if
some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without
effect? ver. 4 God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar. Now if
we do but consider and understand the scope, view, and aim of the apostle here,
we shall find that he had been considering that all the external privileges of
the Jews would not avail to salvation, unless they had heart circumcision, and
were Jews inwardly, as well as ouswardly. Well he sees now a question will
arise, men of a baptist turn of mind would be ready to ask. What advantage then
has a Jew? or what profit is there in circumcision? As much as to say, What
good does it do to stand so related to God, by the external administration of
the covenant of grace as to have the seal, token, or bond thereof applied? when
all this may be, and yet no heart circumcision, no regeneration, no faith nor
salvation? surely there was nothing meant of spiritual blessings in Abraham's
covenant, I will be a God to thee and thy seed: or else God is not true in the
performance, etc.

Now to this the apostle replies, and says, It is an advantage and much every
way; and although some such don't believe, yet God is true to his promise
notwithstanding. What if some don't believe? shall their unbelief make the
faith, that is, the fidelity, truth and faithfulness of God without effect? God
forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a ^^ar: that is, let every such man
be accounted a liar, who shall say there were no spiritual blessings in the
promise of God's covenant with Abraham, I will be a God to thee and thy seed,
or that shall say if there were, then God don't fulfill his promise, unless he
converts and saves them all: for if some, yea thousands perish through unbelief,
that don't make the fidelity of God without effect, or his promise void.

But to proceed, If Abraham's covenant was not the covenant of grace, and
respected things of a spiritual nature, what was the matter that he was not a
Jew which was one outwardly? If that covenant respected the natural seed of
Abraham as such, and as such to remain the subjects of the covenant, and the
good promised was only outward Canaan; and the requirements of the covenant,
was only outward circumcision, and an external conformity to outward rites and
ceremonies: I say, if this was the case, is the baptists plead, then he was a
Jew in the complearest and fullest sense of that covenant, who was one
outwardly; for according to them, that covenant respected, required, nor
granted nothing but outward things.

I grant, that in Abraham's covenant there were some things that respected his
natural seed, as such, viz that God would multiply them, make a great nation of
them, give the land of Canaan to them. But these things were but a mere
circumstance; and as I may say some appendages added, and not the essence and
substantial part of the covenant. Now by these appendages attending Abraham's
covenant God was pleased to and them as very significant things, and as types
to preach, teach, illustrate, and shadow forth the spiritual good and glory
contained in the substantial part, the essence and spiritually of Abraham's
covenant. Abraham's numerous natural seed promised, typified the subjects of
the covenant of grace, or his spiritual seed among both Jews and Gentiles, as
God was pleased to honor him with the title of being called the father o^ all
the faithful. And the gift of Canaan to Abraham's natural seed, typified the
heavenly inheritance, given in Abraham's covenant, or the covenant of grace to
all true believers. So that there was truly a gospel covenant, and gospel
doctrines, and gospel blessings in Abraham's day. Now for the baptist to take
these appendages, these typical things in Abraham's covenant, and try ^o make
the very essence of that covenant to consist in them, is a vile abuse of
Abraham's covenant, and a counteracting the new testament interpretation of
that covenant, as we have seen in part already, and may see more in the sequel.

But sir, I must not forget to consider the main pillar you ground your opinion
upon; and your chief engine which you think to beat down all our arguments and
proof, that Abraham's covenant was the covenant of grace. And that is what we
find in Heb. 8. And especially those words cited by the apostle from the
prophecy of Jeremiah, ver. 8, 9, 10. Behold the days come, says the Lord, when
I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, etc. Now what seeming
proof there is in these words, or whole chapter, to establish the baptist in
the opinion that Abraham's covenant was not the covenant of grace, is wholly
founded on a mistake: which I think I can easily show, and demonstrate to every
rational mind that will attend without prejudice,

And this I shall do by considering two things,

1. That neither the prophet Jeremiah in his prophecy, nor the apostle Paul in
the Hebrews, do oppose this new covenant which the Lord would make with the
house of Israel, to Abraham's covenant; but they oppose^^ to something else,
which is quite evident if we do but attend closely to the matter. Do but see
how the words run. Behold the days come, says the Lord, when I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: not according
to the covenant I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the
hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt. Now if the words had run thus, I
will make a new covenant, etc. -- not according to the covenant I made with
their fathers, when I took Abraham by the band, and called him out from his
kindred and blessed him, etc. I say if the words had run thus, I would freely
give up the point to you, and allow the new covenant spoken of in Heb. 8. is in
opposition to Abraham's covenant. But I find the words of inspiration run quite
another way, even to Egypt and Mount Sinai. Therefore take notice of them
again. I will make a new covenant -- not according to the covenant I made with
their fathers -- But when? -- in the DAY I took them by the hand to lead them
out of the land of Egypt. Now it is as evident as words can make it, that this
covenant spoken of, to which the new covenant is said to be made in opposition
to, was not made in Abraham's day, but four hundred and thirty years after,
when the children of Israel came out of Egypt, and the Sinai-law given; (for we
may note, that the Sinai-law was given the same year that Israel went out of
Egypt); so that I have a right to tell you in the words of the apostle, Gal.
3.17. And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of God in
Christ, (that is Abraham's covenant, as it is called) the law which was four
hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul. So that the covenant with
Abraham, being the covenant of grace, as to the essence and substance of it,
still continues. But if you ask what covenant it was, if it was nor Abraham's
covenant that the new covenant in Heb. 8. is opposed to? I answer, that it is
evident by the main scope of the epistle to the Hebrews, and this 8th chapter in
particular, that it was the covenant of ceremonies and legal services given at
Sinai, considered in the abstract, or what they were in themselves, weak and
insufficient to justify and save those who attended thereupon, unless they by
faith looked to the end of these things which were to be abolished, and saw
Christ the substance of these shadows. For the law, in all the punctilios of
ceremonies, made nothing perfect. And it was impossible that the blood of
bulls, and of goats, should take away sin. Now the carnal Jews, who had no true
faith, to apprehend Christ, in Abraham's covenant, nor Christ the substance of
these shadows; are said to have a vail on their heart, and so could not look to
the end of that which should be done away, but through spiritual blindness, and
unbelief, they terminated in the shadow instead of the substance, to their own
destruction. Therefore as a remedy against this melancholy scene, that
encouraging prophecy was given by the mouth of Jeremiah. -- Behold the days
come says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel
-- not according to the covenant I made with their fathers when I took them by
the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt -- Led them to Sinai, and gave
them a It is very evident that the apostle in the Hebrews, uses the words
covenant and testament, as terms syn^nimous; and therefore he is not there
distinguishing so directly between the covenant of works and the covenant of
grace, as he is between the old and new testament dispensations, giving the
preference ^o the latter. -- An instance or two I shall here mention, of this
nature, where the apostle uses the word covenant and testament interchangeably,
either of them equally answering his design. Heb. 8 6 Where the apostle is
speaking of Christ, says, He is the Mediator of a better covenant. And in Heb
7.22. Christ was made a surety of a better testament. Again, Heb. 8.7. For if
that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought
for the second Heb 9.18 Whereupon, neither the first testament was dedicated
without blood. And Heb. 8.13. "I^ that he says, A new covenant, he has made
the first old." Heb. 9 15 And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
testament. Here we see, better covenant, better testament, ^^st covenant, first
testament, new covenant, new testament. So that as the apostle in Heb. 8. does
not oppose the new covenant to Abraham's covenant as has been seen in the page
above; neither are we to understand him by that covenant which waxed old and
vanished away upon the commencing of the new one, that he is speaking of the
covenant of works, (for that vanished away as to a dispensation of it, when the
seed of the woman was first revealed; but as to men's cleaving to the covenant
of works, through a legal spirit, and a self-righteous temper, it is not vanished
away yet.) But the old testament dispensation must vanish when the new
testament dispensation takes place; to the latter of which, by way of eminence,
the out-pouring of the Spirit was connected, by the purpose and decree of God,
and revealed before hand by the spirit of prophecy.
covenant of ceremonies -- a testament of blood, yet weak that could not take
away sin -- a dispensation that was veiled -- But it shall not always be so,
Christ the substance of all these shall come, and cause these shadows to flee
away: and I will pour out my Spirit in plentiful effusions thereof, and
multitudes shall be converted truly; I will put my laws in their mind, and in
their hearts will I write them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people, in the sense of my gracious covenant with Abraham. And so Zacharias by
the spirit of prophecy, viewed Abraham's covenant accomplishing, in the
bestowment of spiritual blessings. Luke 1.72, 73, 74, 75. To perform the mercy
promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath which he
swear to our father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being
delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve (...) without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

So that this new covenant spoken of Heb. 8. is so far from really opposing
Abraham's covenant, that it does really accomplish it.

2. The second thing I proposed, or intended to consider, as a proof that this
new covenant, Heb. 8. was not opposed to Abraham's, is, because the effects and
blessings of Abraham's covenant, and the effects and blessings of this new
covenant are one: Now opposite covenants don't meet in oneness of effect. But I
have partly prevented myself herein, by what I have said already. However, I
will just add a word or two more.

Now let us consider the effect and blessings of this new covenant, spoken of
in Heb. 8. I will put my law in their mind, and write them in their hearts, and
I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Here is the effect
and blessings of the new covenant you allow. And I trust you will not deny but
that the privileges and blessings of the new covenant are spoken of in other
places of scripture, as well as this; and although not contradictory to this, yet
with more enlargements on the privileges, and more minutely particular therein.
And as the apostle cites this passage in Heb. 8.10. from the 31. chapter of Jer. so
I trust you cannot deny but the next chapter, viz. Jer. 32.38.39. speaks out
also the promise of the new covenant, or covenant of grace. And they shall be
my people, and I will be their God. And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me forever, for the good of them, and of their children
after them. So also is the promise of the new covenant spoken out in the 44. of
Isa. ver. 3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
off^spring. Now let us in a word, consider the effect and blessings of the
covenant with Abraham. And we find, that when God graciously condescended to
enter into these covenant engagements by his own free promise, he tells us what
he meant by it, Genesis 17.7. speaking to Abraham; To be a God to thee, and to thy
seed after thee. The very same blessings carried in those other promises of the
new covenant, though not here so much enlarged upon, nor so explicit, in their
spiritual nature. For the gospel, and covenant of grace, and the spiritual
blessings thereof, opened gradually. But if at every degree of new openings, of
the privileges of the covenant of grace, and enlargements thereof, and explicit
promises made; I say, if we should call the same, at every such period, another
covenant, instead of the same more enlightened into, we should have new
covenants, and new gospels plenty enough in the bible. But when God says in
Abraham's covenant, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, means no less than
the same spiritual blessings contained in the new covenant, elsewhere expressed
by a more particular description of the blessings involved in these words, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. As pouring his Spirit upon them,
giving them a new heart, and writing his laws in their heart, etc. So we may
look upon Deuteronomy. 30.6. a true explanation of Abraham's covenant: The Lord thy
God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord,
etc. And surely this is the same spiritual blessing of having the law of God
written in the heart. And when God says, by way of covenant, I will be thy God,
since the fall of Adam, it is evermore new covenant language, and new covenant
blessing referred to.

But I find baptist authors, and I think you among the number, do allow, that
in Abraham's covenant, that God did engage to be externally their God, although
it was the covenant of works, that did not carry spiritual blessings in the
promise.

Now here I would just remark two things, for there is not a baptist among you
all, but allow that in Abraham's covenant there were great favors thereby
conferred upon the subjects of it.

1. I say that Abraham's covenant cannot be the covenant of works, say what you
will, if there were any favors or blessings at all in it, either spiritual or
temporal. For the nature and property of the covenant of works, is to give life
to sinless, or perfect obedience, and to curse the transgressor, and bestow no
mercy on the sinner, no not the least even of a temporal nature. And although God
does bestow many favors on sinners, who are under the law, as a covenant of
works, yet he does not do it by the covenant of works, or in the way of the
covenant of works; but in a way of sovereign grace through the Mediator, which
the covenant of works knows nothing of.

2 What kind of a covenant, and what kind of a blessing is this? for God to
engage to a people or a person, to be their God externally? and the performance
to be according to the engagement. The plain English of it is this, that
Jehovah ^s their God in word, but the covenant leaves the devil to be their God
in deed.

I observe, sir, that you allow that Abraham was an eminent saint, and was
somehow, in the covenant of grace, but that covenant in The baptists pretend,
some of them at least, that there is an absurdity in holding the covenant with
Abraham, to be the covenant of grace, the promise of which was, I will be a God
to thee, and to thy seed after thee; and to hold that believers are under the
some covenant and promise now; and yet to allow that many of Abraham's children
were not saved, and many of the children of believers now under the gospel are
also not saved: they are therefore very averse to allowing that these words in
the promise, and to thy seed after thee, should be considered indefinitely,
that is not to fix absolutely upon each individual, but only of their seed. But
then, if they should once allow this, they charge us o^ being guilty of another
great absurdity in baptising all the children of believers promiscuously; why
don't we wait, say they, until we see on whom the promise is made efficacious
by their saving conversion? and then apply the seal of the covenant, where the
saving effects of the covenant are first seen. But to apply baptism to any who
are not first inwardly washed, and to many who never at all are washed from
their ^ins, is but only like se^^ing a seal to a bla^k.

To which I answer,

That these absurdities are not real, but only seeming, as I suppose they do
seem absurdities to a baptist. But what I would remark in this marginal note
is, that the baptists interpretation of Abraham's covenant has seeming
absurdities just similar to these, and some real ones to boot.

Now the baptists say that in Abraham's covenant, as it respected his natural
seed God engaged to be their God in outward respects, would give them outward
privileges and the land of Canaan, and enjoined certain outward duties upon
them, and circumcision in the flesh as a seal of this national kind of a
covenant of works.

Now how can this promise be understood, even upon this explanation of the
covenant? Did the promise reach each individual absolutely? No. Ishmael and his
seed, were not intended in the promise, when God told Abraham I will give all
the land of Canaan to thee, and to thy seed after thee. How can the promise be
true then? unless all Abraham's seed be meant in the promise? Why here the
baptists must understand the promise indifinitely, and then it is true. --
Well, but if circumcision was a seal of this covenant, in which Canaan was
promised indefinitely to Abraham's seed, why did they not wait until God had
told them which line should possess Canaan, whether Ishmael's or Isaac's,
before they circumcised any? and not go and set the seal of a certain covenant
upon Ishmael that never was designed to possess the good contained in that
covenant. What is this but to set a seal to a blank? But the baptists will say
in this case, God positively commanded it, he commanded Abraham to circumcise
Ishmael as well as Isaac. I answer, I know it, and I think that is enough to
make the baptists hold their tongues, and never bring this objection against
infant baptism any more, that it is absurd, like setting a seal to a blank; for
as absurd as it is. God commanded it in a similar case. But one real absurdity
I shall here mention, as necessarily following the baptists interpretation of
Abraham's covenant, while they deny it to be the covenant of grace, and that
the promise of it, as it respected Abraham's natural seed, bad no reference to
spiritual blessings, but temporal only. The absurdity is this, viz. That the
jewish nation ^^ood related to God by covenant, as creatures which had no
souls, and the breach of the covenant in them would have been no sin. For the
obedience the covenant required, was but external, and the good promised in the
covenant if it be kept, is but temporal. Therefore if they break it, they must
not be charged with sin nor punished with hell. For to suppose immortal souls
will be punished eternally in hell for the breach of covenant with God, which
if they had fulfilled the terms of, would not have rewarded them with heaven,
i^ absurd with a witness. For although the baptist some times pretend that
Abraham's covenant was the covenant of works, yet at other times they represent
it as a mere outward thing, neither the covenant of works nor the covenant of
grace.


Genesis 17. of which circumcision was the seal, was not it, but the covenant of
works, likewise the Sinai dispensation was the covenant of works; and if so,
all the ^aints from Abraham down to the gospel day, were under the covenant of
works, and went to heaven under the covenant of works; or else some how,
without God's leave, they slipped their necks out of the covenant of works, and
stole away to heaven in secret: I say without God's leave, because God never
gave his saints any liberty while that dispensation lasted, to depart from
those institutions, which the baptist say, were of, and belonged to, the
covenant of works. But I apprehend the grounds of your mistake to be truly
this, that you take the external form of the administration of the covenant of
grace, and make in your own minds, a distinct covenant of it, by itself, even
the covenant of works, as I before noted.

II. I now in the second place, as it was proposed, proceed to consider the new
testament interpretation of circumcision. I observe sir, that in trying to get
along with your scheme in denying Abraham's to be the covenant of grace, one
while you represent circumcision to be a seal of the covenant of works, do and
live, and then se^m to try to make Abraham's covenant to consist in
circumcision, or that circumcision was the covenant itself, as I before noted.
But I am after a more authentic interpretation of circumcision, than I take
yours to be, even the new testament interpretation. And that tells us without
hesitation, how we are to consider circumcision. Romans 4.11. He received the
sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had.
Now the righteousness of faith, is nothing short of Christ's righteousness
apprehended by faith, and such evangelical obedience as is the effect of true
faith; which is gospel righteousness, as truly as any believer has now under
the gospel, and seals by baptism. Therefore circumcision was not appointed as a
seal of the covenant of works, because it was appointed to seal a righteousness
that never belonged to the covenant of works, even the righteousness of faith,
which is gospel-righteousness, and evermore belongs to the covenant of grace.
What will you do then for proof, that circumcision was a seal of the covenant
of works? It may be you will have recourse to Gal. 5.3, 4. where the apostle
tells them that Every man (among them) that is circumcised, is a debtor to do
the whole law. Christ is become of none effect unto you: whosoever of you are
justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace. Now inasmuch as the baptists
think this text to be much in their favor, as a proof that circumcision
belonged to the covenant of works, because tha^ Paul told the Galations that if
they became circumcised they were debtors to do the whole law, etc. Therefore
we will take this matter a little under consideration.

Now when Paul says to the Galations, If ye become circumcised, ye are debtors
to do the whole law; if he means the ceremonial law, then he would let them
know that by being circumcised, they brought themselves under an obligation, by
that, to come under that heavy yoke, in all its branches, which Peter told his
jewish brethren was a yoke which neither their fathers nor they were able to
bear, Acts 15.10.

But I suppose that the apostle has a more special reference to the moral law,
as containing the substance of the covenant of works. And when Paul told the
Galatians, that if they became circumcised, they would be debtors to do the
whole law, viz. get a perfect law righteousness of their own, such as the law
demands. But he don't say that circumcision originally, and institutionally,
laid all under an obligation to perform the covenant of works in order to
justification: although circumstantially considered, and eventually it did the
Galatians, and many of the self-righteous Jews, through their sinful abuse, and
wicked perverting the right order and use of things, as I shall show. And that
we may see in the light of truth how it came about that circumcision laid the
self-righteous Jews, and the Galations who were corrupted by them, under an
obligation to do the whole law, or perform the covenant of works, as a
condition of justification and salvation, we shall consider their abuse, and
misuse of, both the Sinai-dispensation, and circumcision. And this I find Paul
has done to our hands already, in his allegory concerning Abraham's two wives;
a very natural and beautiful similitude, representing the case in a true and
striking light. Now Sarah was a free woman, and in the allegory represents the
covenant of grace. Hagar was a bondwoman and she represented the law, as the
covenant of works; or the Sinai dispensation received in the form of the
covenant of works. Now observe, that Hagar in her first and proper station, was
Sa^ah's hand maid, to serve and assist her, and so long as she did so, and kept
in that capacity, all was harmonious, well, and quiet in the family: but when
Hagar came to be removed from the place of a servant, to the place of a wife,
gets into Sarah's place, and bears a son to Abraham, all is in confusion, and
great disturbance in the family. Although Hagar was a good servant, and would
have done well in that capapacity; yet she was not fit to be made a wife of,
for being a bond woman her self, her children are born in bondage, and not
properly heirs of the inheritance. Therefore, what says the scripture? Cast
out the bond woman, and her son; for he shall not be heir with the son of the
free woman. Now when this is done, and Sarah comes to be wife alone, as she
ought to have been before; and bears Abraham a son, who is free, and truly the
heir, and abundantly blessed; now all things are set right again, and peace
takes place in the family.

Now these things are an allegory, says Paul, and thus he applies it: Satah
represents Abraham's covenant, or the covenant of grace made known to Abraham,
into which God was pleased, of his self-moving love, to take him, giving him
says, the pardon of sin, and eternal life altogether as the effect of free
grace; not of works, least any man should boast, and so Abraham had not
wherewith to glory before God, Romans 4.2. And this covenant of grace was
proposed to Abraham, as the only way of life to fallen man, and looked that God
would bless his seed, in the same way and manner that he had blessed him, viz.
of free grace, in and through the promised seed, on whom alone he depended for
spiritual blessings, both for himself and his seed, according to God's gracious
promise.

Now, four hundred and thirty years after this, the Sinai-dispensation was
given, and Paul shows that it was not given to oppose the covenant of grace,
nor to propose another way of life. Is the law then against the promises of
God? God forbid. Gal 3 21. But the Sinai law was given, to help forward the
salvation of sinners by free grace, and not to hinder it. And therefore the
Sinai dispensation in its true and proper use, was to be like Hagar, in her
first station, which was to serve Sarah. And the Sinai dispensation was well
calculated for this end; for there the moral law was firstly published, which
if understood aright, shows sinners their death; and then the ceremonial law,
which if rightly understood would have shown them the way of life, viz. by the
way of free grace. And so Paul labors to show and convince self-righteous men,
that the law never was given at S^nai, for men to get life by their own
obedience to it, b^^ life mu^^ come by free grace. He puts a question for them
in their mouths; Wherefore then serves the law? Gal. 3 19 He answers, It was
added because of transgressions -- And again, The law entered that the offense
might abound; that is, that they might see their transgressions and abounding
sins, and so the need they stood in of a Savior. And so says Paul concerning
the Sinai-law, it was ordained by angels in the hand of a Mediator, and
therefore to subserve the covenant of grace, if rightly understood and improved.

But now the carnal and self-righteous Jews made a great mistake here,
concerning the right application, and improvement of the Sinai dispensation.
For instead of being convinced by the moral law, of sin, and perishing
condition in themselves; and instead of fleeing to Christ the only remedy,
pointed out in the ceremonial law, they substitute the duties there enjoined,
instead of Christ, and so make a righteousness of their own doings, and hereby
marry the law as a covenant of works, and so remove Hagar from the place of
servant to the place of wife, and so the bond woman brings forth children; and
a dreadful bondage they are in, bound upon the pain of eternal ^^^nation by the
covenant of works to which they cleave, to produce a perfect law-righteousness,
without the least defect; and for the want of it, will at last be cast out and
rejected, from having any inheritance in the heavenly world, and hell must be
their portion. For they who are of the works of the law are under the curse.
And indeed this is the case with self-righteous men now, as well as it was with
the Jews and the Galatians of old, when any substitute rites and forms, and
their own works, although under the gospel dispensation, instead of Christ and
his righteousness, the bondwoman brings forth children yet, that must as
assuredly be cast out, as ever Ishmael was.

Now I apprehend it is quite plain from Paul's epistle to the Galatians that it
is in this light he tells them, that if they became circumcised they would be
debtors to do the whole law; that if they set out upon that footing, even so
far as to be circumcised, under a notion that it was part of their justifying
righteousness, (which they did, it seems, and hence was so loath to give it up)
then they must go a through stich with it, and get a righteousness as perfect as
it demands; as he shows abundantly it must b^ wholly of works, or wholly of
grace. Now if Paul had looked upon it that circumcision in every circumstance,
laid the subject of it under an obligation to do the whole law, in point of
justification, he never would have circumcised Timothy when he did. He knew
that circumcision as Abraham practiced it, was a seal of the covenant of grace,
and as he practiced it, when he circumcised Timothy it was but a mere
indifferent thing. But as the self-righteous Jews and Galatians did it, he saw
it was like to prove fatal to their souls; hence he earnestly disswades them
from it. If the Jews had universally understood, and improved the Sinai
dispensation as they ought, and kept Hagar as a servant, and not married her as
a wife, circumcision would have sealed no other righteousness than that of
faith, as it did to Abraham, and other true believers, according to the
^^^^itive institution of it; neither would they have been so tenacious of the
outward ceremony of it, when the gospel dispensation had abolished it.

Now because the self-righteous Jews misimproved the Sinai dispensation, and
married the law (...) a covenant of works, and misapplied circumcision, and
made it a bond of that covenant to themselves; you and other baptist writers,
pretend that this were the nature and design of these things in reality; that
the Sina^ dispensation was given of God as the covenant of works, and that the
Jewish church was formed by God upon the covenant of works, and circumcision
instituted of God as the seal of the covenant of works. But your opinion herein
is wholly on the send of sad mistake, as the new testament shows. Though so much
is true. I ^reely allow, that when the self righteous folks do cleave to the
covenant of works as being agreeable to their legal temper, and wicked hearts,
God holds them to the terms of that covenant they choose, and damns them
eternally according to the strictness of it.

But to suppose that the chief end and design of the Sinai dispensation was to
give forth a dispensation of the covenant of works, and form the Jewish church
upon that covenant, is absurd with a witness. I apprehend the natural tendency
and design of the Sinai dispensation, when any through grace, fell in with the
true design of it, was on purpose to bring the Jews off from the covenant of
works, to which they and all men naturally are very fond of cleaving. It seems,
that there God acted out, in an external dispensation, what he does internally
by his Spirit upon every soul he brings off from the covenant of works, and to
a compliance with the covenant of grace, in true conversion. First the Spirit
of God ^ets home the law upon the sinner's heart, not with a design to make the
man cleave to the law as a covenant of works, but with a contrary design, viz.
to make him cleave from the law, as a covenant, understanding its strictness
and severity. So in the Sinai dispensation, the moral law came forth in awful
terror, containing the nature and substance of the covenant of works, cursing
the sinner, to humble their pride, and make them sensible they stood in need of
a Mediator, and so to fall in with the covenant of grace; and so the law was to
subserve the gospel, and as Hagar in her right place, was to serve Sarah, and
so the Sinai dispensation was to help forward and promote the salvation of
sinners by the covenant of grace. And thus I think it must appear to every
understanding and unprejudiced mind, that circumcision laid the Galatians and
many of the self-righteous Jews, under an obligation to perform the covenant of
works, or get a perfect law-righteousness of their own, not from God's
institution, order, design and appointment, (had they fallen in with that) but
from their own wicked perversion of things, viz their misusing and misimproving
the law, and misapplying circumcision. For my part I wonder how you, and other
baptists, who pretend to be such new testament men, dare venture to go so right
abreast against the new testament interpretation of circumcision, which
declares, (as it was instituted and rightly improved) it a seal of the
righteousness of the faith. How can it then properly and truly belong to the
covenant of works?

I observe, sir, that you, and some other baptist writers, in order to get
along with your scheme in annexing circumcision with the institution of the
covenant of works, you choose to say little or nothing about this text, Romans
4.11. But with a degree of art and eloquence, stip alo^g as smothly by it as
you can, as if you did not want to see the true import and meaning of it, nor
that we should neither; but with a ^^w of words, and a glib way and manner of
uttering them, you hope to pass in safety this dangerous spot; and herewith
also hope to bribe us to a belief that you pass along without meeting with so
much as one brier or thorn, to scratch even your outside clothes; when at the
same time I cannot but think your insides are scratched and torn, and put to a
good deal of pain to get along as you do. If you should ask me why I conjecture
so, I will tell you one reason of it, and I think a substantial one, viz. That
I have conversed with many of the baptist, one time or another, who assert as
you do, that circumcision was not a seal of the covenant of grace, but of the
covenant of works. Then only ask them how they reconcile that assertion with
Paul's words, Romans 4 11. where he says, Abraham received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith. And they a^e puzz^^^,
they will nestle round, and shift the conversation, and seem to be as afraid to
have this text held up before them, as they would be (by way of comparison) of
a ^^a^ed Cannon; and I never yet was able to obtain a rational answer to such a
question, by all I ever conversed with, nor don't know how they mean to
reconcile it, as rational creatures, to satisfy their own minds and consciences
in the affair.

But what I have observed is not the only proof that circumcision was the seal,
token, or bond of the covenant of grace, as really as baptism is now, although
under a different dispensation. Let us therefore consider this matter a little
further. ^oth circumcision and baptism were of divine appointment, and
consisted of an external sign, and a spiritual mist^ry signified there by: and
although the outward sign of circumcision and baptism differ, yet the inward and
spiritual signification of them but (...) very much agree in one, as to the
essential things therein, and point at one and the same thing, and therefore
both belonged to one and the same covenant. Let us see in the spiritual
m^stery, somewhat of their oneness, agreement and harmony, although their outward
sign differs.

Circumcision in the outward sign of it, was that circumcision which was said
to be made with hands; the spiritual mystery signified thereby was that
circumcision made without hands, viz. heart circumcision, the effect of
renewing grace.

Baptism, in the outward sign of it, is the application of water in a sacred
manner ordinancially, or the washing with water; "I baptize you with water,"
says John. The inward mystery signified thereby is the baptism of the holy
Ghost and of fire; or the inward washing and cleansing from sin in the blood of
Christ; or the washing of regeneration and renewings of the holy Ghost, which
is the same thing with heart circumcision.

Again, if these ordinances are considered as a convictive sign, both of our
disease and remedy, there seems to be an agreement here. Circumcision, rightly
understood, doubtless carries a conviction and an acknowlegement of defilement,
by natural generation, the sign itself very significantly seems to point that
out; and the sign being painful and bloody, carries also a conviction and an
acknowlegement of the remedy in the circumcision of Christ, that is, by his
blood. So baptism, by washing, acknowleges native defilement, as well as the
virtue of Christ's blood to cleanse.

Again, if we consider these ordinances as an obliging sign, or bond of the
covenant, there is an agreement here also.

Circumcision laid Abraham and his children, under a bond to look solely to
Christ, and free grace, (the good contained in the covenant) for salvation; and
strength to serve God acceptably: which Abraham, and all the faithful in the
jewish church, through grace did, as really as believers do now under the gospel
dispensation. And those of the circumcised, who did not thus do, broke through a
strong bond, and their sin became aggravated, and without repentance, their
punishment too, as the scriptures abundantly show.

So baptism may be considered as a bond, obliging the believer, and his seed,
to look solely to Christ for righteousness and justification, for pardoning
mercy and sanctifying grace; for strength to serve God acceptably here, and a
glorious immortality hereafter. And if the children of believers, under the
bond of baptism, don't through grace, come up to those obligations, both their
sin and punishment will be dreadfully aggravated; for the nigher any stand
related to God, and his gracious covenant, and the higher they are exalted, by
their situation, with privileges, the lower they must fall, and the deeper they
must sink into hell, if they abuse the same, and continue impenitent.

I don't say there is an exact parrallel, in every thing, between circumcision
and baptism, neither need there be, as the baptists pretend there must be, a
parity throughout, in order to have them both seals of the covenant of grace;
but that is mere fallacy, or folly, as I could easily show, were it not a
needless waste of time. But there being a parity and agreement in the spiritual
mystery signified by both, in the main essentials thereof, it is entirely
sufficient. Doubtless there was something in circumcision typical of Christ and
of his death, as yet to come, who was to be born of the holy circumcised seed
of Abraham, and yet to be born of a woman, although the females were not
circumcised, to show perhaps, while the bloody sign was only to pass upon the
males, that Christ alone was to suffer for, and in the room of the church, his
spouse; for of the people there was none with him. And perhaps this may be one
reason why females were exempted from the painful and bloody sign of the
covenant under the typical dispensation. But now under the gospel dispensation,
the sufferings of Christ being over, the painful seal ceases, a mild seal
commences, and females are brought under it, this signifying, that although the
spouse of Christ was not to share with him in the curse, yet she is to share
with him in the blessings.

III.I come now to consider the new testament interpretation of the jewish
church, after the Sinai dispensation, and the yoke of the ceremonial law, was
laid upon them. The rites and ceremonies laid upon the jewish church, were very
numerous; of which, as Paul says, I cannot now speak particularly; but shall
only observe in general, that that was a testament of blood. There was atoning
blood, sprinkling blood, cleansing blood. For says the apostle, Heb. 9.22.
Almost all things are by the law purged with blood. -- Now, although this
ceremonial blood was weak in itself considered, and could not take away sin;
yet it declared there was blood efficatious enough to do it, and it pointed
them right to Christ and his blood, that does make an atonement to the full
satisfaction of divine justice; and does purge the conscience, and cleanse from
sin. And all those then in the jewish church, who understood the true nature of
these ceremonial institutions, and fell in with the design of God therein, read
the atonement of Christ's blood therein, and by faith fled thereunto for
cleansing and for salvation. -- And a baptist knows not what he says, nor
whereof he affirms, when he asserts that that was a dispensation of the
covenant of works, or denies it to be the covenant of grace. What, does the
covenant of works provide a Mediator for sinners? and point out the way of life
by the Mediator's death? A strange sort of a covenant of works, that points the
way of salvation by free grace. But there are two things which I apprehend that
the baptist do not rightly distinguish, which proves the means of their mistake
here, and has led them to consider the Sinai-dispensation a covenant of works,
upon which they say the jewish church was formed, and not upon the covenant of
grace.

First, I apprehend that the baptists do not distinguish the covenant of grace,
appearing in an external form of administration, and, the internal efficacy on
the heart. And therefore when they read of the legal services, and so many
carnal ordinances as they are called, enjoined upon the jewish church, they are
ready to say, these cannot belong to the covenant of grace, for that is
efficacious to inspire life into the soul, or put the law of God into the heart.

Secondly, the baptists don't distinguish between the true nature and right
improvement of the ceremonial institutions, and how the Jews in general did
improve them. How they did improve them, and how they ought to have improved
them are two things. They ought to have improved them so as to have been led to
Christ by them, and to have accepted of salvation by free grace in the way of
the new covenant: But they did, the body of them, so improve the ceremonial
institutions as to make them a covenant of works to themselves, and so clave to
that covenant. -- And what was in the event, the baptist pretend was the intent
of that dispensation, viz. a covenant of works. But it is all a mistake. What
if one should say, that the gospel dispensation was a dispensation of the
covenant of works, and should think to prove it by this, viz. that many
professors under the gospel substitute the externals of gospel duties,
ordinances, rites and ceremonies; instead of Christ, and make a righteousness
of their privileges and doings, cleave to the covenant of works, and live and
die under that covenant. I say, notwithstanding this is a sad and awful truth,
doubtless, with respect to many under the gospel; yet will this prove that the
gospel dispensation is a dispensation of the covenant of works? Doubtless
baptists and all will say no. And no better proof have they, that the typical
dispensation was a dispensation of the covenant of works.

But what I principally aim at, under this head, is, to consider briefly, that
notwithstanding all the legal services, carnal ordinances and indeed carnal
men, in the jewish church, yet things were not, even then, so altogether
typical of something future, concerning the covenant of grace, and the
spiritual glory of the gospel church, as to deny a dispensation of the covenant
of grace, and a spiritual church then existing, although the glory thereof was
comparatively low, and veiled with a type.

Let us hear then how the new testament considers the jewish church under the
ceremonial law. Gal. 4.1, 2. "Now this I say, that the heir as long as he is a
child, dissereth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all. But is under
tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father."

Now this passage is, I know, by good divines, sometimes applied to an e^ect
^ou^, before conversion, as differing nothing from others, but is under the
curse and severity of the more law, or the broken covenant of works, (...) he
is converted, and so obtains freedom and deliverance from the curse thereof.
But I dare say, this is not the principal meaning of Paul, nor the text. For by
the heir, in these two different circumstances, Paul speaks of; as first under
age, there to be tutored, and that with a good deal of severity, as if he was
but only a servant, and not a child: And then coming forth out of that
circumstance, into liberty and freedom, as a child does who has got to be of
age -- I say, by this heir, Paul means to point out the church of God in two
different periods: The heir in minority, under tutors, etc. represents the
church under the ceremonial law, which was very severe: But the heir coming
into freedom, no more to be under his former tutors and governors, represents
the church in the gospel day, coming into gospel liberty and freedom, and no
more to come under that heavy yoke, the ceremonial law. And all who read Paul's
epistle to the Galatians with understanding, and take the chain of his
arguments, will see this to be the case; yet I allow that the church under the
gospel, is favored more eminently with internal and spiritual blessings, and
commences into a circumstance more pure and spiritual than under the typical
dispensation. But then what I aim to remark from this new testament
interpretation of the church under the ceremonial law, is, that there was the
existance and being of a spiritual church, even then, (though not in the gospel
form) although the spiritual glory of it was comparatively low, and veiled with
a type. If this was not so, Paul brought a very unsuitable similitude to
represent the case by. A man, an heir, at liberty and freedom, had existance
and being, when but a child; and although now he throws away the habit he wore
when he was a child, and bids adieu to his old schoolmaster, who then learned
him his letters, and betakes himself now to employment that more becomes a
state of manhood; yet he is to be considered as one and the same person, in
these two different circumstances, the latter of which is much to be preferred
before the first. So God considered his church as a child under age, and dealt
with it accordingly under the typical dispensation, and by types and shadows
did as it were, take the child by the hand, and lead it to the spiritual
substance. But at the time appointed of the father, viz. in the gospel day, God
considers his church more advanced in age, and ripeness for freedom, and treats
it accordingly; which latter circumstance of the church is much to be preferred
to the former. But if the church was not under a dispensation of the covenant
of grace, but formed upon the covenant of works, as the baptists pre^end, nor
to be considered in a degree spiritual, how could it then, with any propriety,
be called a child and in the gospel day advanced to manhood? When according to
the baptists, there were no advancement to it; but were to be considered as two
distinct churches in their nature, the one instituted and constituted by God to
be a carnal church in the d^sign of it; the latter instituted and constituted
by God ^o be a spiritual church. And also according to the baptists these two
different churches are formed upon two different covenants, which d^ffer in
their nature and essence, viz. that the jewish church was formed upon the
covenant of works, do and live. And the gospel church only formed upon the
covenant of grace. And if this were the case, it seems Paul should have took
some other similitude, and of different species, the one specie to represent
the Jews church by, formed upon the covenant of works; the other specie to
represent the gospel church by, formed upon the covenant of grace, viz such a
similitude as this, That the ox or the horse was under tutors and governors,
but the child is free: yea, free as soon as it was born; for according to the
baptist, the true church never had existance until the gospel day.

IV. I am to consider the new testament inter^^^^ation, and representation of
the breaking off of the (...) from their church state, and the g^afting in of
the Gentiles. Now the apostle represents this in the 11th cha. Romans by the
similitude of an olive tree, natural branches, and wild. By this olive tree,
Paul means to represent the Jews in their covenant relation to God; by the
natural branches which were broken off, he means the Jews who fell by unbelief,
and forfeited their standing in covenant relation to God, and in severity God
took the forfeiture at their hands, and rejected them. And by the olive tree,
wild by nature, which was grafted in among the natural branches that stood,
Paul means the Gentile church. From all which we may fairly and truly argue
thus: That if the Gentiles, by being grafted in among the natural branches that
were not broken off, do stand related to God, as his church, by the external
administration of the covenant of grace, under the gospel dispensation; then
the natural branches, before they were broken off, did stand related to God by
the same covenant, although under a different dispensation, or a different form
of administration.

Again, If some of the natural branches were not broken off by unbelief, but by
faith kept their standing in covenant relation to God, and this standing in
covenant relation to God, in the gospel day, is a standing in relation to God
as his church and covenant people, by, and according to the external
administration of the covenant of grace under the gospel dispensation: Then the
natural branches did before, stand related to God by the external
administration of the same covenant of grace, although under a different
dispensation of it. What sense would there be in saying, that when the Gentiles
came to be taken into a covenant relation to God, even by the covenant of
grace, that they were grafted in, if the Jews had not stood in relation to God
by the same covenant? but another covenant essentially different. Do you think,
sir, that the Gentile church is grafted into the covenant of works? and stand
in relation to God by a dispensation of that covenant? Or do you suppose the
Gentile church is grafted in to a covenant relation to God, by a covenant that
is merely national, that does not mean, nor carry spiritual blessings in the
promise of it? Yes, you must hold to this abominable absurdity; or else make
Paul talk nonsense; or give up your assertion wherein you deny Abraham's
covenant to be the covenant of grace, and deny the jewish church to stand
related to God by a dispensation of the covenant of grace. According to the
baptists. Paul should not have said broken off, and grafted in; for when he
says, some of the natural branches were broken off, it fully implies that there
yet remained the stump, stock, and some of the natural branches which were
continued along, and the Gentiles by ingrafting, come in upon that root. And
hence says Paul to the Gentile church, B^ast not, for thou bear not the
root, but the root thee. Now by this roo^, stock, and branches which were
continued, cannot possibly mean the typical or ceremonial dispensation; for that
had waxed old, and was vanished away; therefore it was the essence of the
covenant relation it self, that did not change with the change of
dispensations. But as I said, according to the baptist notion, Paul should not
have said, Some of the branches were broken off, and the Gentiles grafted in
(...) but that all the branches, stock, an^ root, and all sunk together, and a
new stock and branches arose, essentially different. For if the church under
the ceremonial law, was not under a dispensation of the covenant of grace, and
the gospel church is, there can be no ingraftment in the case, but two distinct
things.

But that we may learn further, what the breaking off the Jews, and the
grafting in of the Gentiles meant, and intended, the parable of the vineyard,
Mat. 21. may afford us some light. None will deny, I suppose, but that the
vineyard represented and meant the jewish church state, with the privileges
thereof, which they fadly and wickedly abused, as you may see at large in the
parable, as Christ there represents and sets it forth. Then Christ demanded of
his hearers, what they thought the lord of the vineyard would do to those
wicked husbandmen? They answer, miserably destroy them, and let out the
vineyard to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their
season. Now it seems that Christ approved of their answer, for he further adds
and says; The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Now by the kingdom of God here, it is
evident that the same thing is meant that the vineyard represented, which as I
noted before was the jewish church state, with i^s privileges; and says Christ,
it shall be giv^n to a nation bringing forth, the frui^s thereof; referring to
the Gentile nation, who was about to receive the gospel, and through grace, did
bring forth, in some measure, answerable fruit. But now observe here, that it
was the same vineyard, the same kingdom of God, which was taken from the Jews,
that Christ says should be given to ^he Gentiles; that is, it must mean a
relation to God by the same covenant, viz the covenant of grace, although not
under the same dispensation of it.

But it s^ems that if you had been to have explained, or represented this
matter, your principles would not allowed you to have explained it just as
Christ has done. But your principles would have necessi^ated you to represent
the matter some how after this manner, viz. That the jewish church, by a
certain covenant relation they stood in to God, distinct in its nature from the
covenant of grace, had certain favors and privileges granted to them, which
might be compared to a vineyard let out, the fruits of which they were bound to
return in due season; but for their unfaithfulness and unfruitfulness, God in
righteousness determined he would take the vineyard from them. And what will he
do with it? Will he give it to the Gentiles, and try them whether they will
render answerable fruit? No, but God will take away the vineyard from the Jews.
and give the Gentiles another essentially d^^ferent, and a thousand times
better in its nature.

For certainly, if the jewish church did not stand related to God by a
dispensation of the covenant of gra^e, but if they were formed or constituted
upon a disp^^sation of the covenant of works; or upon a covenant merely
national that did not carry spiritual blessings in it; very certain it is that
the privileges of the same covenant are not given to the Gentile church. But
Christ says, the same vineyard, the same kingdom of God, shall be taken from
the Jews, and given to the Gentiles; and who must I believe? when Christ says
it is the same, I think it it safest and best to credit him, let the baptists
say otherwise ever so peremptorily.

But I think enough has been said under these four foregoing heads, to show,
that what you charge us with is not true, viz. That we do not construe and
interpret the new testament by the old, in order to support infant baptism: But
contrarily, we adhere to the new testament interpretation of the old, and hence
find a warrant for the practice. For from what has been said above, we may, I
think, remark these following things, as grounded and established upon the new
testament testimony, viz.

1. That the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace, containing
spiritual blessings, Gal. 3.17. Luke 1.72, -- 75.

2. That circumcision was a seal of the covenant of grace, Romans 4.11.

3. That when by God's gracious and sove^^ign appointment, Abraham's natural
seed were included within the external administration of the covenant of grace,
and brought under the bond and seal of the covenant, are considered as standing
in covenant relation to God, and as belonging to his visible kingdom, Acts
3.25. Romans 9.3. Mat. 8.12.

4. That to stand thus related to God by covenant, even by the external
administration of the covenant of grace, and brought under the seal and bond
thereof, is considered as a distinguishing mercy, great favor, privilege and
benefit, Romans 3.1, 2. Acts 3.26. chap. 2.39 1 Cor. 7.14.

5. That the Gentile church is grafted in to the same covenant relation to God;
that is, related to God by the same covenant of grace, as the jewish church
once stood in, although under a more glorious dispensation of the one and the
same covenant, and are come under the promise and blessings of it, so that the
blessing of Abraham is come on the believing Gentiles; to whom God said, through
the promised seed, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, as the language and
tenor of his gracious covenant; by virtue of which gracious promise, Abraham
did claim spiritual blessings to his own soul, and a place for his children, in
God's visible kingdom, and under the bond and seal of God's covenant, Romans 10
17. Gal. 3 11.14.

But that the blessing of Abraham is come on the believing Gentiles, and by
their relation to God by the same covenant, they may claim the good of the
promise, which is the same still, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, the new
testament will help us to some further confirmation respecting this: For we do
find in the new testament, that where one of the parents is a believer, the
federal holiness of the children is asserted. -- By God's gracious covenant
with the believer, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, where there is one
parent thus related to God, and his gracious promise, the wickedness of the
other can^ make null the promise; for the children are considered as standing
in relation to the believing parent, and holds that relation, to that parent
and God's gracious covenant, as much as if the other parent had no being. 1
Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. -- As for
your baptist nauseous interpretation of the word holy, here in this place, that
it means the children are not bastards, I don't think it worth while to spend
time to make a reply to it, seeing it is so mean a plea, to get by the force of
our arguments, and sufficiently confuted many a time already: only this I shall
observe, that it seems to be evident, by the drift and scope of the apostle's
argument, that that holiness he there spoke of, was in consequence of one of
the parent's being a believer.

Furthermore, the new testament confirms our opinion, because it speaks of, and
holds forth houshold^ baptism. 1 Cor. 1.16 Acts 16 15. And Peter, speaking of
No^h's houshold-salvation from the deluge, which was obtained upon the account
of the householder, he only being upright, he makes baptism a figure of ^t, or
that a figure of baptism. 1 Pet. 3.21. But if we deny household baptism upon the
account of the believing householder, and hold that baptism is to be administered
to individuals upon their own personal right, it more lamely, if at all
answers, the one to the other, as a figure. But if we consider believing Noah
taking his family into the ark, and thereby gives them a figurative salvation,
that is, instrumentally by him, and upon his account they had it, and hereby,
and herewith, he taught them, (for he was a preacher of righteousness) what was
necessary to their eternal salvation. And then view the figure in baptism,
while the believing householder takes his household under baptismal washing on
his account, and teaches them they must also be washed with the washing of
regeneration and the renewings of the Holy Ghost, in order to eternal
salvation; which is an acknowledgement that water baptism does not put away the
filth of the flesh; but in it there is the answer of a good conscience, viz. in
the householder, while he himself subjects to the ordinance of baptism, in the
belief that his sins are washed away in the blood of Christ, and brings his
children under baptismal washing or springling, a figure of saving washing in
the blood of sprinkling which cleanses from all sin.

Agreeable hereunto we find that upon the conversion of the head of a family,
the household was baptized, Acts 16 15.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. And although there is no
mention made of infants, yet households do include infants, and that is
sufficient for our purpose.

So that believers under the gospel, I mean such of them who have their
understandings fruitful in the knowledge of the word and will of God, in this
point, relating to the scriptural grounds and warrant for the practice of
infant baptism, may unite and sing, with the understanding, faith, and
gratitude, to the glory of God and free grace, the following song, when they
dedicate their children to God in baptism, viz.

"Thus says the mercy of the Lord
I Will be a God to thee;
I Will bless thy numerous race, and they
shall be a seed for me.
Abra'm believed the promised grace,
and gave his sons to God:
But water seals the blessing now
that once was sealed with blood.
Thus Lydia sanctified her house,
when she received the word:
Thus the believing jailor gave
his household to the Lord.
Thus later saints, eternal King!
thine ancient truth embrace:
To thee their infant offispring bring
and humbly claim the grace."
Perhaps, sir, you will say, that if I intended to write upon this controversy,
I ought to have taken the baptists arguments in course, and answered them in
their order particularly. To which I answer, in a few particulars, as,

1. What I aimed at principally in this letter was to dwell upon the positive
side, and establish that, or rather show the establishment of that, and so
meddle with no more of the baptists arguments than naturally fell in my way, in
order for so doing.

2. That method would be too long and tedious, and not at all consistent with
my designed brevity.

3. I apprehend that there is no need of taking that method; for if I aimed to
kill a tree of vile fruit, I think one stroke well laid at the root, would do
as much good as three or four struck at the boughs and branches. -- And what I
have here written, and the plan I have gone upon, if it stands the trial of the
written word, saps your scheme to the bottom, and overthrows it by the roots,
that the boughs and branches must die of consequence; I mean in
scripture-informed minds. -- And if the substance of what I have here written,
and the main drift and plan I have gone upon, will not stand the trial of God's
written word, I will turn baptist myself, as soon as ever I am convinced of it.
Not that I expect this will ever be; for I never was more fully established in
the scripture warrant for infant baptism, than I have been since I read your
answer to Mr. F's letter; to see how, such a writer as you, was obliged to
misinterpret the plain spirit and meaning of some parts of the scripture, in
order to get along with your scheme.

I know that the baptist pretend that they can raise so many and mighty
objections against this scriptural plan, I have been attempting to point out,
for the warrant of infant baptism, that thereby they think they can overthrow
it. But I think if they should raise as many objections against this plan, as
there are stars in the firmament, yet I apprehend, that with all their
multitude and magnitude they must be driven back before it, and made to
disappear, as all the stars in the fimament are driven back and made to
disappear before the rising sun. So that virtually, all objections are answered
already, in this scriptural plan established, for the grounds and warrant for
infant baptism. However, I will proceed to answer one or two of the heaviest
objections, that I know of, which you have against the practice, before I
conclude this letter.

1. Objection, That to baptize infants makes them members of the church, and
gives them a right to the Lord's Supper, as circumcision gave a right to the
passover; for if infants have a right to one seal, they must to the other; for
captism is as sacred an ordinance as the Lord's Supper; and if they have a
right to both, this is to build the church with unconverted men, as such, which
is contrary to the general language of the new testament,

To which I answer,

1. I acknowledge that some who hold to, and practice infant baptism, do improve
it according to the objection above, and suppose that the infant baptized has a
right to the Lord's Supper, without any true grace, or the professon of any.
But I suppose it to be an abuse and wrong improvement of the doctrine and
practice of infant baptism. But shall we reject infant baptism for that? If we
reject every thing that has been abused, we must reject the whole bible.

2. The objection, or objector, don't distinguish what kind of right, nor in
what manner, the believer's infant has a right to baptism. The child of a
believer has not a right to baptism by personal qualifications, but relative?
that is, standing so related to his believing parent: because that God in his
gracious and sovereign pleasure, was pleased so to couple the believer and his
child together in this matter, that in the External administration of the
Covenant of grace, one seal should be applied to both parent and Child. And
Ishmael, though a wicked Child, and turned out wicked in the end, yet had the
same relative qualification that Isaac had; that is, he stood so related to his
godly Father, that by God's gracious Covenant, it became Abraham's duty, and
Ishmael's privilege, to have the seal of Gods covenant, and the parent's
faith, applied to the Child. But Ishmael abusing his prilviledges, growing
profane and wicked, and not having, nor producing the personal qualifications
requisite for a continuance in God's church, even under that (comparatively)
dark dispensation, was rejected, and purged out. So the children of believers,
being baptized, or having the seal of God's gracious covenant applied to them,
under the gospel dispensation, it is upon their relative qualification, and
their right comes by their parents, or parent; God's covenant being still the
same, with the believer, thou and thy seed. But now if these baptized children
come to the Lord's-table, they are the actors, and not their parents; and
coming upon their own personal right, they must have the personal
qualifications requisite; and the new testament shows what they be, and insists
much upon them; as faith and repentance, or in a word, the truth of grace.

3. I remark a mistake in the above objection. When the baptist perceive, we
hold with them, that true grace is requisite in order to come to the
Lord's Supper, with the divine approbation, they seem to triumph in bringing
this objection against us, viz. That we pretend to hold infant baptism, from
circumcision, and yet will not let them come to the Lord's Supper upon that;
whereas circumcision, say they, gave the Israelites a right to the passover.
But here is some mistake, and the baptist seem to be quite willing to join with
the Stoddardeans -- By, this phrase I mean not to reflect upon the memory of
the venerable Stoddard. For I verily think that he was a man really great, and
truly good; though not so great nor good but that he was liable to mistake. And
that he did mistake, respecting the qualifications requisite for full communion
in the church, I think the great Edwards, his grand-so^, has sufficiently
shown. But as these principles, that baptism gives a right to the
Lord's Supper, if the persons are outwardly moral, and that the unconverted may
come to that sacred ordinance with the divine approbation; I say, as these
principles are so generally known, and spoken of through the land by the na^^^ of
Mr. Stoddard's, it is in reference thereunto that I will use (...) bove
expression, as being the most handy, and the easiest way (...) vey my ideas to
the reader.
Stoddardeans against us in it; perhaps they think the better to serve their
own turn by it. But I apprehend two armies against the truth, will never
overthrow it; especially when both are involved in one mistake. The mistake is
this; they say that circumcision gave the Israelites a right to the passover;
whereas I find there was a concurrence of other things and circumstances
necessary, in order to attend the passover with the divine approbation. Look in
Genesis 12. where the passover was first instituted, and there we find personal
directions how and after what manner the passover ought to be attended. They
were to eat the passover with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, to denote that
repentance accompanies faith: That those who feed on Christ, the Lamb of God by
faith, do it with bitter repentance for sin. So there were personal directions
further, they were to eat the passover with their loins girded, shoes on their
feet, and their staves in their hands; and was this to show that they were
circumcised? No, but to show that they were personally, and actually in a
marching posture from Egypt to Canaan, and that the power and strength of
Egypt, that night was broke. And afterward they never were to eat the passover
but in the circumstance of being found ceremonially clean; as well as to be
circumcised. Circumcision was a duty previous to the eating of the passover, I
allow; and so is baptism previous to the Lord's Supper, and requisite in order
thereunto, but I cannot allow it qualifies therefore, but where there is the
concurrence of other things, viz. those personal qualifications the gospel
requires; when any can come and feed on Christ the Lamb of God, with that faith
which true repentance attends, and show that they are in a marching posture to
the hea^^^^ly Canaan, and their native bondage to sin and satan is broke. --
And besides, to suppose that God did not then under the typical dispensation,
require any thing spiritual in the manner of their attending upon the passover,
in order for his gracious approbation, but only in a manner to answer to the
letter of the type, is to me, giving a strange idea and representation of the
unchangeable God. And yet if I form my opinion upon the baptists representation
of things I must conclude that formerly God was solax and indifferent, that he
required, and was content with only ceremonial holiness; but now is grown so
severe that he requires, and nothing less will content him, than real holiness
in his people.

But while I attend to these things, I find I am led where I am beset on both
sides with objections, and need the two edged sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God, that will cut both ways, and make the path of truth appear,
notwithstandstanding the attempts to block it up with objections; and trusting
I have the same at hand, I shall make a reply here both ways, And

1. To a Stoddardean objection, which is, that we have no right to keep a
baptized person from the Lord's Supper, if he be outwardly moral, although he has
no true grace, nor so much as professes it.

2. On the other hand the baptists say, it does the child no good to baptize it
before it has faith, this don't enable it to believe, nor secure it salvation,
and therefore it is no benefit at all.

Now both these objections arise from one root, however different the aims and
character of the parties may be who make them, viz. from this they both arise,
a secret kind of taking it for granted that it is not a person's sin, even
under the light of the gospel, that he don't truly believe in Christ, or become
converted. Now if this supposition were true the objections might possibly have
some grounds to stand upon, but it being false, the objections are only like
castles in the air.

1. I shall reply to the Stoddardean objection. And as I remarked before, one
who comes to the Lord's Supper, as it is a personal act, so the agent must come
upon his personal right, and consequently must be possessed of the personal
qualifications required, which I think is not merely infant baptism, nor an
outward moral life, but true faith. And as this might be proved from the new
testament in general, so from the 11th. chapter of Romans in particular. Paul is here
speaking of the Jews who were broken off from their church state by unbelief,
and the Gentile church, who was grafted in by faith. Now the unbelief of the
Jews who were broken off, and the faith of the Gentiles who were grafted in,
are opposed to each other. But the unbelief of the Jews was damning, therefore
the faith of the Gentiles was saving. And without any departure, or distinction
from this kind of faith by which the Gentile church at first was grafted in,
Paul tells them they must stand. Thou (O Gentile church) stands by faith. But
what does Paul mean by standing? Why in continuance; as his own words explain,
Be not high-minded but fear; for if God spared not the natural branches, viz.
the Jews, take heed lest he spare not you. So that the Gentile church is to
stand in continuance in that relation to God as his church, by says, and not
by baptism in infancy and outward morality merely, as the Stoddardean principle
pleads they may. But if the natural seed of believers, who are distinguished
from other children, by God's sovereign appointment, and their parent's act,
and brought under the bond and seal of God's covenant, and hereby into an
external nearness to God, and laid under additional obligations to repent of
sin, believe in Christ, choose God for their only portion, and unfeignedly to
dedicate themselves to him, even for time and eternity: I say, if they refuse
to do this, in these circumstances, and continue in possitive damning unbelief,
refusing Christ, and a cordial compliance with the gospel; they not only judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life, but hereby render themselves unworthy of a
continuance in God's visible church in the gospel day, which is to stand in
continuance, by says; therefore such must go out like a wicked Ishmael, and a
profane Esau, who sold his birthright; and the blame must lie upon themselves,
and not upon God, who appoi^^s rules, nor upon his church who attends to them.
But O! is not this hard? I answer, That if impenitency and unbelief in these
circumstances, was only their calamity and not their sin, it would be hard
indeed: but if unbelief is their sin, and the greatest of sins, in these
circumstances. I don't know who would think this hard, that will not think
damnation harder, to be inflicted for the same sin.

But a Stoddardean, upon the principle, will say, no, it is unreasonable that a
baptized child should go out of God's visible church, and his seed with him,
and to become heathen, for the want of true faith; no^ let one who was baptized
in infancy, do as well as he can when he becomes adult, without the grace of
true faith. and ^e shall preserve to himself and his posterity a standing in
the church of God: that is, let him profess his speculative faith and moral
sincerity, and he shall obtain a right to the Lord's Supper for himself, and
baptism for his children. Therefore I suppose one breathing out the very spirit
of the Stoddardean principle, may address himself to a baptized child, now
grown to adult years, and has children of his own, after this manner; O! to my
grief and sorrow, I find that there is some such cruel ministers and churches
in the land, who would sain be so severe to persons in your circumstances, as
to hold you off from the Lord's-table, and deny you baptism for your children,
and cause that you, at least that your children become heathen, because you have not that special grace of faith, belonging, and peculiar to regenerate men;
when notwithstanding you are possessed of so many amiable qualities and
virtues. I see you have a good conversation, a civil and moral life; and you
hold to orthodox principles, and are ready to profess your speculative says
and moral sincerity, and willingness, on this wise, to come under covenant
engagements to serve God for the future, as far as by his grace he shall enable
you. God forbid that his ministers and churches should deny you and your
children ordinances, and a continuance in the church upon such an upright
profession.

And thus the principle sooths up, and flatters the unbeliever, as though it was
not his sin that he don't truly believe, provided he is willing to come forward
in the profession and practice of the externals of religion. But I don't find
that the gospel thus paliates the soul-damning sin of unbelief, neither will it
compound matters with the unbeliever, and accept of other things, in the liou
of true faith.

2. And from the same root, as I said, as supposing that unbelief is not much
of a sin, if any, does the baptist objection arise when they say, it does the
child of a believer no good to baptize it before it has says, for baptism
don't secure salvation to the child, nor enable it to believe, etc. To which I
answer,

The question is not whether baptism secures the salvation of the child of a
believer, not whether it enables the child to believe. But the question is
whether the child is not hereby bro't under an additional obligation to believe
and repent; and whether thi^ additional obligation thus to do, is not a great
privilege, and of the nature of a mercy: and this is what I ass^rt. But if
impenitency and unbelief is not the sin of every man who enjoys the light of
the gospel, and continues therein, then the obligation to believe and repent
cannot be more bin^ing in one circumstance than another: and the baptized child
of a true believer, who by God's appointment and the parent's act, is brought
under the bond and seal of the covenant, is not additionally bound to believe
and repent. But if it be a duty to believe and repent truly and savingly, then
the obligation to perform this duty may admit of degrees, and the highest
degree the greatest mercy. And God has a sovereing right to favor some with a
greater obligation laid upon them to believe and repent, than others. As for
instance: A child born and bro't up in a land of gospel light, is under a
greater obligation to love, fear, and serve God, than one born and brought up
in a land of heathenish darkness. And this obligation is a great mercy and
privilege, as all will allow; and bestowed in a way of sovereignty; for he came
into being and existance in this situation, without any planning or contrivance
of his own; and here he is bound. O blessed bond! the stronger the better; but
if broken, the condemnation will be the greater. And what hinders but that
there may be higher degrees of obligations laid upon some children in way of
sovereignty than what I have mentioned? even by God's appointment to be born in
a greater external nearness to him, than barely in a land of gospel light; to
stand so related to God, and his church, as that by the external administration
of the covenant of grace, to be placed under the bond and seal of it? Who dare
say this is not a mercy and privilege? or that there is no additional bonds to
God in this standing? Although through the sin of unbelief, many times, the
privileges are misimproved, and the obligations with all their strength are
broken, and the children of the kingdom, in this sense, are finally cast out
and rejected of God; but they could not be cast out of God's kingdom, if they
had not had, in some sense, a standing in it.

If men are not, and cannot be laid under obligations to believe and repent
truly then I allow that the obligation cannot be increased by difference of
circumstances; and for the children of believers to be included in the external
administration of the covenant of grace, and to be baptized in infancy, does
them no good. But I trust that through grace. I never shall be left to embrace
such corrupt Here, sir, I would just put you in mind, that your great and
celebrated Dr. Gill, whose writings you recommend so much, with all his
eminency and greatness, has made a great mistake in a very material point in
divinity. I mention it because there are many in the land who swallow down such
divinity as sound and good. -- Some years ago, I read a pamphlet with a presace
by Dr. Gill, who recommended the book as good, and the divinity as sound; but
when I came to read it, I was surprised to find that Dr. Gill should recommend
such stuff as good divinity. Now the author's name I have forgot, but the
divinity of it (if it will do to call it by that name) I well remember. The
author, speaking of the final condemnation of the wicked, who perish from under
the light of the gospel, said, they would not be condemned because they did not
believe truly, or exercise saving faith, and repent evangelically: but they
would be condemned because they ^^d not improve their historical faith, or
speculative faith, in a better manner. And the weak grounds he thought to
support it upon, was this, that true faith, and true repentance, are the
special gift of God, and therefore seemed to think it could not be their sin
not to exercise these graces, unless God had actually first bestowed them upon
the sinner. But this divinity and argument would excuse the devil in hell, and
the wickedest man on earth, from any blame for not loving God with all their
hearts. For love to God is as much the special gift of God to a sinner, as
faith and repentance is; and if God don't give this special gift of love to
himself, to the sinner, he must excuse the sinner from blame and punishment,
according to this argument, if the sinner don't love God; although if the sinner
don't make as good an improvement of his common grace as he can, consistent:
with his reigning enmity, he shall be damned for that. -- In a word, it seems
by such divinity, that all proper ideas of man's moral obligations to perfect
holiness, is entirely lost; for what is the exercise of true faith, and
evangelical repentance, but particular branches of holiness? and such branches
of it too, as shows that the subject thereof is greatly wanting as to the
degree of holiness, which the moral obligations he is under, binds him unto.
divinity.

2. Objection. To baptize infants, is to make the church national under the
gospel, like the jewish church, whereas according to the new testament, the
church is considered as congregational only.

To which I answer,

1. That if infant baptism is supported by the word of God, then it may and
ought to be practiced, let it make the church national, or what it will.

2. But the objection is not true; infant baptism does not make the church
national, as to the essence of those things which denominated the jewish church
national. -- While the jewish church was national, their worship and discipline
was so; they must come so often to Jerusalem to worship, and had they set up
the like worship any where else, they would have been guilty of idolatry. But
under the gospel, the worship is not fixed; neither in this mountain, nor at
Jerusalem, but they are the true worshipers who worship the Father in spirit
and in truth.

And as to the discipline of the church under the gospel, it is congregational,
with respect to the gathering, building, organising, cleansing, or whatsoever
is necessary in order for the well being thereof; I say it is, or may be
altogether congregational, and not a whit the less so because the individual
members dedicate their children to God in baptism.

3. Objection. But the plain letter of the new testament is, believe and be
baptized To which I answer,

That the church was then first gathering and forming upon the gospel plan, and
those of whom it was required that they should believe in order to receive
baptism, were adult persons, and coming to that ordinance upon their own
personal right; and hence the personal qualifications were demanded: though it
appears, that some such brought their households with them, and it seems, as I
apprehend, were baptized upon their relative qualifications, as I before noted,
and so shall not add here. -- If I was going among the heathen, or in this land
either, to baptize any upon their own personal right, I should say, if thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may, and not else.

But before I conclude this letter, I would just remark a word or two upon some
things I find in your answer to Mr. F's letter.

1. In the 73 page you charge it upon the principle and practice of infant
baptism, without making any distinction, that such parents cry peace, peace to
their children, when there is no peace.

Now I acknowledge that there is a disposition in the fallen race of man, to cry
peace, peace to themselves, and to their children too, when God says there is
no peace. And many who practice infant baptism, are awfully guilty herein, no
doubt. But this is not to be charged upon the principle, but another cause. I
have known some baptists, the rankest sort of Arminians, but I never thought of
fathering arminianism upon the baptists principles, but upon another cause,
viz. The corruption of humane nature, together with satan's influence.

Again, on the other hand, there are some, not to say many, that go by the
denomination of baptist, who were dipped deeper in the antinomian spirit than
ever they were in the water; and from thence growing expert in slinging out
their invectives, against Babylon, antichrist and tradition, without making
any proper distinctions; calling every thing to be such that don't fellowship
them in their antinomian travel, they commence very spiritual christians in
their own op^nion; and are for a religion just like their own minds, which is
without form and void. Doctrional religion, and preaching the terrors of the
law, with them is reproached as legal; and to preach up conviction, conversion,
christian experience and a growing conformity to God, in the work of
sanctification, with them is termed old fashion religion, that used to be in
vogue when religion run low. They are after higher things, and more glorious,
in their own view, than merely increase of holiness, growth in sanctification,
and greater and greater conformity to God, viz. the travel of Zion according to
the work and witness of God in the spirit, as having out grown, and left all
creeds, articles of faith, principles, and written church-covenants as merely a
dead letter, belonging to anti-christ's kingdom. And hence they are always a
building, and always a breaking: always upon the theme of union, and yet always
contending; always right, and yet always altering; always in some glorious
travel, but never get along (in the right way) a step. Now if I should measure
the baptist principles and people, all off in a lump, by the principles and
practices of these sort of baptists I have above mentioned, you would, I doubt
not, think it was unfair dealing; and yet, it would be doing but as you have
done, while you charge it upon the principle, and all who hold and practice
infant baptism, of crying peace, peace to our children, as if safe enough, when
we have once baptized them. Whereas this suggestion is a vile and wicked
slander, let the man be ever so good from whom is came. For when, through grace,
we act up to our principles, we are so far from crying peace, peace to our
baptized children, that we cry wrath! wrath! the heaviest end of the divine
wrath will enevitably fall upon them, if they go on in sin, and remain
impenitent, seeing God has exalted them so high in point of privileges.

2. I remark, that with a good deal of satire and eloquence, (not to say
insult) you attempt to reproach Mr. F. and all in general who have wrote in
favor of infant baptism, that they use great ambiguity of words in this
controversy; so that their ways, like the harlots, are moveable that one cannot
know them -- But in so doing, you bring to my mind the apostle's severe
reprimand, Romans 2 11 Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not
thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? v. 1.
Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge
does the same things. Yea, the very same that thou chargest them of doing. It
is really mavelous to see with what ambiguity you express yourself; a little
hint by way of specimen, I will here just drop. When you are denying the
covenant with Abraham to be the covenant of grace, you say, the letter of it
was do and live. Now I would ask whether you mean by this, that the letter of
Abraham's covenant contradicted the true nature and spirit of it? if you don't,
then I would ask again, Whether you really mean, that Abraham's covenant, which
you say was do and live, was an Adam's covenant of works, which required
perfect doing, as a condition of life? Now if you meant thus, it would so
unavoidably involve you into such absurdities that I don't know how to think
you really meant so. Therefore you have hid your meaning under ambiguous terms,
unless you meant to use ambiguity upon design, which to me is very probable. So
again, speaking of Abraham's covenant, you use those scripture expressions
where God told Abraham, when he had enjoined circumcision upon him, And my
covenant shall be in your flesh. But you use them so ambiguously that you don't
distinguish whether you mean, as the scripture explains, that the token of
God's covenant should be in their flesh, or the essence of the covenant; but
the latter of which, with ambiguity of words you attempt to insinuate. So
sometimes you seem to represent Abraham's covenant to be neither the covenant
of works nor the covenant of grace; at other times almost conceed that it was
the covenant of grace: But your words are so ambiguous, and ways so moveable,
that I cannot know them.

3. I would remark a word or two upon the general vein, and strain of your
writings upon this subject. And truly, surprising it might well seem, to a
christian and catholic mind, to observe how that your principles contract and
narrow up, with such rigid superstition, a mind, which otherwise might be
considered as noble, excellent, and praiseworthy. Placing the very offense of
baptism in being put wholly under water; of which I shall not make any
particular reply in this letter, for it has already swelled in my hands much
beyond my first intention, neither do I look upon the mode so material, as the
subjects of baptism. -- You write with such peremptory airs of boast, as being,
by way of eminence, in the cause of God, while you are setting yourself against
infant baptism, and triumph so much in the supposed clea^ness of proof, and
fullness of demonstration for your si^e the question; with such a
representation of the weakness, or wickedness of those on the other side; that
I should be apt to think, as the saying ^s, if a man was to drop out of the
clouds, wholly ignorant of the scriptures in general, and this controversy in
particular, and was to read your answer to Mr F's letter, and to form up a
judgment by your representation of things there, he would go nigh to think that
there was no man of sense, understanding nor conscience in favor of infant
baptism. And it seems by the spirit of your writings, that you mean to
insinuate and impose this notion on the ignorant and credulous, that as fast as
any come to act honestly for the truth of reformation, and the cause of God,
they come into your sentiments and practice in th^se things. And it seems as if
you was ready to conclude, that what Job said once satirically concerning his
three friends, ought to be applied to you and your party, in sober sincerity.
Doubtless ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you. But I query in this
case, what would be the harm, and wherein the impropriety? if we should repeat
Job's words here, which his friends extorted from him by their censorious
charge they bro't against him. What know ye that we know not also, and wherein
are we inferior to you? Or to allude to the words of the apostle. Are ye
ministers of Christ? ^o are we. Are ye improved as instruments in the hands of
God, for the conversion of souls? so are we. Are ye for reformation, purity of
ordinances, and the power of godliness? so are we. Bear with me a little in
this folly of boasting, ye have compelled me.

I have observed, sir, that with other things in your public writings, you have
wrote, three or four times at least, in the vindication of your peculiar,
baptist principles, and never have yet had, as I have known, or heard of any
particular antagonist, in those points, that has appeared to write against you.
And it seems that you began to think that the day was your own, that you had
stopped every bodies mouth, or at least had struck all with such intimidating
fear, that there was not one stripting left who dare encounter with this great
Goliath, that has been these several times, defying one branch of the army of
the living God, viz. the little children of his gracious covenant, and visible
kingdom. -- And it seems you have lifted your sails rather too high -- Began to
triumph before you h^d taken the field -- Attempted to divide the spoil, before
you had won the battle. -- Infant baptism is not given up yet -- neither is it
a going to be by the church of God in general, notwithstanding there be these,
here and there, (and some of them very judicious christians in other respects,
yet in this particular, one and all of them, I apprehend, may justly be termed,
near sighted people) who stick inthe latter and are not able to penetrate
through the ba^k of the typical dispensation; I say, insant baptism is but a
going to be given up, although such there are, ready enough to boast of their
number under water. But m^^ of a good understanding in the church of God, and
that are blessed with a clear sight in the knowledge of his holy word, that can
through grace see, nigh at hand and at a distance too, can see the gospel as far
off as Abraham's covenant, as truly, though not so clearly, as in the new
testament, can see the new testament take off he vail from the old, and
discover the spirituality thereof; that can see the harmony of the two
testaments, and how they both terminate in one thing, even the salvation of
sinners by the blood of Christ, the one dispensation by the help of a type, the
other not needing of it, the antitype being come; that can see the covenant of
grace under both dispensations, and that the blessing of Abraham is come upon
poor Gentile believers now in the gospel day. I say, such will see a solid
foundation and scripture warrant for infant baptism, and feel firm and stable
in the point, altogether unmoved, as having firm ground to stand upon, even in
shaking ^mes; while others who built th^^r infant baptism upon the quicksand
and quag-mire of humane tradition and custom only, in shaking times, no wonder
if they feel their foundation give way, and they sink and are plunged.

As God has united all true believers with Abraham, in the blessings of the one
and same covenant, so all such as have their understandings fruitful herein,
will unite with Abraham, not only in acknowledging the blessings thereof as it
respects themselves personally, but their seed also. While others who are
wanting in fruitfulness of knowledge and understanding herein; although they
profess to be the children of Abraham, yet in this point will not do the works
of Abraham, but deny the seal of God's gracious covenant to their children,
this did not Abraham.

But to draw toward a close, and as expresh^^ of my ideas, and the nature of
the present subject, I shall here add a divine hymn, entitled, Circumcision and
baptism.

From Doct. WATTS.
Thus did the sons of Abra'm pass
Under the bloody seal of grace;
The young disciples bore the yoke,
'Till Christ the painful bondage broke.
By milder ways does Jesus prove,
His Father's covenant, and his love;
He seals to saints his glorious grace,
And not forbids their infant race.
Their seed is sprinkled with his blood,
Their children set apart for God;
His Spirit on their offspring shed,
Like water poured upon the head.
Let every saint with cheerful voice,
In this large covenant rejoice;
Young children in their early days,
Shall give the God of Abra'm praise.
P. S.

AS in the foregoing letter I have wrote, as the grounds and warrant for infant
baptism, the true sentiments of my own mind, as it has been led, I trust, to
take the truth from the word of God it self, and not from humane testimony; so
I have proceeded with taking but very little notice, of what others have wrote
on my side the question before me. -- So on the other hand, I don't pretend I
have attended closely to a multitude of arguments which baptist authors have
advanced to support their principles, only just some of them which fell in my
way. For my design and aim has been, in the above letter, to dwell mainly on
the positive side, and show the scripture establishment thereof -- And if what
I have advanced on the positive side, for the establishment of infant baptism,
will not stand the trial of God's written word: it is not the answering of a
thousand particular baptist arguments will make it stand: but if the ground
work and foundation I have gone upon, is warranted by the scripture, then I
think I may be excused from being obliged to go the tedious round of all
particulars. Or if hereafter I should judge it necessary, and think I have a
call thereto in providence, to answer any opposing arguments to the plan I have
here laid down, I am ready to persuade ^^self they may all be shielded off, in
a short and concise manner. -- Therefore I give this public notice, that if
you, sir, or any other baptist writer shall pretend to answer this foregoing
letter, and don't attend immediately and directly to the ground work I have
laid down; but leaving that unmolested, at least I mean if you don't attempt to
molest it, but hover round about, or dwell upon other points, I shall look upon
it so impertinent a performance, in all probability, that I shall not think it
worthy of any further reply.

But to this it may be you will answer, that you also have been upon the
positive side, endeavoring to show the scripture warrant for the baptist
principles, and had as good a right to require me to attend directly to your
plan, and the groundwork thereof, but seeing I have took another method, you
have a right to call my performance so impertinent a piece that it deserves no
answer.

If you should say thus, I am willing to say amen to the controversy; for I am
far from desiring to continue in it; but let the judicious and impartial judge
which of these two positives, your side the question and mine, both pretending
to a scripture warrant; I say, let the judicious judge which in reality has it.

In the school of Christ we must, and may, learn to distinguish between a man
and his sentiments. The man we must love, his sentiments we may hate. And through
grace, I trust I can say, truly, I remain a cordial friend to your person,
although I have appeared against your sentiments.


