PETTIE's ISLAND Land and Cash LOTTERY, To be Drawn on the said Island, in
Delaware, For the Disposing of certain valuable LOTS and IMPROVEMENTS, situate
in the Northern Liberties of the City of Philadelphia, and Province of
Pennsylvania.
The SCHEME is as follows; A LOT of 100 Feet Front and 500 Feet deep, with a
thriving Orchard on the back Part of the Lot, a good Garden under Pale Fence, a
large Three-story Brick Dwelling with four Rooms on a Floor, and convenient
Out-Buildings, rents at Forty Pounds per Annum is L 700 0 0 1 A Ground-rent of
L 17: 10: 0, per Annum, estimated at 20 Years Purchase, 350 0 0 1 A Ground-rent
of ditto, ditto, 350 0 0 1 A Ground-rent of L 12* per Annum, to be purchased at
L 200, 200 0 0 1 A Brick Tenement and Lot, 20 Feet on Second-street Continued,
and about 200 Feet deep, 130 0 0 1 A ditto ditto ditto ditto 130 0 0 1 A Frame
Tenement ditto ditto ditto 130 0 0 1 A ditto ditto ditto ditto 130 0 0 1 A
Ground-rent of L 2* per Annum. 60 0 0 (...) 1 A Ground-rent of L 12, per Annum,
to be purchased at L 200, 200 0 0 1 A Brick Tenement and Lot, 20 Feet on
Second-street Continued, and about 200 Feet deep, 130 0 0 1 A ditto ditto ditto
ditto 130 0 0 1 A Frame Tenement ditto ditto ditto 130 0 0 1 A ditto ditto
ditto ditto 130 0 0 1 A Ground-rent of L 3, per Annum, 60 0 0 1 A vacant Lot,
40 Feet Front, suitable for a convenient Tan-yard 60 0 0 1 A ditto 20 Feet
Front and about 200 Feet deep 40 0 0 1 A ditto ditto ditto 40 0 0 1 A ditto
ditto ditto 40 0 0 1 A ditto ditto ditto 40 0 0

The following PRIZES to be paid in CASH without any Deduction, 1 of L 100 9 0
is 100 0 0 1 50 0 0 is 50 0 0 4 25 0 0 are 100 0 0 10 10 0 0 are 100 0 0 20 5 0
0 are 100 0 0 40 2 10 0 are 100 0 0 400 2 0 0 are 800 0 0 490 Prizes 2010
Blanks, which is little more than 4 Blanks to a Prize. 2500 Tickets, at Four
Dollars a Ticket, are L 3750 0 0 The several Lots of Ground here described, are
all situated in the Northern Liberties, adjoining the Upper-End of the City,
and one Mile from the Courthouse.

THOSE who are inclined to become Adventurers, may depend on the utmost
Punctuality and Justice. The Drawing will begin as soon as the Tickets are
disposed of, under the Inspection of four reputable and substantial
Freeholders; immediately after the Drawing, a List of the fortunate Numbers
shall be published, and the Cash-Prizes paid; such Persons as shall draw any
Part or Parts of the above-described Estate, may depend on a good and
sufficient Title, being made by their obligated Friend,

W. M.


