AN ORATION, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE FOUNDERS OF WILLIAM AND MARY COLLEGE,
DELIVERED ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF ITS FOUNDATION, AUGUST 15, 1771.

BY E. RANDOLPH, STUDENT.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM RIND, MDCCLXXI.

TO THE REVEREND SAMUEL HENLEY, PROFESSOR of MORAL PHILOSOPHY, IN WILLIAM and
MARY COLLEGE,
THE following ORATION, in Testimony of the utmost Esteem, and Gratitude, is
most respectfully inscribed, by his

Much obliged, Obedient Servant, EDMUND RANDOLPH.

Mr. PRESIDENT, GENTLEMEN of the SOCIETY, GENTLEMEN, and FELLOW STUDENTS,
I SHOULD be ungrateful indeed, did I not with Pleasure, embrace this
Opportunity to commemorate the Munificence of our Royal Benefactor. For, as far
as I can trace back the Scenes of Life, or recall the fleeting Ideas of my
Childhood, these Walls, reared by the pious Hands of William, have sheltered me
in my infant Studies. I am well aware, that I shall sink in the Attempt, but I
depend on your Benignity to support me: I am conscious also, that it requires
an Apelles to pourtray an Alexander; but should I be fortunate enough, to drop,
during this Essay of Youth, any Thing, worthy your Attention, I should exclaim,
(...), with more than Egyptian Joy, as having found my Reward in the
Approbation of the Learned.

"Heaven," says Pope, "first taught Letters for some Wretch's Aid, some
banished Lover, or some captive Maid:" But surely then only are they equal to
their Dignity, when they "raise the Genius and mend the Heart." The Tears of
the Macedonian, as he stood by the Tomb of Sigeum, flowed from a Sense of his
unhappy Fate, in wanting a Homer to celebrate his Actions: But how had he wept,
how miserable had he been, if he had thought, that the boldest Flights of
Genius, like the Leaves of the Sybil, must have been given to be dispersed by
the Winds? How had the Glory of Antiquity perished in hopeless Oblivion, had
not Letters interposed to perpetuate its Existence? Without their Aid, in vain
had the Poet sung the Anger of Pelides, or Passion of Agamemnon: In vain
painted the Horror of Impiety in Diomede, wounding a Divinity, or cautioned
against the delusive Witchery of Fortune, by presenting Hector, now exulting
over Patroclus vanquished, now dragged in Triumph round the Trojan Wall.
Without their Aid, we never had beheld Aeneas, bending under the Weight of
filial Duty, Pharsalia had never risen to our View, to display the Havoc of
Ambition, nor had the dissolute Assyrian been prepared for Death by the written
Herald of his approaching Ruin. Through them the Wisdom of Greece, of Rome, of
the whole World, passes before us in one continued Mirror, Ages, long elapsed,
reflect a searching Light upon those which are to come, and the Divine
Indulgence commissions us to be happy, by thus revealing the Mysteries of
Learning. Consider! Man comes into the World, a naked, helpless Animal, free
from Biasses of every Kind: Consider! He cannot remain in a State of
Neutrality. He may indeed, while Vice insinuates on this, and Virtue awes on
that, Side, in the Intervals of Hesitation put on the Smile of Revelry to one,
and sickly over his divided Looks with Melancholy to the other, but must
shortly, like Herculus, determine on the Path, as each suspects the Influence
of its Rival. Vice is daily reinforced with Millions: Even Custom herself has
enlisted under its Banner. Let it but wave the Crimson Standard, Fancy, with
all her Train, comes fluttering around: Let it but give the Blast for the
nocturnal Orgy, Intemperance, Debauch, and Lust gambol in the Van, while
Disease and Misery follow in the Rear. Amid such Tumult and Disorder, where
shall Virtue find a Friend? Should she strive to mix with the Crowd, by them
she is pushed back with Contempt: Should she retire from factious Strife, she
is proclaimed the chimerical Existence of a distempered Brain. Because she
allures them not to the Shores of Ruin, by the Songs of Guile, the Young are
too apt to consider her Habitation, as the Exclusion of all Joy. But let them
recur to Learning, their Prejudices will be removed, they will know how to
prize that which is estimable. Whether we be versed in metaphysical
Speculations, or contemplate the Wonders of the material World, we shall reap
these Advantages. If we resign ourselves to the former, they will teach us "to
abstract, extend, and spiritualize our Ideas," will render us superior to the
ensnaring Nets of Sophistry, will qualify us to unveil Falsehood in Disguise, to
trace Skepticism in its Labyrinth of Subterfuges, and oppose Truth to the
labored Disquisitions of false Refinement.

But while the Hand of Science detects to our Eye, the connecting Fibers as it
were, and vital Principles of Nature, while we explore the several Properties
of Matter in all its primary Forms, and artificial Combinations, we are
capacitated for inhancing the Comforts and Means of Life. Then, then indeed! we
turn our Eyes up to the Heaven of Heavens, haste to distant Planets, and descry
other Systems. In the Laws which govern their Revolutions, we admire unbounded
Goodness, in the Forces, which retain them in their Orbits, Almighty Power.
Mere Sense circumscribes the Views of none but the ignorant, the Terms of Space
we here can never know; for to us new Firmaments now arise, new Suns now kindle
up to our Imagination, in infinite Succession, "in regular Confusion, and we
hail thee, O GOD, "Father of all, in every Age,
"In every Clime adored,
"By Saint, by Savage or by Sage,
"Jehovah, Jove, or Lord."


Yet Virtue disdains no Heart which is open to her Reception. She may be found
under the Cottages of Ignorance, as well as amid the buzzing Schools of
Letters. Nay, I will add, that she may exist independent of Learning, that the
thoughtless Clown oftimes possesses more Probity than the skilful Critic. But,
when the Statuary's Chizzel has hewn off the formless Mass, that encumbered the
latent Figure, when it has given Strength of Features, Elegance of Shape, and
Expressions of Life, how far does this polished Marble disclaim all Connection
with the Rudeness of its kindred Quarry?

It is you, fair Science, who touched Confusion into Order, and spurred into
Action "the lethargic Powers of the human Breast." Before the Days of
Literature, though the Secretions of Matter had exhibited the Form of a World,
the Savageness of Mankind seemed to continue, the Anarchy of Chaos. Uncertain
of his Den, "the sad Barbarian" roved from Field to Field, "fought the fierce,
tusky Boar for his Acorn Meal, and where the descending Night overtook his
wearied Steps, there he laid him down, to refresh himself for the Morrow's
Contest. While the "mixed Tempests" of the Winter, forbad the Chase, while the
leafless Tree denied her Fruit, and the general Pulse of Nature seemed
benumbed, whither could he betake himself for Amusement, whither fly for
Sustenance, how rescue his active Limbs from motionless Torpidity? A Friend he
knew not: The "tender Ties of Relationship" could not bind the boisterous Soul
of Licentiousness, untutored by the Precepts of Learning. He was "desolate in
Crowds," and how could Solitude afford him the Companion of the Scholar. Worse
than the Beasts of Prey, he cared not for Futurity, and must have starved in
emaciating Penury, had he not rifled the Stores of the Brutes. But it was
Discipline, which taught him to melt at another's Woe, to sympathize with
another's Joy, and forgive the ungenerous Robbery of his Birthright. It was
she, who called out from amid the Woods, and Wilds of Nature, the uncivilized
Herd of Men, changed their "blood-polluted Furr into the woolly Vestment," and
united them by common Interests, and social Laws.

But if the Sluggard still clings to his downy Bed, if Intractibility, cannot
now be soothed to Application, and Folly still rebels against its Happiness,
behold! the Hand of Majesty extending the Laurel to reward, and the Trumpet to
proclaim. Whither have the Monuments of Roman Glory vanished, like fantastic
Visions? Whither the Child of Justice? -- Numa is gone to "hide his diminished
Head." Whither the willing Victims to their Country's Safety? Decius, Paulus,
and Curious fall a ready Prey to Oblivion. Whither the Patron of Learning? --
Have thou fled, Augustus? Indeed: And "blushing drops his Wreath" at the more
illustrious Name of William. The fortuitous Title of Inheritance often serves
as a Ladder, upon which Demerit may climb up to Honors, and the Crown, though
thrice refused, is but a doubtful Evidence of Sincerity. Yet William challenged
not the Preference under the Sanction of the Nassau Race, but under the
Protection of the Nassau Virtues. Nor did he buy the Devoirs of a Parasite to
make a Parade of his Integrity, but under the Shield of Innocence defied the
Shafts of Calumny. What is it to us, that no Footsteps of victorious Rage were
left in his Camp, no Tincture of Monarchal Pride stained his Royal Purple, and,
when with eager Haste he thunderedon the Foe, with eager Haste he lent the Hand
of Mercy to raise him up? The Horror of Bellona shocks the Solemnity of this
Day, and the milder Influence of Minerva demands the Character of William, as
free from the Bustle of martial Life. -- It shines with the Eclat of more than
Roman Virtue, unclouded by Roman Vice. Nature seems to have reanimated him with
all the Glory of his Ancestry. The Ravages of Superstition began to lose their
Force and Fury, when this Prince embarked in the Cause of Religion. Numerous
Conspiracies were projected, numerous Snares laid against his Life: But the
Favor of Heaven put forth a Star to lead him into the Path of Security, gave
him Power to tread upon the young Lion, and the Adder, and look! Whatsoever he
has done, it has prospered.

The Flowers, which, without his Care, had blushed unseen, he transplanted into
this his own fair Garden: The latent Gem, which soon had mouldered into Dust,
is here prepared to glitter on the Crown: Nay, the Fount is here struck out,
where the Muses choose to inhabit. Cadmus instructed Greece in Letters, and
Greece was grateful: Triptolemus first opened to the astonished World the
Treasures of the teeming Field, and the astonished World demonstrated their
Gratitude by following his Example: But can we, the Offspring of his Care,
mention the Name of William, and not be enraptured with his Praise? Dare we
not, with heartfelt Joy, admire his Virtues, his amazing Virtues? Methinks I
read in the Looks of this infant Throng a Desire to speak, methinks, they all
unite their Voices, and dictate to me, what they feel. "How happy," say they,
"are we under the Shadow of the Royal Wing? It matters not to us, though "the
World be made for Caesar," provided we can find a Refuge in the Royal Favor.
To him it is perhaps owing, that the savage Indian is not now defiling this
holy Spot, exulting in barbarous Triumph over his captive Fellow Creature,
pinioned at the Stake of Slaughter, and panting with an impious Thirst after
the unhappy Victim's Blood. Even the British Lions felt the Greatness of their
Charge: William and Mary, the unalienable Object of his Love, were entrusted to
their Care. No Medean Charm could stupify their Vigilance: The golden Fleece of
Heaven rested in impregnable Security. The Art of Raphael might picture the
unsunned Snow, as an Emblem of Chastity, or paint the speaking, correspondent,
Glances of the Eye, as Symbols of true Affection; but Invention itself would be
baffled in its Attempts, to rival her Innocence, or the tender Regard of their
united Hearts, by Fable or Allusion."

But alas! how frail, how fickle is the State of sublunary Things! how like the
transient Colors of the fleeting Bow! And yet we foolishly imagine, that
Summer Scenes can bloom amid the Storms of Winter, give ourselves Credit for
the Morrow, and with the Falcon soar in the empty Space of Hope, till the
Object of our Prey eludes us. "Fair laughed the Morn:" Wrapped in pleasing Fancy,
we fondly thought, as Heaven had restored to us a William in a Norborne, some
Guardian Angel would have warded off the fatal Blow. This sweet Deception
played before our Eyes in all its fairy Mazes, led us from Scene to Scene,
pictured Joy behind, Joy in endless Perspective, till at last the Enchantment
ceased, when we heard the Knell of our Friend, our Pattern, our Botetourt. We
beheld him pale, as afflicted Patience on a Monument. We touched the Hand,
which once smoothed the rugged Pillow of Disease: 'Twas cold. We closed the
Eye, that once shed the pitying Tear: 'Twas quenched. The Voice which once
infused Balm into the wounded Spirit, now spoke no more. Man! foolish Man! does
thy Heart exult, should Fame herald the abroad, the Hero of thee Age, should
animated Busts bespeak a pompous Parentage, or gilded Roofs receive thee, as
their Lord! For a Moment stop thy Career, approach, where Berkley lies,
approach where Berkley is intombed, and see the Vanity of human Expectations.
This great Man -- great let me call him -- was placed on the Pinnacle of
Admiration. He had Wealth, sufficient to glut even Avarice itself, and Titles
to lull asleep the most restless Ambition. But he coveted Riches, merely to
consecrate them by a proper Use, he desired Authority, only to enforce his
Example, and what he wished for he received, as the golden Censer receives its
Frankincense, to "spread a sacred Gale of Blessings around on all." He kept his
Eyes, steadfast on the End, and Aim, of his Being: from his Piety, his
Presence, our sacred Chapel derived a daily Luster, and, though his Attention
to the Commands of his Maker could not disarm Death of his Power, yet at least
did it disarm him of his Terrors. He thought himself, as yet, but an Embryo in
Existence, and that he then only was entering on the Theater of Life, when Fate
drew up the Curtain of Futurity. "The Almighty spoke." The Scene is past, and
weeping Science, absorbed in Woe, pays the last Tribute of her Gratitude, a
Tear. She stretches forth the Laurel, but the Laurel droops: The baleful
Cypress with its funereal Gloom saddens the silent Vault. There we saw him
interred, there committed to the Dust, and, while Despondence sat on every
Face, in the pealing Anthem, the pensive Look, the broken Sigh, you read, you
heard, that Berkley was no more. But in vain do we weep for him, since "The
dread Path once trod,
"Heaven lifts its everlasting Portals high,
"And bids the pure in Heart behold their GOD."


But, my Fellow Students, how can we better solace ourselves for the Loss of
our Friend, than by endeavoring not to need him? -- What avail the hidden
Treasures of the Mine, if fettered Indolence dissuade you from the Question?
What avails the yellow Harvest, if the Husbandman denies his Sickle? "Beast,
Bird, Air, Fire, the Heavens, the rolling Worlds, all Nature lives by Action."
Nothing lies at Rest, but Death, and Ruin, nothing can purchase Ease, and
Quiet, but Industry, and Perseverance. "Who would suffer the Slings, and Arrows
of outrageous Fortune, who would bear the Whips, and Scorns of Time, the
Oppressor's Wrong, the proud Man's Contumely, or groan, and sweat under a weary
Life, but that the Hopes of an undisturbed Asylum for impotent Old Age, cheered
his drooping Spirits in the round of Misery?" -- "The Heart-Ache, and the
thousand natural Shocks, which Flesh is Heir to," daily prove the Insufficiency
of earthly Bliss, and Reason bids us crop its Pleasures, as we pass through
this Vale of Tears. But before we can enjoy them, we must labor to know, where
they bloom, how to unmask the Deceit of Ruin, which bristles with its Bed of
Thorns, disguised by the false Appearance of the Rose. Consult your Breasts,
and tell me, if Pleasure lies in the Smiles of Beauty: Tell if the precious
Moments of Mortality were intended to be sacrificed at the Shrine of Lust, or
if Duty injoins us to tread in the Footsteps of the Brutes. This cannot be your
Creed, these cannot be your Wishes. You are reasonable Beings, and can
therefore steel yourselves against the envenomed Dart. Envenomed indeed; for,
like the deadly Present of Nessus, it burns, and burns, and will for ever burn.
Whither then shall we seek for Pleasure? In the brimming Goblet? -- In the
brimming Goblet seek for Destruction: In the brimming Goblet lay down the
Distinction of Humanity, and in the midnight Revel call forth the Beasts to
associate with their new Relation. For, can the blushing Cup afford one cordial
Drop to Remorse, give an Opiate to Pain, and "steep the Senses in
Forgetfulness?" It may cheat us of our Remorse, it may cheat us of our Pain, as
we quaff the luscious Potion; yet in the End it does but dissolve a Pearl which
the combined Wealth of the World cannot repurchase, it does but open new
Sources of Misery, rushing with redoubled Force. Let us not put it to the
Trial: Let not the Examples of those, who have miscarried, speak with as little
Credit as the Prophesies of Cassandra, and thus will Youth arrive at true
Philosophy, real Pleasure, and solid Happiness. Arise, renounce the Errors of
your Age, and approve yourselves worthy of Royal Patronage. If past Hours have
escaped, unimproved, quit not the present Opportunity, but, like the holy
Patriarch, clasp the parting Angel to thy Bosom, until he bless thee. Let
future Statesmen, future Lawyers, future Divines here spring up, but such
Statesmen, such Lawyers, such Divines, as shall strive to do Honor to their
Family, their Country, and this, their Alma Matter.


