The SCOURGE. Numb. I.
Major Haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a Iure and Legibus, quam a
Parentibus. A greater Inheritance descends to us from the Laws, than from our
Progenitors.
THE chief Magistrate is at last become so corrupt, that without some
alteration in his conduct, we have all the misery to dread that can befall a
nation, the laws have for a long time ceased to be the rule of government; they
are no longer a terror to villains nor a protection for the innocent; justice
and right are banished the kingdom, and in their place, the chief Justice and
the Prince have substituted cruelty and oppression. To claim a restitution of
those rights which the Sovereign encouraged his ministers to violate, is
dignified with the title of treason and sedition. To assert and maintain the
common rights of mankind, and support upon the principles of law and the
constitution, the liberties and privileges peculiar to this nation, is now a
scandalous, malicious, and treasonable libel. In a word, the situation of this
country is much more deplorable at this time, than at the last stupendous
revolution. The danger of a total subversion of the government, and extinction
of the laws and liberties of England, is much greater now, from the corrupt
subserviency of the present house of Commons to the despotic designs of the
King and his ministers, than it was before the revolution, from the arbitrary
and popish designs of King James. Indeed we have now hardly one shadow of our
liberties left, and with them seems to be lost the heretofore invincible and
free spirit of Englishmen. However I still entertain a better opinion of my
countrymen, than to believe that they will degenerate so far from the virtue of
their ancestors, as to resign up all their liberties at the shrine of
despotism, and passively submit to a state slavery. No! I have a more noble, a
more generous opinion, of the bravest, and I hope the freest people in the
world; I can conceive they will soon see the necessity of leaving their wives,
their children and dearest connections, and once more, gloriously vindicate
their own rights, against the wickedness, treachery and corruption of the three
estates of the realm, who should be their protectors; but who are become their
known and notorious enemies, who have been for some time endeavoring to
destroy, the liberties of Englishmen, and the constitution of England. Yes my
fellow countrymen I am persuaded the day is not far distant, when we must all
stand forth, and bravely attempt a restoration of our rights, or nobly die in
the cause of freedom. Let me rouse you if I can.

Consider, my friends, upon your virtue and firmness, depends the liberties,
and happiness of you and your children. If you vigorously exert yourselves at
this time, you may yet recover your country, even from the brink of ruin upon
which it stands at this melancholy era.

Consider, my friends by some means or other the integrity of the judges is
corrupted, and it is shrewdly suspected, by the prince upon the throne.

Consider, your lives are now exposed to false accusations, and your persons to
arbitrary imprisonments and heavy fines.

Consider, the judges before whom you are to stand upon life and death, and
before whom all cases concerning liberty and property must be brought, venal
and corrupt; witnesses, in all cases of moment to you, suborned and perjured;
and the juries who are to decide your fate; packed, bribed and modelled, to the
iniquitous and pernicious designs of a court serving judge, or a weak, wicked
and detestable ministry.

Consider, the sovereign and his ministers, have packed a House of Commons, by
bribery and corruption, and that they keep a majority of the representatives of
the kingdom, in pay and dependency with the public money. And these abandoned
tools are now giving sanction to every diabolical scheme of the King's minions,
and as fast as possible riveting the fetters of Britons.

Consider, the great bulwark of the constitution Magna Charta notoriously
violated in a variety of instances, whether by the immediate order or direction
of the King, is not material to determine, it is only necessary to say, it was
not done without his knowledge, otherwise redress had been obtained from his
hands; he is therefore deeply involved in the guilt of his ministers.

Consider, the declaration of rights, the Habeas Corpus act and trial by jury,
all explained away and reduced to mere shadows and empty names. The King must
be weak indeed if he could give the least countenance to measures so
destructive of his own interest and welfare; yet it is not possible to draw any
other conclusion, for wicked and venal as our chief justice is and hardened in
villainy as the present ministry are, they never would have been daring enough
to have proceeded so far without such authority.

Consider, the act of settlement is prostituted, and every clause in it, made
for the benefit of the people, either repealed or rendered useless.

Consider, the late daring attempt of the ministers to influence the election
of one of the sixteen peers for Scotland. Can you my friends be so far duped,
can you be so credulous as to believe, that Lord North, and Lord Sandwich, (the
last not three hours in office) would be so presuming as openly and avowedly to
subvert the constitution, and risque their heads, without the authority of the
sovereign, for their proceeding, and a promise of protection; no my countrymen,
this is too bare faced, here we cannot be deceived. If the King did actually
authorize his ministers to do what Lord North and Lord Sandwich have done, he
committed high treason, violated his coronation oath, and dissolved the compact
between the House of Hanover, and the people of England. It is difficult to
bring proof; but the conclusion is obvious.

Consider, Lord Mansfield, has succeeded so far in his vile, his infamous
design of destroying the liberty of the press, that there is not one bookseller
has now resolution enough to publish the most trifling essay wrote with any
kind of spirit in defense of the common rights of mankind; great and infinite
are the obligations, the people of England are now under to Mr. Moore, who has
boldly stood forth in these corrupt, these degenerate times the friend to his
country and mankind; and who still perseveres, unawed by fear or prosecution.
Had it not been for him, this and many other papers of the same kind would not
have been ushered into the world, and we had now been little better than slaves.

In short consider, every fence to your liberties destroyed, and the
constitution torn up by the roots. Once more I say consider, seriously consider
these things, consider this picture I have drawn; here is no false coloring,
this picture is drawn by the hand of truth. Will you hesitate then one moment
what course to take; no, if you are Englishmen, if I may dignify you (I mean
deservedly) with the title of Britons, you will not. Fired with the noble
spirit of your ancestors, you will seek that redress for the injuries you have
received which the laws of God and nature authorize.

The Sovereign is obstinate and we must be resolute; remember (King John
notwithstanding all his attempts to render himself absolute, was at last, by
the virtue and courage of our forefathers, reduced to (...) than obedience to
the laws. They (...) suffer their liberties to (...) from them, by lawless
(...) designs of their Prince, were determined to die gloriously in defense of
them. Their cause was a righteous one, they were successful, and obliged their
ungrateful monarch to sign the great charter of liberties, at once preserving
themselves free, and at the same time securing to their posterity that most
desirable blessing. Our cause my friends, is the same, it is the cause of our
country. And we like them must either proceed in the same manner, or suffer
ourselves to be enslaved, and involve millions yet unborn in the same miserable
and unhappy state.

You are not only warranted, but required to enter into associations, and oaths
for the preservation of your liberties and the constitution. The words of Magna
Charta runs thus, "That in case the King should violate any part of it, and
should refuse to rectify what he had done amiss, it should be lawful for the
barons, and the whole people of England to distress him by all the ways they
can think of, such as the seizing on his Castles, Lands, and possessions,
provision being only made for the safety of the persons of the King and Queen,
and of their children.

I believe there is not in this kingdom, one man, when he seriously reflects
(unless it be some ministerial hireling) who will deny that the Sovereign has
violated the GREAT CHARTER, and the laws of the land. There is often a
necessity of speaking the truth, and this is a truth the generallity of mankind
believe, though they have not resolution enough to declare it openly. It
appears to me the grossest absurdity even in thought, to suppose that the
ministry would act daily in direct opposition to the laws of the land, and the
chartered rights of the people; if they were not supported by their Prince, no,
it is certain he encourages then, we are sure they act with his consent, if not
by his advice; otherwise they had been delivered up to the justice of their
country, or at least dismissed from his presence and councils: it is therefore
nonsense to throw the odium and guilt of public measures, entirely upon the
minister, when the King only appears to be blameable* because it is in his
power wholly to prevent them. I shall always speak in respectable terms to the
Sovereign, but if it should be thought I speak too freely, let it be remembered
the circumstances of the times demand it. I hope not to live to see the time
when the people of England shall be so loyal, as to make their Prince a
compliment of their liberties; nor so corrupt as to suffer him by lawless force
to wrest from them their birthright, their inheritance, which ought to be as
dear to them as their lives, and never should be resigned but with their last
breath. In this manner I would have them act, and in this manner I hope they
always will act; they, best show their loyalty to their Prince, who defend the
laws and the constitution; his title and continuance upon the throne will be
very precarious; when once they are effectually destroyed he could not ensure
himself either peace, or happiness; no it is but reasonable to suppose, that he
would fall in the general ruin, if not, it might be attended with the
destruction of his family afterward; these considerations I should think would
always be sufficient inducements for every Prince governing a free people not
to violate his coronation oath (...) in one instance to break through the laws,
and deny right to his people

Many have (...) attempts since the foundation (...) government, to break in
upon (...) constitution; and with various success. More than once it has,
seemingly been overturned and destroyed, either by the open attacks of
violence, or by the more sure way of undermining, sapping, and corrupting; and
sometimes by all together: but such has hitherto been our happiness, that
divine providence has been so benign, as to stretch forth the Almighty arm in
our defense; never failing to animate some great and good men to undertake at
the riscue of their lives, the recovery of our civil and religious rights; and
as blazing stars enlighten the firmament, so did they the minds of the people,
and provoked them to a noble imitation of their virtue and courage.

Let me exhort you my worthy countrymen, at this time to defend your rights,
against the united efforts of King, Lords, and Commons, they seem determined to
destroy them; do you fix a resolution, and determine to be free. Let not the
power of a misguided and perverse Prince, the prostitution of hereditary
peerage, nor the corruption of the house of commons terrify you. Remember we
are engaged in the cause of liberty, the birthright of every man; a cause that
will do immortal honor to our memories; the day is arrived there is no time to
be lost; we must awake from the fatal lethargy; we must exert ourselves and not
by foolishly complimenting our Prince be weaving the web of your own
destruction. If he is deaf to the cries of the wretched, and concerns not
himself about the welfare of the nation, it is absolutely necessary we should
pay some regard to our own preservation, and that of our country. No man
(unless some passive obedient fool) will pretend that there is any loyalty due
to the sovereign, further than he himself is loyal to the law. If any man
misled by sound and delusion, doubt this, let him consider the design of
magistracy, and the duty of magistrates; and if he has reason in him, he will
find that duty is due only to those that perform theirs; that protection and
allegiance are reciprocal; that every man has a right to defend, what no man
has a right to take; that the divine right of Kings, if they had it, can only
warrant them in doing actions that are divine, and cannot protect them in
Cruelty, depradation, and oppression; it would be a reproach upon the Deity, if
he gave any man a commission to be a devil. A King in comparison with the
universe, is not so much as the Mayor of a town, in comparison with a kingdom;
and were Mr. Mayor called King, it would give him no new right; or if a King
were only called Mr. Mayor, it would not lessen or abrogate his old
jurisdiction, they are both civil officers; and an offense in the lesser is
much more pardonable, than an offense in the greater. The doctrines of
hereditary right, and blind obedience to the will of a Prince, are only the
flight and forgeries of such tyrants, and monsters, as Mansfield, Grafton,
North, Hil'sborough, Gower, Sandwich, Norton, Dyson, Jenkinson, Talbot,
Barrington, and the rest of the Carlton-House junto, who belie heaven, and
abuse men to make their own court to power, and not one of them would stand the
trial himself: In fine honest and legal government, is imperium legum non
hominum, the authority of law and not of lust.

These are the principles upon which our government stands. When these
principles are violated, and the rights of the people invaded, such violations,
and such invasions, should be immediately resisted; or the whole fabric of our
noble constitution, the work of ages, will presently be destroyed, and we shall
be enslaved. If the present Sovereign has acted contrary to his trust, there
are rules for us to proceed by, in order to bring him to reason, however,
should we be at a loss for a precedent, we can follow the maxim of Lord
Mansfield and make one.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON: Reprinted and sold by I. THOMAS, in Union-Street.

The SCOURGE. Numb. II.
IF we could suppose the badge of office laid, for a few hours entirely aside,
if we should imagine the sense of danger to rouse a dozing Prince from his
lethargic state; did we but once see him so thoroughly convinced of his own
errors, and so sensible of his ministers atrocious designs, as to be willing at
all events to break through the spell that duped his judgment into a bad
opinion of his most loyal subjects; during such an interval the language of
allegiance and unbiassed patriotism would probably, Mr. Printer, run in the
following channel.

SIR,
WHEN the ancient Britons inhabited this island they were renowned even amongst
uncivilized states, for personal valor and an ardent love of liberty. When
they were intermingled with other nations, the same characteristic still marked
them for a people, generous, humane, yet fearless of danger, if contending for
freedom, their inherent birthright. When through length of time, and the
natural course of things, monarchy was permitted by the people; it was
nevertheless so properly tempered, that the smallest encroachment upon their
claims, the least violation of their privileges, was opposed with vigor, and
the King who dared to countenance such proceedings, or meanly plead his
prerogative as an excuse for his oppression, was instantly deemed an enemy to
the state, a traitor to the commonwealth, and branded with the opprobrious
epithet of dastardly tyrant. When one of these miscreants intoxicated with
lofty ideas of monarchial power, and not content to be looked on only as the
first magistrate in the kingdom, presumed of his own accord to levy taxes, and
increase instead of lessen public grievances, then, Sir, did our ancestors
reduce this huge Leviathan, they made the Lion crouch, and forced from his
unweildy paw, that every memorable charter, which ought to be the loud boast of
every true born Englishman. Sensible of the acquisition, and careful for their
posterity, our great progenitors, taught, by rueful experience, that truth
seldom dwells in palaces, cared not to trust the word of future monarchs; but
wisely exacted on oath, that they should hold their crown by the tenure of a
strict adherence to MAGNA CHARTA ONLY.

Among your other idle amusements, Sir, it is possible, you may have read the
history of a family, who, by every tie of blood, succession, or hereditary
right, deserved to wear the (...) of royalty, yet fascinated by the charm of
arbitrary sway, they plunged the nation into (...) discord; till oppressed
beyond all bearing, (...) people, at length, resumed their lawful power, and
with one patriotic blow, saved their sinking country from inevitable ruin. The
heat (...) party, however, soon subsiding, British dignity roaming for safety,
in a foreign land, was a (...), which touched the breasts of Englishmen (...)
that compassion, for which they are so justly (...). The people, therefore,
exercised the christian virtue of forgiveness; buried their various wrongs in
silent oblivion; and, with many an endearing mark of tenderness, invited over
the descendants of a man, who however well qualified for the domestic purposes
of knitting garters, fabricating buttons, saluting his lady, or dondling his
children to sleep by the drone of a princely lullaby, had yet none of the
requisites necessary in a King of England.

Charles the first, Sir, was chaste, timid, weak, pious; and showed if
possible, as great an attachment to his wife, as you do filial affection for
your very amiable mother. His son, the second Charles, was abandoned,
licentious, and totally devoid of principle: -- It is therefore quite needless
to add, that he was casual ancestor to your admited friend the present Duke of
Grafton.

In short, Sir, every branch of the Stuart race, displayed such a love for
absolute rule; delighted so much in an extension of prerogative; that the
abdication of that priest-ridden poltroon, James the second, only saved
churchmen the trouble of making him a saint; or the nation the formal ceremony
and expense of chopping off his empty head, in a royal manner. The
mal-practices of that Jesuitical family, ended at last, in their total
extirmination, paved, Sir, the way for the promotion, and astonishing
elevation, of the house of Hanover, to the throne of these (...).

The short reign of George the first, scarcely afforded us an opportunity of
knowing with precision, the man's real character. He was a perfect stranger to
the manners and genius, and the disposition of the English. But, when able to
stammer our language, perceiving in the nation, a prodigious aversion at being
governed by a foreigner; he discovered wisdom sufficient, to wish himself
quietly reinstated again in his own Electorate.

Our late monarch, wielded the scepter with the spirit of a soldier; acted from
himself, opposed with great vigor, rebellions, that shook the fabric of our
constitution; and died replete with honors and with age.

Now, Sir, indulge me, whilst I take a transient view of your most piteous
reign. Scarcely had you pronounced the lesson taught you by a Scottish chieftan;
-- no sooner was the word BRITON sounded in our ears; -- than we perceived,
Sir, your mind strongly tainted with every Highland notion, the despicable The
author of this paper, once for all assures the public, that it is foreign from
his intention to excite any national animosity. Men, not countries, deserve
scourging, and are therefore the objects of our satire. Measures, not men, are
what we would wish to praise. It is true, that two such despicable
crooked-minded wretches, as Johnny Stuart, Lord of Bute; or Willy Murry, Lord
Mansfield, would throw a disgrace on any country. But James Stephen, author of
the "Considerations on imprisonment for debt," and a small preface to Jackson's
"King's Bench Sermon," will wipe away the stain. This man, is equally well
qualified to defend the subjects liberty, or plead the cause of Magna Charta
against the most subtle advocate for despotism. His nervous abilities render
him an honor to this age. His spirited intrepidity would have marked him for
an Hero in the bravest times of the Roman republic. And yet, what? why this
man, with a wife and five children, has been immured only twenty-two months in
the King's Bench prison. Blush! (...) blush!
Caledonian could infuse. You stirred the very dregs of northern nobility to
find a favorite, with whom to share the empire. Lord Bute, from obscurity's
obscurest corner was summoned to bask himself at court, as a worm crawls forth
from putrefaction, cherished by the sun's enlivening rays. Disgusted at the
upstart insolence of such a mushroom, your ancient nobles blushed Sir, for a
man too weak to govern kingdoms; too obstinate to be advised; and to little
versed in human nature to be capable of distinguishing real merit. What
therefore, most illustrious Sir, was the powerful reason for this undue
preference? what but some bewitching Siren, an utter enemy to Briton's welfare,
could have infatuated your untutored mind, or thus have rivetted your
affections, upon a creature, in the shape of a man, possessed of every
qualification, but intrinsic worth: If this all crafty Lord, be endowed with
any thing like abilities, they are, I will be answerable, altogether corporeal;
and therefore entirely unknown, to every person, unless a certain lady near St.
James's; -- who much, it seems, delights in such mysterious charms. From this
indissoluble, this jejune attachment, however, as from their real source and
fountain, flow all the divided streams of infelicity, that speedily will deluge
a land, devoted by your headstrong weakness, to certain devastation. To make
room for the exaltation of this insidious minion, the sacred ties of friendship
were dissolved; former obligations were totally forgotten; relations, who
presumed to remonstrate, were treated with cold indifference; and even
gratitude, humanity's brightest ornament, was, with the revolution's firmest
friends, banished far distant from your royal habitation.

Think Sir! brighten up your faculties! and but for a moment think of the
dismal state, into which, by this precipitate unwary step, you throw
Great Britain! deprived of all assistance from men able to guide the
complicated machine of government; -- distracted (...) gave our enemies fresh
vigor; -- until mo^^ (...) despised abroad, a glorious and successful war,
served by your favourite's mismanagent, only to render us more completely
ridiculous

You know Sir, or it is now high time you was informed, that both the nations
interest and honor were basely sacrificed to the sordid avarice of some
ravenous harpies, who, for the sake of gold, most cheerfully would extirminate
the whole human race. John Ayliff's best friend, the vulture-minded Lord
Holland; his Grace of Bedford, the weavers guardian angel; the universally
detested Lord of Bute; together with his joyous buxom dowager of Canton-House;
these, Sir, were the blessed group, who sold to France, a peace the most
superlatively infamous, that ever disgraced the annals of English story
Whether, you Sir, influenced by their persuasion hastened the treaty, is a
question you alone are able to decide.

What followed the cession of hostilities, I scarcely need relate. Murmurs,
discontents, accusations, and motions for impeachments, were answered by Scotch
addresses, ragamuffin panegyrists, prostitute citizens, and votes of courts
sycophants, and by the resignation of a raw boned pri^e -- any thing -- but
minister.

Even during such a peace, have the arts been assiduously cultivated? Has
Science reared her dejected head? Has all due encouragement been given to men
of illustrious merit? Lord Bute, indeed, affected to be thought a Mec^enas, a
distinguished patron of literature. As a proof of the extreme refinement of his
taste, he made a Scotch renegade parson, his principal confident; delegated to
the quack hill, who pretends to lengthen human life by a leaf of sage, the care
of Kew gardens; pensioned that veteran self-important Jacobite Sh^bbeare, alias
Cinna; and gave the man who wiped the cob-webs from his musty books, a seat in
parliament -- Whilst you, Sir, have been ravished with enchanting harmony;
exalted beyond the limits of humanity, by the graces of Pianissimo; and
absorbed the various beauties of painting, building, or collecting RAREE SHOWS.

When his Lairdship was driven from the public theater of life, he deputed
certain engines to continue his pious work, of reducing us to an abject state
of slavery. The friends of liberty pursued him, Sir, with success, worried him
through all his haunts. He sheltered himself like another ROGER Roger Mortimer
lay with Isabella* mother to young Edward the 2d. and by his influence over
her, almost ruined this country.
, under the foldings of a royal hoop-petticoat: and when forced to fly for
safety to his catercousin the Pretender, you, Sir, was commanded, by a certain
female, to commence his champion, and brave his cause, against such as should
call in question his PARTS, his patriotism, or his honesty. Accordingly, Sir,
you have been indefatigable in pursuing with rigor, the author of an harmless
paper, merely on account of his enmity to Lord Bute. Your time might, methinks,
have been employed to much better advantage. Your christian piety, Sir, should
alone have taught you to forgive an injury: but your rank and station called
for a nobleness of soul, entirely exempt from, and far superior to resentment
-- an abject passion, calculated only for sordid base-born minds. The firmness,
however, of a man has before now totally defeated the merciless cruelty of an
abstemious, chaste, virtuous, sovereign. -- It is true, Sir, we really believe
your disposition so well inclined, at any rate, to peace, that there is no
injury, public or private, you would not much sooner sustain than commence open
hostilities. If, for example, Don Iuan Fernandez was, with Spanish gravity, to
kick your royal breech -- your mother's leave must first be asked, before you
dare return the gross affront. This, Sir, I call an excellence, as it displays
the filial milky softness of your most amiable nature to an imperious woman,
therefore, we solely attribute, the various despicable stratagems you have, at
different times, been ^^^ced to countenance with your sanction. To glut her
^^^ming vengeance, the sinews of government, often have been strained beyond
their usual tone. Parliaments, Sir, ought to be the guardians of our liberties.
When we are legally represented, the House of Commons is the sacred magazine,
wherein are deposited British privileges and immunities; -- curtailed of which,
existence becomes a burden, and a curse. A French writer, Sir, called
Montesquieu, pronounces it impossible for this kingdom ever to be undone,
unless by the corruption of its senators.

The present parliament, Sir, -- Britons I perceive your indignation rise!
Friends and fellow-countrymen, I entreat your pardon, for this hasty slip of my
unguarded pen! the motley mixture at Westminster, I mean, is a self-created
Junto, the majority of whom under the favor, Sir, of your illustrious
auspices, are daily violating those rights purchased by the blood, the
treasure, and the manly fortitude, of our gallant forefathers. Think you I
venture beyond the limits of decency? For God's sake, Sir, by what name am I to
call a meeting, which assumes to itself the right of judicature, determines
upon incapacitation, and directs its own existence upon the total ruin of our
most hallowed laws? that it is degenerated from its orginal institution is a
plain matter of fact.

That in obedience to a lascivious widow's nod, a person was expelled, because
obnoxious in her sight -- this is a truth, all Europe, who laughs at our
puppet-show petticoat ministry, can amply testify: and yet, Sir, the pains the
Carlton-house crew, headed by a vixen who is all pure Scotch below the middle,
and quite German about the brains -- the fatigues, I say Sir, these wretches
have undergone to banish from their counsels, every person of worth or honor,
are in reality, not to be compared with the steps they have pursued, to people
a chapel with a congregation, quite of their own complexion.

Sooner than suffer their schemes to prove abortive, murders were committed,
and the parties who gloried in the ministerial slaughter, pardoned by your
clemency. Much imposition has your goodnature suffered! -- During your reign,
to cut a throat with impunity, the hardy assassin needs but to have a
prostitute sister, and circumstances, which greatly alleviate his guilt, are
instantly discovered by a sharp sighted court minion, who has a fellow feeling
in the case. Your acquiesing, Sir, in such complicated villainy, must, I should
imagine, lessen the high-flown opinion, we are taught to conceive about your
pious virtues.

In short, great Sir, were your eyes but couched, clearly would you perceive
that your people are enslaved. You would see yourself grossly deceived,
cajoled, bamboozled, and imposed upon: You would discover, that the nation is
in a ferment; that factions, fomented by court parasites, gather strength; and
that your very throne is so besprinkled with innocent blood, as to tender it
utterly impossible, for any thing but a general sacrifice of the whole banditti
of a ministry, to wash out the stains.

If then, thou best of private men, you regard with an eye of paternal
tenderness, your own offspring! If you wish well to this once happy island!
call forth, Sir, for God's sake! call forth, your magnanimity! summons all your
resolution! shake off the slumbers of domestic indolence, nor longer, let a
wanton woman's wayward will, desto^y our chartered freedom!

Forgive me, Sir, thus presuming to advise: but hard is the condition of
princes. As gamesters play upon the foibles of those whom they intend to
plunder; so courtiers, for selfish ends, pour their delicious poison into a
monarch's ears. Trust not, Sir, to their delusions. Listen to the faithful
voice of your undone people, they speak a language you are bound to hear. From
them you need not fear deception. -- In compliance therefore, with their
requests, rid yourself of this abhorred administration, as you would shake from
your mantle, crawling vermin offensive to your sight. Restore the rights of
free election. Execute strict justice upon each public plunderer. Spare not,
through filial tenderness, even a Mother; when the nation's wrongs so loudly
call for satisfaction. Let sterling merit be sufficient introduction to your
presence. Build your now tottering empire upon a solid basis. Reign in our
hearts. Act with the dignity of a man; -- nor borrow consequence from crowns.
Be mindful, that you are born, Sir, for deeds far more exalted, than barely
propagating the species, or excelling in mechanics. And, as nature deals much
in revolutions, wear always one truth very near your heart. A single vote
transfered three mighty kingdoms. Some short time hence, it is possible, A
RESOLUTE MAJORITY OF MILIONS, may, from the topmost pinnacle of greatness, hurl
headlong AN INCORRIGIBLE M --; and send him to the book of sufferings to learn,
that all power is derived from, and lodged in the people only; and that
Englishmen will never long tamely submit to MINISTERIAL SLAVERY, OR PETTICOAT
JURISDICTION.

SIDNEY.


LONDON: Printed by W. MOORE, at No. 22, Fleet Street. BOSTON: Reprinted and
sold by I. THOMAS in Union-Street near the Market. MDCCLXXI


