DIRECTIONS FOR BREEDING SILKWORMS, Extracted from a LETTER of JOSEPH
OTTOLENGHE, Esquire Late SUPERINTENDENT OF THE PUBLIC FILATURE IN GEORGIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-Street. M, DCC, LXXI.

DIRECTIONS FOR BREEDING SILKWORMS, etc.
FINDING that a laudable design is in agitation amongst your people, to promote
the culture of silk, I was willing to throw in my mite by giving some
directions how to proceed in that undertaking, having for several years been
superintendent to the filature here; and it may be necessary, to premise that
the following rules are calculated for the meridian of this place.

The obstacles to the culture of silk in Georgia are many and great, but
Pennsylvania, I am informed, is more fortunate in this respect, and as her
inhabitants are numerous, every incentive to promote industry amongst them must
be praiseworthy. Any essay to introduce new manufactures, cannot fail becoming
of public utility; for thereby the drone is excited to labor, and new vigor
is added to the industrious. The prospect of gain carries along with it a
stimulating energy, and it must be a dull soul indeed that is not influenced by
it. It is to be ardently wished, that the public would on all such occasions,
support every well weighed new enterprise. And as I hope that the scheme for
introducing the silk culture in the middle colonies will prove highly
beneficial, to the inhabitants, as well as to Great Britain; I shall therefore
proceed to lay down such rules as I practiced while retained in the service of
the filature. But before I enter upon this subject, I must observe, that
although I have read a good many books that treat upon the silk culture, I have
found that most of them, in proportion as they deviated from nature and
experience, have become blind guides. Should we, in Georgia, take Miller to
conduct our gardens, and Mortimer our husbandry, and implicitly follow their
rules (though both men of good sense, and whose labors are very useful to the
climate for which they are calculated) we should find ourselves egregiously
disappointed.

But, to proceed --

The first thing necessary to be provided, for carrying on this valuable
culture, is food. The leaves of the Italian mulberry tree are what they are the
fondest of, and produces the best silk. These trees are, with us, of a quick
growth, neither delighting in swamps, or rank ground; the town of Savannah is
built upon an heap of sand, and yet they thrive very well.

The next thing to be provided, is good eggs. I have ever preferred those from
Portugal to the Italian seed. They produce a ball like a ground-nut, well
coverrd with silk. It is true, that this sort, as well as the rest, will, in a
few years, degenerate and become, in a little time, very bad; but this is
easily prevented by exchanging the seed with a somewhat distant place every
year.

For hatching the eggs, take the following simple method, which has seldom
failed us. So soon as the weather begins to grow warm, (which generally happens
sometime in February Which answers to April and May in Pennsylvania.
or March) and the buds of the mulberry tree are observed to put forth, the
eggs should be exposed to the air If there is any reason to apprehend a future
nipping frost, it would be prudent not expose your eggs to the air till the
spring seems settled, lest they should be injured, and the young buds of the
mulberry destroyed, which might occasion a scarcity of food. The latter may be
guarded against, by cutting some succors or small branches of the mulberry
tree, and setting them in bottles of water, in a warm room. By this means they
may be made to vegitate as early in the season as you please, and afford a
sufficient supply of food for your young worms, till it will be produced by the
natural sprouting of the mulberry trees.
, which, by its effect, promotes their hatching. When they begin to hatch
(which will be soon after sunrising, and for three or four hours after) some
of the tender leaves or buds of the mulberry, plucked with the stems, should be
lightly scattered upon the eggs which in a little time will be covered with the
infant brood. As soon as the leaves are well ^^arged with worms, they should be
removed by the stem, to a paper with the edges turned up; then the eggs should
be supplied with fresh leaves; which, as they are covered, are to be removed as
before, until the hatching is over. They will at first require but a small
space; but as they increase in growth, their lodgments must be enlarged; and
therefore after the casting off their skins, or moulting The worms moult or
shed their skins four different times, at which periods they neglect their
food, and appear very sickly and languishing for about eighteen hours, during
which time they should remain undisturbed, without any food;; otherwise it may
prove fatal to them; on this account it is advisable to keep those worms
together on the paper or table which are of the same age, that they may all
moult together: after moulting their appetites return more voracious than
before.
, they should be removed to a larger lodging, if the first is too confined.

Cleanliness is the delight of this valuable insect; therefore, care should be
taken to have their dung removed from under them, as soon as a quantity
appears. The method practiced in removing them from the eggs, may still be
continued (in removing them from their litter) until after the third or fourth
stage or moulting, when they may be conveniently removed with the fingers. All
noxious smells should be kept distant from them: severe cold and intense hot
weather are equally hurtful: fire in the room will remedy the one, and air will
relieve the other. Care should be taken to preserve them from rats, mice,
pismires, spiders, cockroaches, etc. which are their natural enemies.

Their food should be given to them free from wet, otherwise it will destroy
them. In time of heavy rains, or even moderate showers, the leaves should be
dried between two linen cloths, before they are given to the worms. The proper
time for gathering the leaves, is between sunrising and setting, that they may
be free from dews.

With respect to houses for raising these creatures, it is not necessary to be
very particular. Some of our people have had very good success in hutch, some
in rooms which serve them for kitchen, parlour, and bedchamber; others raise
them in garrets, either upon boards raised from the floor, or even upon the
bare floor. I have observed, that a very little nicety and care, has sometimes
obtained the desired end.

With respect to feeding the worms; their food should be administered to them
early in the morning, and as often as they have finished their former food.

I repeat it -- Unclean food, bad air, heavy rains or great heats, and
offensive smells, are the causes that bring destruction upon them; and,
therefore, whatever of these can, should be prevented.

When the worms become transparent, forsake their food, and keep their now
bright heads constantly erected, bushes should be placed among them, In
Georgia, they provide broad hanging shelves, to lay the worms on to spin; these
shelves should be rubbed over with fennel, some little time before they are
ready to spin; and a quantity of small white oak boughs with their leaves on,
should be cut about one week before they will be wanted; the reason of which
is, that the leaves may be dried and shrivelled a little against that time.
These boughs or branches must be laid very steadily on those shelves for the
worms to spin amongst. The perfume of the fennel being very grateful to the
worms, it will allure them to begin their work, and the leaves being
shrivelled, will accommodate them with a suitable nest to spin their silk balls
in.
(having been cut some time before, that the leaves might have time to shrivel)
observing to give the worms sufficient room to work, for if too many are
crowded together, then two, three, and sometimes four, will club together to
make a cone, and will produce bad silk, and of course of an inferior price.

In three days they will have finished their ball; in which they remain, and
undergo a kind of temporary death, for the space of fourteen days, if the
weather does not prove too hot, for in that case they will change to a moth fly
in ten, and eat their way through the cone; therefore care should be taken to
prevent it. -- There are three different methods in practice for killing the
worm in the ball; the most simple and easy is, by the heat of the sun, provided
the weather is favorable; to accomplish which spread your cocoons on dishes or
boards, not very thick, and expose them to the strongest heat of the sun for
two or three days, which seldom fails to kill the worm; but if the weather
should prove cloudy or very cool, the heat of the sun may not be sufficient; in
that case the most eligible way is, by baking them in an oven, after the bread
is drawn, in dishes, or baskets, taking care that the oven be not so hot as to
burn or scorch the silk; after which spread them on a dry cool floor until it
is convenient to wind off the silk.

If any cocoons are to be saved for seed against the next season, as many males
as females should be chosen. The male is known by making its ball sharp-pointed
at one end, and the female round at each end Those balls which contain two or
more worms are unfit to be wound, therefore they should be reserved for seed.
They may be known by their clumsey shape and extraordinary size.
. The cocoons for seed should be spread thin in some convenient place, out of
the reach of rats, mice, etc. meanwhile a linen cloth should be nailed against
the wall or wainscot, to place the moths upon, which will daily come out of
their cones some time after sunrising, the male will join the female, and
ought to remain undisturbed in that state until evening, when they should be
separated.

When all the females have finished depositing their eggs upon the cloth Which
they will do to the amount of about 300 each, and will pass through this stage
of their existence without any food.
, they will shortly die. The color of their eggs at first is a pale yellow:
within five or six days after they are laid, this color changes by degrees to
a darker; and then those eggs are said to be of the best sort, which are of a
gray ash color, inclining to a tarnished purple. If the first color continues
unchanged, it is a certain mark that the eggs are unimpregnated and barren. So
soon as the eggs have changed to the gray ash color, or tarnished purple above
described (which is a convincing mark of their being good) the cloth ought to
be taken down, folded together, and wrapped in some coarse cloth, to prevent
rats and other vermin coming to the eggs, which now must be be put at the
bottom of a drawer or box, free from damps and where clean linen is kept, in
the coolest part of the house, there to remain untouched, never to be exposed
to the open air until the ensuing season for hatching.

THE END.

