INNOCENT BLOOD CRYING TO GOD FROM THE STREETS OF BOSTON.

A SERMON OCCASIONED BY THE HORRID MURDER OF Messieurs SAMUEL GRAY, SAMUEL
MAVERICK, JAMES CALDWELL, and CRISPUS ATTUCKS, with PATRICK CARR, since dead,
and CHRISTOPHER MONK, judged irrecoverable, and several others badly wounded,
by a party of Troops under the Command of Captain PRESTON: ON THE FIFTH OF
MARCH, 1770. AND PREACHED THE LORD's DAY FOLLOWING: BY JOHN LATHROP, A. M.
Pastor of the Second Church in BOSTON.

Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel --
Genesis xlix. 7. The remainder of wrath shall thou restrain -- Psalm. lxxvi. 10.
LONDON, PRINTED BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by EDES and GILL, Opposite the New
Court House in Queen Street. M.D.CC,LXXI.

INTRODUCTION.
MR. Lathrop says, That this sermon, wrote while innocent blood was fresh in
view, was not designed for publication; and is now only yielded to, on earnest
solicitation. He is not conscious that it contains sentiments in any wise
unjustifiable, or such as are unfit for any Briton or British American to have
inculcated upon his mind in the present alarming situation of public affairs:
but sentiments which he is well assured are peculiarly grateful to the people
with whom the kind providence of God has placed him: sentiments adopted by all
who are upon principle friends to the glorious Revolution: sentiments which
gave the crown to the house of Hanover: sentiments which brought our fathers
into this new world; which were urged and defended with boldness and fervor by
his predecessors, particularly the worthy and venerable Doctors Increase and
Cotton Mather, and which he doubts not his brethren of the clergy in this
country will be ready on all proper occasions to assert, however displeasing
they may be to persons disposed to rob men of that liberty which the God of
nature designed his rational creatures should enjoy.

He observes, that some few among us were displeased with the notice the
ministers of this town thought themselves bound in duty to take of the late
murders; but exclaims, Can it be thought that the heralds of the Almighty,
whose commission obliges them to cry aloud, and not to spare! to reprove,
rebuke, and proclaim on divine authority that the wages of sin is death; can it
be supposed, he asks, that they will be silent when the blood of the people of
their charge is spilled as water, and their carcases strowed in the streets?
Verily no! For to do this were a great evil, and such as could not escape the
righteous judgment of Almighty God!

INNOCENT BLOOD CRYING TO GOD FROM THE GROUND.
GENESIS III. 10. -- The voice of thy brother's blood cries unto me from the
ground.
I NEED not inform you, my hearers, that the bloody and most cruel action of
last Monday evening led me to the choice of the words which have now been read,
for the theme of the following discourse. We should be criminal to let such an
awful affair pass over without taking notice of it in a religious manner.

THE unparallelled barbarity of those who were lately guilty of murdering a
number of our innocent fellow-citizens will never be forgot.

THE now lisping child will rehearse the (...) to his attentive offspring, when
revolving years have covered his head with silver locks. Future generations
will read the account with sorrow, indignation and surprise: sorrow for the
dead, who sell victims to the merciless rage of wicked men: indignation against
the worst of murderers; and surprise that any rational beings could be so
destitute of every human feeling, as wantonly to destroy those who never did,
or thought of doing them any hurt.

BUT we have seen the gloomy time when our brethren were murdered before our
eyes, and our most public streets were deeply dyed with innocent blood. How
affecting, unutterably affecting, to see our fellow citizens shot to death --
their garments rolled in blood, and corpses wallowing in gore, upon our
Exchange, the place of general concourse, where our most respectable
inhabitants meet every day! But such a scene has been acted -- yea the blood of
the slain is but now washed from the pavements.

A NOBLE spirit, indeed has appeared on this occasion, not only in securing the
presumed murderers that they may be brought to trial; but insisting that all
the troops should be removed from among us.

FROM this violent out-breaking, and innumerable disorders that might be
mentioned, the whole world may be convinced of the infinite impropriety of
quartering troops in a well-regulated city under a notion of assisting the
civil magistrate, or strengthening government. I pray God we may never behold a
like appearance on a like pretense! It is time for that magistrate to resign,
who cannot depend on the assistance of his neighbors and fellow-citizens in
the administration of justice. And that government which rejecting the
foundation of the law, would establish itself by the sword, the sooner it falls
to the ground the better, that in its stead another might be established, more
agreeable to the nature of man, and consistent with the great ends of society.

BUT we shall leave these considerations to the improvement of the politicians
of the day, and pursue the thoughts which the words read seem naturally to
suggest.

WHAT I design, is to show particularly when it may be said, that innocent
blood cries unto God in the sense of our text, and then make some reflections
suitable to the occasion.

FIRST then, Human blood cries unto God, when it is shed in a wanton or cruel
manner, without warrant from the law of the land or law of nations, founded
upon and consistent with the law of nature written upon the heart by God
himself, to speak in the language of inspiration.

BEFORE there was any such thing as civil government, which is founded on
compact or the agreement of a number of people upon some plan to secure their
general happiness, every individual had a perfect right to his own person,
life, and limbs, and a clear sense of his duty and interest in preserving and
defending them against the attacks of any one. These natural notions were
planted in our breasts by the God who made us, and would for ever lead us to
determine that the life of man is sacred, and his blood not to be shed, unless
forfeited by some atrocious crime. In the yet uncultivated wilds of America, so
strong are these moral notices, that the man who is conscious of having
murdered another, does not pretend to resist the surviving relation, who takes
upon himself the office of an avenger of blood, but calmly bows his head to
receive the fatal blow. Hence well observes St. Paul, that the heathen, which
have not the (written) law, are a law unto themselves: their understandings and
consciences witnessing the justice of the divine decree, that, he who sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. To refuse, or unreasonably delay
doing justice upon the murderer, is to let the blood of the innocent, like that
of Abel, cry unto God for vengeance.

THE murderer forfeits his right to life even in a state of nature, where there
is no civil authority; in that case every man is in some sense a minister of
justice, and may execute the law which God has written upon his heart. And
whether that universal practice which obtains among the savages, of the nearest
kinsman pursuing and slaying the murderer of his relation, is not strictly
justifiable upon principles of natural law, will I think scarce admit of a
question.

THUS much is plain, we have no security for life in the neighborhood of a
person having a disposition and power to destroy us: self-preservation
therefore obliges us, on failure of other expedience, to cut off such a common
and dangerous enemy. And it seems as if all who found him, whether related to
the slain or not, might fall upon and dispatch him.

How strong a sense of this appears in the sad expostulation of guilty,
self-condemned Cain? -- Every one that finds me shall slay me.

FROM the case of Abel, who was murdered before the promulgation of any law in
that behalf, it is sufficiently evident that the blood which was unjustly shed
called aloud to God for vengeance, whether it was his will that the shedder
should be destroyed by a relation of the slain, or by whoever met with him; or
whether, acting as Supreme Judge, he reserved the execution to himself.

WE add secondly, The blood which is shed contrary to the revealed law of God
calls to him from the Ground.

GOD showed his absolute abhorrence of murder from the beginning: he denounced
a tremendous curse against him who was first guilty of it. From the nature of
the crime, and the fear which Cain expressed, it is more than probable that
murder was punished by death in the most early ages, though we find no express
law requiring it till after the flood, when the solemn declaration, in part
cited before, was made. And surely your blood of your lives will I require: at
the hand of every beast will I require it; and at the hand of a man, at the
hand of every man's brother, will I require the life of man. Whosoever sheddeth
man's blood by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made he
man. In these words the value of human life is fixed; a guard is set upon it by
God himself, and that penalty is fully expressed which the Author of Life is
pleased should be incurred by him who unjustly dares to take it away.

THE life of man is highly valued -- for in the Image of God made he man. This
value was set upon the life of man, even when he was a sinner; for
notwithstanding the depravity of human nature, none of God's works in this part
of the system are worthy to be compared with the children of men. They are
capable of higher services and more refined enjoyments than the beasts that
perish.

THEY are therefore protected with more care. Even the irrational creature, who
is capable of neither moral good nor evil, must be killed, if by a wild
ungovernable rage he should destroy a man. No less excusable is the rage of man
if he really intended to kill, unless in defense of his own life under absolute
necessity, he shall surely be put to death, according to the immutable sentence
of the great Jehovah!

THE (...) of innocent blood cannot be allayed, but by the death of the guilty!
There is no evading this law where the murder is indublicably proved -- no
liberty to acquit the criminal -- God, the supreme legislator, has given the
magistrate no authority to alter or disponse with his law, or mitigate the
punishment in any manner or degree. He shall surely be put to death! And if
that punishment is not inflicted, innocent blood will cry from the ground -- it
will cry for vengeance to fall not only on the murderer wherever he is, but
upon those, whoever they are, that divert the course of justice, and cause the
murderers to go unpunished.

THESE capital punishments are doubtless very disagreeable (...) -- to put an
end to the life of one's (...) fellow-men is shocking.

THE tender seeings of human nature strongly, strongly plead in behalf of the
criminal, and beseech the judges if possible to show mercy. But should any
degree of tenderness -- should the strongest inclination to mercy -- or should
all the horrors of an execution influence a conduct so contrary to the law of
God? When the Lord of heaven has declared he shall surely die, and moreover
added, thou shall not pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of innocent
blood. shall any pretend to pity -- shall any, at the expense of incurring the
vengeance due to blood-guiltiness, dare to acquit, to spare, or solicit a
pardon!

THIRDLY, Human blood cries from the ground, when it is shed contrary to the
laws of the community within which it is spilled.

CIVIL government, if good, is founded upon the law of nature, or the revealed
law of God -- the divine pleasure is an universal law, eternally binding upon
all rational creatures; whether this pleasure be known by certain notions of
right and wrong, which all men have within them -- by the declarations of holy
men who have been favored with intimate acquaintance with God -- or by
immediate revelations from the Deity himself.

THAT he who formed the universe should be lord and king, is a conclusion few,
if any, will deny. This only absolute Monarch has an indisputable right to make
such laws, and establish such rules of government, as he knows will best suit
the nature and mutual relations of all his subjects, and serve best to promote
and secure the general happiness of all. --

THAT it is the will of God his creatures should be happy, is very evident from
his own most solemn declarations. It is also in a good degree evident from the
unextinguishable thirst, after it, placed by God in every sensitive being. All
wish for it; and however diverse our notions of happiness may be, 'the eternal
sigh' covets it with most ardent desire and steady attention.

IT is utterly unworthy, and inconsistent with every idea of infinite wisdom
and power, of inexhaustible fullness and unbounded beneficence, to suppose the
Creator of man designed him only a composition of appetites, wants, and
desires, for the reasonable gratification of which he has made no provision.
Infinitely more shocking would be the presumtion, that he had left him open to
all invasions from beasts of prey, and men more savage than the beast, and
neglected to furnish him with means of defense or escape.

ONE of the strongest affections or inclinations of the human mind is that for
society. -- The Lord God said, It is not good that Man should be alone. The
whole species, indeed every order of creatures, seem designed as meet-helpers
to each other. All the difficulty in civil and social life is, righteously to
determine how much help we have a right to expect or demand of each other and
what shall be a just consideration for such assistance. The Author and Finisher
of our faith has graciously solved this grand question, in a divine axiom, as
copious and descriptive, as plain and suitable to the human understanding. All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them;
for this is THE LAW -- the eternal and immutable reason of things constituted
to promote and secure the happiness of all.

GOVERNMENT, in whatever form it may be established, can rightly aim at no
other, and possibly at no higher end. Even the government of the Supreme Ruler
of the universe is not pretended to aim at any thing more or greater! --

THE general good is therefore the end of all just government; and all the
rules of conduct, agreed upon, all the statutes, laws, and precepts, enacted
and promulged, are made with a view to promote and secure the public good: and
therefore the very nature and design of government require new laws to be made
whenever it is found that the old ones are not sufficient; and old ones to be
repealed, whenever they are found to be mischievous in their operation. Yea, if
the essential parts of any system of civil government are found to be
inconsistent with the general good, the end of government requires that such
bad system should be demolished, and a new one formed, by which the public weal
shall be more effectually secured. -- And further, if under any constitution of
government the administration should vary from the fundamental designs of
promoting and securing the common good; in such case the subjects are in duty
bound to join all their strength to reduce matters to their original good
order, whatever may be the fate of those wicked men who for ends of their own
would subvert the RIGHTS of the people. --

As no right is more sacred than that of every innocent man to enjoy his own
life, and the law of nature authorizes every individual to defend his life,
that system which was given by God to his people contains a number of very
particular laws to secure the lives of the innocent, and most positive
injunctions for the extirpation of such as are guilty of innocent blood, as has
been mentioned in the former part of this discourse. In no point are the laws
of our excellent constitution more express; for what peace can be more sacred
than the peace of God and the king, which every quiet subject has a right to;
which nothing can destroy?

FROM all the foregoing considerations it is plain, if any one by design slay
another, or any-way cause an innocent person to be put to death, that innocent
blood cries unto God from the ground: it cries for vengeance. It cries to
all who see it, or hear of its being shed. It cries to the murderer himself,
and requires him to submit to justice, and receive his punishment. It cries to
those that are witnesses, and requires them to give faithful testimony of what
they know. Whoever knows of murder and does not give information thereof, that
the guilty may be brought to justice, will have innocent blood crying for
vengeance to fall upon him. Innocent blood cries to the magistrate, that the
murderer be secured and brought to trial; it cries to the judges, and requires
that they see it avenged. And if innocent blood is not heard and avenged
according to the strict requirements of the law of God and the laws of every
good system of civil government, it will continue to cry, not only against the
murderer, but the government and land, which suffers murderers to go unpunished.

THUS have I mentioned, as particularly as seemed necessary, when it may be
said that human blood cries unto God in the sense of the text.

AND what a solemn cry of innocent blood is now going up to heaven from our
streets! The scene lately acted among us is on many accounts the
most-afflicting that ever this place beheld! When consuming fires have
repeatedly swept down a great number of our houses, the inhabitants escaping
the flames viewed the loss of their substance as chargeable to the malevolence
of no one: but in the late dreadful affair we saw the agents, and had nothing
but destruction to expect from their unbounded and unbridled rage, had they
happened to have force enough to have put their horrid designs in execution.

THE barbarous murder of young Snider on the 22d of last Month was distressing
to all who had any feelings of humanity; but how aggravated was the horrid
affair of last Monday night!

IT is pretty evident from several plain testimonies, and a variety of
circumstances, that a number of the troops, with other sons of Belial, were
determined to murder the inhabitants -- They began in several parts of the town
-- The alarmed people rang the bells to collect an aid for their security; and
when they had obliged the first riotous soldiers to retire, and were
dispersing, not expecting any further disturbance, a party of the troops fired
upon a number of innocent people, unarmed and under no apprehension of such
cruel treatment!

WERE our brethren killed by avowed enemies in time of open war, we should be
grieved, it is true, but we could not complain; death and slaughter may then be
expected: but in a time of profound peace, to have troops quartered among us on
pretense of supporting government, where government has ever been supported as
well as in any part of the known world -- to be abused by common soldiers -- to
be assaulted by them in some or other part of the town almost every evening --
to be wounded with the instruments of death -- yea, finally, to see our
brethren killed in cold blood -- to behold their mortal gasps, and hear their
dying groans -- but I desist -- the rehearsal of these things is too much for
me. Who can reflect on the horrors of that night without shuddering! What were
our fears, when the inhabitants, roused by the murder of their brethren, were
hurrying together -- When the troops were all paraded, and with fire arms
presented stood ready to attack or defend, from the just indignation of an
enraged multitude, and nothing less than a general slaughter could be expected!
To God alone be praise, that in this critical moment his divine power was
displayed, and the remainder of wrath in so signal a manner restrained!

No less conspicuous was the good hand of God in moving the hearts of those in
power to exert themselves for the immediate relief of the people from further
fears and dangers, to which a longer continuance of the troops in town would
have subjected them. The wisest of men has well observed, and too siensibly
have we found it verified, that persons cannot well dwell together unless they
are agreed. The human heart must undergo a strange revolution before it can
look kindly on the instruments of its ruin and destruction! We trust in God's
unerring Providence, that so unnatural a society will never be the subject of
another experiment -- That the civil magistrate will never again be furnished
with such a band of assistants, as will rescue criminals cut of his hands, and
even put his life in danger in the execution of his office. -- That the lower
and looser part of our youth may never again have such additional temptations
to forsake the paths of virtue and religion.

FINALLY, that we may be allowed to live in the full enjoyment of all those
important rights and privileges, both of a civil and religious nature, with
which the God of our fathers has been pleased to favor this part of his
heritage; let us take heed to our ways, let us by a pious and exemplary
behavior persuade men that Liberty and Religion are worth contending for --
Let us cheerfully conspire with our Lord and Master to do good unto all, even
to the evil and unthankful. Let justice flow down our streets as a river, and
righteousness as an overflowing stream -- Let the sabbaths of the Lord, which
have been too long profaned by the noise of drums and other martial
instruments, be now sanctified by the reverent and peaceful exercises of
religion. Let the late affecting spectacles of mortality -- the awful pomp of
so uncommon a funeral, excite us all to preparation for our own dissolution.
Though we hope not to be murdered and cut off by the hand of violence, we are
yet mortal. We must all die, it may be suddenly. Let us then seriously engage
and unweariedly persevere in the service of the Lord, that whenever we are
called from this very precarious state, we may be found doing tho will of our
great God and Redeemer, and at last be admitted into eternal glory.

FINIS.

