PRIESTCRAFT DEFENDED. A SERMON OCCASIONED BY THE EXPULSION OF SIX YOUNG
GENTLEMEN FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, FOR Praying, Reading, and Expounding
the Scriptures. Humbly Dedicated to Mr. V -- C -- r and the H -- ds of H -- s.

By Their Humble Servant, THE SHAVER.

THE TENTH EDITION.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON: Reprinted, and Sold, by EDES and GILL, in
Queen Street, 1771.

THE PREFACE TO THE CANDID READER.
YOU must know, my friend, that I am a gentleman in the country, and by craft a
SHAVER of very considerable scope; though I have turned preacher of late and
seem to be pretty successful at my preachment, as the sole of this sermon will
testify. I have been a great man for the news as we Shavers commonly are, and
among other fine papers, I usually took in the St. James's Chronicle, a paper
that is filled in all the four corners, but if you ask with what: on my word, I
must refer you to people of greater penetration than I am to find that out.
Well I paid, and read to no purpose for a long while; but at last I chanced to
spy An Extract of a Letter from Oxford, and I wot it pleased me mightily.

It told us how that Six young men were expelled the university for holding
Methodistical tenets, and for praying, reading and expounding the scriptures in
a private house. Well, thought I, that is well enough: but then I did not so
much approve of the principal crime of those called Methodists, being said to
be reading and expounding the scriptures, etc. thought I, that is going too
far. But not long after I happened to see another account from Oxford, wrote by
Oxoniensis, and that account made me resolve upon something. For he tells us,
that one of the Six was formerly a Publican, another had been a Blacksmith, a
third had been a Barber, and a fourth had been a Teacher in a School.

Well, You must know my grandfather was a publican, my uncle a blacksmith, and
I myself am a shaver; which is by interpretation a barber; and my eldest son, a
promising lad, is destined for a schoolmaster. Therefore seeing the honors of
our family cast down into the puddle by the arrogance of Oxonian priests, I
began to grow surly upon it; but did not yet think of preaching. What brought
me to that was finding from the learned Oxoniensis, that those young men
preached without orders. Then, thought I, I will even have a Trial at it
myself. Well, you must know we have a good sort of a fellow to our parson; a
gentleman who loves his bottle and his friend, if it was for a whole night
together, and there is never a youth in all the parish who will sing a merrier
catch than himself, nor tell a prettier story: with him I am pretty familiar,
and I thought I would even borrow his Sunday's style, and his orthodox plan,
knowing him to be a true churchman, and I would try what I could do at
preaching. But I had certainly been disappointed in an audience if an happy
imagination had not befriended me; but no sooner had I bestirred my imagination
than I was wasted from Clarely Common to the great hall at O -- d, before the V
-- ^ C -- r, and the Heads of Houses, to whom, after I had mounted the rostrum
with the usual formality, I preached the following sermon:

Concerning which I would have it observed,

1. That I pretend not to justify any part of the Methodists conduct, besides
praying to God, reading, expounding the scriptures, and singing hymns, etc.

2. That I censure none of the clergy, but such as are against praying,
reading, and expounding the scriptures, and singing of hymns.

3. That whoever this coat is found to fit, I would have the gentleman put it
on and wear it, as his own: assuring himself that it was made for him, and
that, though a shaver, I am his tailor.

4. That, perhaps, in gratitude for my great pains, and the new hints given in
this sermon, which may cast a light upon ecclesiastical history, the V -- e C
-- r, and Heads of Houses, may present me to some good benefice. And they may
depend on it that I shall shave the parishoners as handsome as any on 'em.

Thus, reader, I have told you all about it, and have only to add, that after I
had at leizure hours wrote my sermon fairly out, I carried it to a booksellor,
expecting, that he would be as fond of it as I was, which I believe is a case
very common with us authors; but he drew up his shoulders, looked sour upon it,
and said he feared it was too coarse for this polite age. But I assured him
that the style was quite clerrical, being borrowed from the parish priest; and
what he might hear in many pulpits if he would only travel for it; so he agreed
to take my word rather than be at the expense and trouble of seeking for
further proof, and it was sent to the press to furnish you with half an hour's
entertainment, and please

Your humble servant, The SHAVER.

A SERMON, etc.
Having the honor of addressing so learned a body, with bands so white, gowns
so black, and caps so orthodox, I take the liberty of striking a little from
the common road of preaching, and as this is a singular occasion I shall make
free with a singular text.

You know, my beloved, it is the way of most preachers to choose some passage
of scripture for their text, which having distinctly read twice over, you hear
no more of the bible till the sermon is finished; but are entertained with such
a lecture as you may find in a news-paper, price twopence halfpenny. But I
have the honor of departing a little from this general rule, and shall be the
first who takes his text from a news-paper, and illustrates his doctrine by
scripture-history, and having broken the ice, as we used to say, I expect to
have many ingenious followers. You will find our text in the St. James's
Chronicle, for Thursday, March 17, 1768. No. 1099. Printed by Henry Baldwin, at
the Printing-Office, White Friars, Fleet Street. Wherein, if you will pull your
newspapers out of your pockets you may read with me the following paragraph.

EXTRACT of a LETTER from OXFORD.
On Friday last six students belonging to Edmund-Hall were expelled the
university, after an hearing of several hours, before Mr. Vice Chancellor, and
some of the Heads of Houses for holding Methodistical tenets, and taking upon
them to pray, read, and expound the scriptures, and sing hymns in a private
house. The -- of the -- defended their doctrines from the thirty-nine articles
of the established church, and spoke in the highest terms of the piety, and
exemplariness of their lives; but his motion was overuled, and sentence
pronounced against them. Dr. --, one of the Heads of Houses present, observed,
that as these six gentlemen were expelled for having too much religion, it
would be very proper to enquire into the conduct of some who had too little;
and Mr. -- was heard to tell their chief accuser that the university was much
obliged to him for his good work.


OUR text is indeed somewhat too long, but then, my beloved, we have the more
matter to work upon: and you know this is a day in which invention is not very
brisk, especially among the gentlemen clergy. But,

We proceed to prosecute our subject after the old orthodox plan. Namely,

1. To go over our text by way of explication.

2. Deduce a notable point of doctrine from it, viz. That this act of the V --
e C -- r, and the Heads of Houses, is defensible from the conduct of the clergy
in all ages, and in all countries.

3. Conclude with special application.

I. Explain our text. In doing which I must divide it into very small parcels,
even as the skillful surgeon does the flesh of a hanged malefactor, when he
dissects an organ. -- And in the

First place, Extract of a Letter from Oxford.

This Oxford my beloved, is a city in the West of England notable for a great
university; i. e. a place of learning: and it would do you good to see the
numbers of hopeful young gentlemen who come from all parts of England in
pursuit of learning, insomuch that all the colleges are frequently crowded* But
you will say, What do they learn? To which I answer in the negative, as being
much easier than the affirmative. For it appears from our text that there are
some things which they do not learn.

(1.) Praying: -- I mean, they do not, in common, learn to pray to God. It
seems, this is no part of the approved exercises of the students in that
university: for, says our text, Six young gentlemen were expelled the
university for praying. From whence we may draw this inference: namely, That if
the Vice Chancellor, and the Heads of Houses, expelled these six offenders for
praying to God; it is natural to suppose, that they are not guilty of that
crime themselves: otherwise, they would fall under that reproof, Romans ii. 1.

(2.) To read and expound the scripture, is another thing which seems to be
there prohibited. Whether Rochester's Poems, Tristam Shandy, and such books are
esteemed orthodox, and therefore tolerated, I pretend not to say; but one thing
is clear from our text, that reading and expounding the scriptures is against
the Oxonian law: for Six young gentlemen were expelled the university for
reading and expounding the scriptures.

(3.) Singing of hymns is another thing which they do not learn: this is also
clear from the words. By singing of hymns, I mean praising of God for blessings
received according to Col. iii. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. But singing of
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, cannot be connived at in the
university, by the Heads of Houses; for Six young men were expelled the
university for singing of hymns.

Note, This was an extract of a Letter from Oxford: which shows, that there be
some people there who can write, notwithstanding all the reflections that have
past upon them; and that although reading is dangerous there, yet an Oxonian
may write with impunity.

II. Last Friday: -- the better day, the better deed. Friday, you know, is a
fast day; on which it was fittest to go about a work of this importance; when
the judgment was not fettered with bodily grossness, but purged by an empty
belly.

Last Friday: It was not a thing that happened in the dark ages of Monlish
Ignorance, but what has happened in this enlightened age of CHRISTIANITY. It
was not when the university was tied hand and foot by Popish prejudices, and
the Heads of Houses were obliged to submit to their betters; but it was Last
Friday, the act and deed of Protestant Divines.

III. Six Students! -- What a miracle was it, my beloved, that, out of so many
hundreds of students, as are at Oxford, only Six should be found guilty of
praying reading and expounding the scriptures. This shows the faithfulness of
their vigilant tutors, in guarding them against such pernicious practices. Now
from this, observe,

1. That there were but Six students of all the university, who could be
detected in those evils of praying, etc. much to the honor of that learned
body.

2. That those Six being expelled; -- now there are none left in all the
colleges who take upon them to pray, read and expound the scriptures: --
therefore, gentlemen may with safety send their sons to that fountain of
learning, without fearing that they will become religious; -- there being none
left now to ensnare them.

IV. They all belonging to Edmund Hall. -- It seems they loved to be together:
from whence it may be gathered that they loved one another. A fault which the
Heathens accused the Christians of old with, but from which mankind in general
are now pretty free. It appears as if this Edmund-Hall was the only place at
Oxford in which praying people were to be sound. But it is hoped that the
governors of that Hall will be mulct for their carlessness in suffering the
students to read the bible and to enquire after religion, seeing it is contrary
to the sense of this university.

V. Were expelled the university. Deprived of the rights and privileges of the
king's loving subjects, or as the word signifies, they were drove out, forced
away, and banished from the university. This religions act was performed by the
Vice Chancellor after an hearing of several hours. I remember when bishop
Hooper was sent for by queen Mary, the pious bishop of London; and my Lord
Chancellor being determined to have him burnt; but yet to make a show of
justice they would give him a hearing, withal resolving not to swerve from
their bloody design. So in like manner, our venerable tutors were determined
not to suffer praying persons to breathe the university air; yet, being tied to
form, they would give them an hearing.

An hearing of several hours. -- Ah! my beloved, ye may see how remarkably the
scriptures are fulfilled in that learned body of divines; where it says, Hear
ye indeed but understand not, see ye indeed but perceive not.

VI. We come to the crime for which they were expelled the university: and I
wot it was an heinous crime indeed. This would appear without illustrating it
from the Character of the expellers; namely, Mr. Vice Chancellor, and the Head
of Houses. But as I love to remove every hillock out of the way, for your
better information, I shall explain it. What was their crime then, my beloved,
think you? Was it drinking? No, no, it was not drinking, for they were very
temperate. Was it whoring then, the common practice of many students? No, it
was not whoring neither; for their lives are said to have been very exemplary.
I wish, my beloved, it had been no worse. But what was it then? Was it
swearing, and fighting, and abusing their fellow students? No, for they shunned
the other students, as a wise man will shun an attorney: thus much may be
gathered from our text, which intimates, that they met together among
themselves. But it was praying: that, my beloved, was one part of their crime,
Six young men were expelled the University for praying. For Mr. V -- e C -- r
and the Heads of Houses will suffer no praying people to continue in the
university.

Reading and expounding the scriptures was another part of their crime. But
what in the name of the Pope, can students have to do with the scriptures? What
pity is it that the bible is not locked up in the Vatican. But letting that
pass, we find that learning to expound the scriptures is no part of the
employment of the students, Six young men being expelled the university for
reading and expounding the scriptures.

What added to their guilt was, that they carried their religion to a private
house. But what can private people have to do with religion, ought not they to
do, as their forefathers did; namely, give up their consciences and
understandings to the guidance of their venerable priest? Is it not enough that
gentlemen in black know, and understand religion, but every private person must
be dabbling in it contrary to the sense of this university? I wot, my beloved,
that the clergy cannot thrive as they do, if every private house must become a
worshipping temple; but it is though it there is little reason to fear this, seeing
our text informs us that the doctors of the university are determined to
prevent it, for Six young men were expelled the University for being religious
in a private house.

VII. Another part of their crime was that they held Methodistical tenets. This
same methodist, my beloved, is a cramp word, gathered out of old books, by men
of learning, and applied to such who pray, read, and expound the scripture, and
sing hymns in private houses. A people never to be tolerated by the clergy.
You Will observe, that this same hard word, which the nation has long rung with,
first of all was given to the sons of Esculapius as a name of honor, and about
thirty years ago, was by learned men raised up as the witch of Endor (who seems
to have been a clergy woman too) raised the ghost of old Samuel.

Those same sons of Esculapius were physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries in
their day, but then they were quite immethodical, like the greater part of the
old women in black prunella and white cambrick. For instance they had not the
method of wearing large whigs, gold headed canes, and of wheeling about the
streets in their chariots. And with respect to their physic and surgery, they
were guided chiefly by the dictates of nature without the abstruse methods of
art. At last there arose a great man and his name was Galen, a mighty man for
dissecting of apes; for it ought to be observed, that in his days in Pagan
lands, there were very few criminals who deserved death, and fewer still who
were given to the surgeons. Well what should he do, think you; why, my beloved,
being blessed with better stars at his nativity, than his predecessors, he took
their confused and immethodical practices and reduced them into method i. e.
form and order. Well, this great man being principal of the College of
Physicians, he taught his pupils to observe orderly rules, otherwise method,
from whence his disciples were in honor called Methodists. So much for
learning, now for doctrine.

Then my beloved the case stands thus; amongst the clergy there always have
been a great number who did not love praying, singing of hymns, reading and
expounding the scriptures, the like may be said of the students. What they
aimed at was a good living without much work, and as one in a certain place
says, Those men care not if the Devil take the flock provided they can but get
the fleece. On the other hand, there have been some who loved to pray, to sing
hymns, to read and expound the scriptures, who if they were not permitted to do
it in public houses or churches, would do it in private houses to the no small
disgrace of the other gentlemen. Well, my beloved, these are they who have been
called methodists, fanatics and enthusiasts. Now a word or two about their
tenets, and then I dismiss this head, for really their tenets, being
destructive of priestcraft, must by no means be encouraged.

1. First, and foremost, they think that a man ought to attest no articles of
faith, but what he believes to be true.

2. They think that a man ought not to profess to my Lord bishop that he
believes all the thirty nine articles of the established church to be the true
faith of the gospel when he secretly believes in his heart that they are false.

3. They think that a man should not profess to his lordship, that he is moved
by the holy ghost to desire the office of a deacon, when he considers it in his
heart as delusion and enthusiasm for any man to pretend to be moved by the holy
ghost in these days.

4. They think that after a man has subscribed the thirty nine articles, and
solemnly swore that he believes them, that he should not go and preach
doctrines directly opposite to the said articles.

5. They think that no man ought to be permitted to enter the pulpit whose life
and conversation is dissolute.

These with a great many tenets besides equally ridiculous to maintain, and
therefore, though tolerated by the king and parliament, the Heads of Houses
will never endure them in the university.

VIII. The -- of the -- defended their doctrines by the thirty-nine articles of
the established church.

I wot, I fear me much, that this doctor is himself tinctured with
methodistical tenets; for no body now adays besides methodists, etc. consider
the thirty-nine articles of the established church as any test of doctrine: as
for the clergy it is well known that they are mostly dissenters from the
doctrine of the articles and prayerbook. Ah! beloved, if the truth was known,
it would be found that this same -- prays to God, and reads his bible, or how
else should he take part with those young men whom the Heads of Houses expelled
the university for praying, reading and expounding the scriptures. Besides he
would not have spoken so highly of their piety and the exemplariness of their
lives as the text tells us he did, seeing the sense of the university was, that
their praying, reading, etc. was vicious. I fear me, my beloved, that if the
Heads of Houses do not keep a good look out after this same doctor, it will be
difficult for them to keep the university clear from such as pray, and read,
and expound the scriptures; but his motion was overruled. What is one methodist
among a host of divines?

Thus, my beloved, I have gone through the first part of my plan, and shall
proceed to the second.

II. Namely, to raise a notable point of doctrine from it; which is this, viz.
That the conduct of the Heads of the Houses, in expelling the six young men
from praying, reading, and expounding the scriptures, is defensible from the
conduct of the clergy of all ages and countries, whatsoever snarling persons
may say.

To clear this I shall produce four instances, all of which I shall take out of
that old antiquated book called the scripture. A book which sets forth the true
spirit of the university doctors to the very life. The

1st. Of which instances we have in the book of Daniel, chap. iii. wherein some
transactions of the established church at Babylon are recorded; concerning
which I would make the following notes:

I. That the religion, by law established was the religion of the golden image
which Nebuchadnezzar, at the request of the clergy, made and set up in the
plains of Dura. A place, my beloved, which, if we may give credit to
travelers, very much resembles the plains of Oxford.

II. The clergy, who you know have always been wonderfully fond of a golden
god, would by no means suffer an act of toleration to be passed in favor of
methodists and dissenters; but on the contrary, got an act of parliament on
their own side, enjoining the strictest uniformity in religion, and threatening
death to all dissenters: for it seems this prince was too easy and like some of
our former princes in England, was so much afraid of the clergy, that he was
obliged to conform, and so espoused an act of uniformity, which they hoped
would bring good grist to their mill, verse. 6.

III. This law established, the clergy were impatient to have the subjects of
this great king brought to the test: which they thought best to do by
appointing a public feast; on which it was required that every man, and
mother's son should fall down before, and worship this golden god set up by the
king, as the tool of the parsons.

IV. That there were four degrees of learned men, whom, I suppose dwelt in the
university at Babylon: first, there were magicians, who were with them, the
same as doctors of divinity are with us in our universities: secondly, there
were astrologers, or men of learned sciences, much the same with our masters of
arts: thirdly, there were sorcerers, who I suppose, were either fellows of the
college, or batchelors of arts, appointed to be tithe gatherers; and, fourthly,
there were chaldeans or students of their divinity, and other fine arts: and,

V. That all those gentry were very vigilant in discovering and informing
against dissenters, verse 8. Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near
and accused the Jews. That is to say, certain young students, being spurred on
to it by their tutors who care not to appear in such a dirty affair themselves,
and so forth.

VI. Strict as the law was, there were some who took upon them to pray to God,
like those six young gentlemen who were expelled the university for praying.
But what were they think you? why truly, they were dssenters and methodists,
for they would not conform to the form of worship by law established, therefore
were dissenters; and they were methodists, if praying to God denominates a man
a methodist. But what followed, trow ye? why, as soon as they were found out to
be non-conformists, the doctors of divinity accused them of rebellion; and had
the king been as fond of burning dissenters, as their reverences were, these
men had in a trice been executed, without having another chance for their
lives: But he was not quite so fiery, but gave them another trial. If you will
read the chapter through you will see the upshot of it, and how the doctors of
the university were confounded, and the dissenters were readmitted to the
king's favor, for God did work for them.

I pass on to the days of Darius: a prince who had a praying nobelman for his
first minister of state, and, for ought I know to the contrary, he might be
lord of the treasury, as well as the chancellor of the empire. His name was
Daniel, and by birth a Jew. Well, my beloved, being so very great, he was
grievously envied, by the inferior placemen, though they kept it secret, and
spoke him fair to his face; and he was very much abused by those who were out
of place. If we may judge of ancient times from what appears in ages more
modern, we may suppose that the times took a turn something like the following.

One man cries out against his being a favorite, and too intimate with the
queen or queen's mother, as their kinsmen do upon similar occasion; another
complains of his being a foreigner, and a captive, so highly dignified, whilst
the natives were neglected: perhaps their newspapers might be stuffed with
clamours against the exotic favorite; and the incensed mob might be taught to
cry out, liberty and Babylon for ever -- but no Jew -- no favorite -- no
captive. Well, my beloved, all the inns and outs might have fretted themselves
to death, without being able to do any thing against this prime minister, this
same Daniel, the king's favorite, if they had not applied to the principal
clergy, the Heads of Houses. But I trow, the reverend doctors, the magicians,
the masters of the art of astrology, etc. etc. no sooner embarked in the
popular cause but they were more than a match for the favorite, who had fallen
by means of their reverences, if the Almighty had as little to do with him, as
he has to do with the greatest part of the clergy.

Well, my beloved, the Heads of Houses and the disaffected statesmen met
altogether, and consulted what was the best way to overturn the state of this
praying favorite. But the conduct of Daniel was so exemplary, that they knew
they should be able to find nothing wrong in him, unless they could entrap him
in matters of religion. Therefore having first persuaded the king, that the
church was in danger, they urged the necessity of a law being made, prohibiting
any man's praying unto God. Well, Darius the king, was not such a novice in
politics but he knew the necessity of having the clergy on his side, and
therefore though he could not see into that part of their mysterious divinity,
made the decree according to the plan concerted by that learned body.

But it is thought that he would have strained a point with them, if he had
known that they were aiming at the life of his faithful favorite.

But how stiff these biblists are? for this Daniel went on praying to God,
reading and expounding the scriptures in a private house, notwithstanding the
king had under the direction of the clergy ordained otherwise; this was enough
to have provoked the Heads of Houses to have expelled him the University had he
belonged to it, but he not belonging to it, they were obliged to be satisfied
with putting him to death without expelling him.

Now lest any should object to the clergy having the honor of devising this
scheme, because there is no notice taken of them in history; let it be
observed, that it was never known that many great men or noblemen were ever
given to interfere in religious matters, and statesmen in all ages have been
wise enough to take up with the religion which the priests have prescribed to
them, therefore what you give of honor to any body in this affair, let it be
given to the clergy. And I pass on to make a comparison betwixt that affair and
this before us.

I. They could find no occasion of fault in Daniel; so it was with the six
young men who were expelled the University, for their lives were said to be
pious and exemplary.

II. They thought they might entrap him in some matters concerning the law of
his God. So likewise, these young men though they were no whoresters, no
gamblers, no drunkards, etc. yet they could be trapped in matters relating to
their God.

III. This same Daniel notwithstanding the penalty denounced in the edict
against any who should take upon them to pray to God, perversely, rebelliously,
and obstinately persisted in his usual apostolical, puritannical,
nonconformistical and methodistical manner of praying to God in a private
house. So no doubt but these six young men knew that it was against the will of
the Heads of Houses, etc. that any of the students under their care should pray
to God in a private house; for says our text, Six young men were expelled the
University, for praying, reading, and expounding the scriptures in a private
house; yet they persisted in it.

Lastly, under this head. Daniel president of the princes, kneeled upon his
knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God as
aforetime. But how will you be able to find such puritanic conduct among our
British noblemen: for I wot that a praying nobleman is pretty near as great a
rarity as a white crow upon Malvern hills. The

II. Instance of clerical conduct which gives countenance to the late act of
the Heads of Houses I shall bring from the clergy of that famous university at
Jerusalem, in the days of Christ and his apostles. In the established church of
Judea there were articles of faith and a canon law, which all the clergy
professed to believe, regard and defend. This confession of faith was first
compiled by Moses the founder of that church, and afterward ratified and
confirmed by Ezra and Nehemiah, their two principal reformers; even as the
thirty nine articles of the established church were ratified and confirmed by
our English reformers. I know you will be ready to think that the clergy deemed
it an honor to tread in the steps of those pious reformers; but I trow, my
beloved, ye are greatly mistaken; for the Heads of Houses of the university at
Jerusalem, even did as many others have done since, make the commandment void
to establish their own traditions. Perhaps you will be ready to startle like
the cows in July, when bit by the envious flies, when ye hear of a university
at Jerusalem: but I assure you, it was there that the doctors (i. e. teachers)
of the law dwelt, and their law was their divinity. Now, where do the
neighboring dogs delight to resort so much as to a place were the carcass is,
or where shall we see such swarms of reverend doctors as at the university.
Those pharisees, those lawyers, those scribes, and those doctors were all
gownsmen, but whether they wore the very same uniforms with the gentlemen of
Oxford university, my author does not say. Yet thus much may be gathered from
the history, that if that wandering Jew who they say has lived ever since the
times I am speaking of, should chance in his travels to call at Oxford, he
would think upon his longevity that from the manners of the men it was old
Jerusalem risen again from its ruins. But we will drop this, and come to the
matter in hand, which is to give a just account of those clergy, that you may
see that the heads of houses have not departed a jot from the rules of their
clerical ancestors.

The Jerusalem clergy finding that their living depended upon subscribing the
articles given by Moses, and the homilies compiled by the prophets; they could
for the sake of a venerable reputation, and a fattish living, or, as ye would
say, for the good of the church, very readily subscribe, and attest them upon
oath, though many of them, called sadducees, did not believe any thing about
them. Now not to take notice of the vulgar opinion, namely, that there are a
great many sadducees in our universities; I cannot but observe the weakness of
those who blame such of the clergy who swear to articles they do not believe,
seeing that was the practice of the clergy of the first established church that
was in the world.

About something more then 1700 years since, there arose some dissenters who
made a great stir among the people, and brought great uneasiness upon the
clergy. I do not mean that those were dissenters from the articles of faith
which was of old given to the saints; but they were dissenters from the clergy,
and did not spare to detect their errors, both in principles and practice; a
practice which our modern methodists are said to be guilty of, to the great
concern of the Heads of Houses.

Those were laymen, not regularly educated at the university, and who took upon
them to preach without receiving authority from the archbishop of Jerusalem; I
think his name was Caiaphas, and I wot he was primate of all Judea. Well, those
men were not only laymen, but the riff-raff of them, even fishermen: note, they
were not attorneys or merchants clerks; nor were they chemists, nor
apothecaries, but fishermen. And yet they preached, and yet they expounded the
scriptures, to the great confusion of the holy trade of priestcraft. The
established church was now thought to be in danger. And how it could be thought
so was something strange, seeing those praying and preaching dissenters proved
all their doctrine from the articles and homilies given by Moses and the
prophets, the same as our modern methodists prove their doctrines from the
articles and homilies of the church of England; and the church of England has
been thought in no small danger from these same methodists, upon grounds
equally substantial. Believe me my beloved, the reverend, the learned, the
zealous doctor Sacheveral, was not the first nor the last, who was grieved for
fear of the church. But he is dead and gone, therefore I return to the clergy
at Jerusalem; and ye cannot but remember how active they were in procuring the
destruction of Jesus Christ, and when he was risen from the dead and ascended
into glory, they abated nothing of their zeal for their established church.

For no sooner were they aware of the power of the apostles doctrine, (by
apostles I mean those who took upon them to pray, read, and expound the
scriptures in private houses, as you may see in the subsequent part of the
history) as these six young men who were expelled the university are said to
have done. Seeing, I say, their extraordinary fervor in preaching, they cried
out against them as persons drunk with new wine, by which we may understand
enthusiasm. Acts ii. 13 Well, my beloved, this is the very cry of the clergy
against all such as preach Jesus and the resurrection, and from their mouths
the vulgar catch the sound; so that with many, a methodist, an enthusiast, a
dissenter, and a fanatic, are thought to be synonimous terms. From hence we
may learn that slander may as well be thrown in a sermon as in a farce, and
will issue with as good a grace from a pulpit as from a theater. But no more of
this, because our time draws toward the other end.

It is very remarkable how zealous those of the gentlemen of the gown, who
aimed no higher than a good fat benefice, have always showed themselves when
the doctrine of Christ in its simplicity has been preached; for why? truly
because it lays the ax to the root of the tree of priestcraft, and throws down
the importance of the parson into the dirt. If the clergy were all to observe
the rules given by Christ to his disciples in his sermon upon the mount, where
would be all their riches and grandeur, their coaches, their liverymen, and
their plate? But ye know, that these rules are different from this craft,
whereby we parsons get our wealth, as heaven is different from hell. But as
priestcraft is lucrative, it will be sure to find supporters, whilst the houses
have got one head left upon them.

In Acts v. we find that Peter and the rest of his praying, reading, and
scripture-expounding brethren, were brought before the Vice Chancellor and the
Heads of Houses for a hearing, and after a hearing of several hours they took
counsel to slay them, v. 33. But there was one Gamaliel, the head of a certain
house who sided with them, and probably proved their doctrine from the articles
of the Jewish church as by law established. I trow this same Gamaliel was
tinctured with the doctrine they preached, as -- of -- who defended the faith
of the six young men who were expelled the university of -- for praying, etc.
may be supposed secretly to have believed in the articles which he once
subscribed, though he dared not to avow his faith openly.

There is one thing in the account that is something remarkable, namely, the
wise motion of doctor Gamaliel overruled the bloody designs of the priests; but
it was not so at the other university, for although -- of -- defended and proved
the methodistical doctrine from the articles of the church, and spoke highly of
the piety and exemplariness of their lives, his motion was overruled and the
six young men were expelled.

Another thing we may take notice of, namely, those ancient doctors had a law
by which they could put people to death for praying, reading, and expounding
the scriptures; but our universities have no such law, or it is no way doubtful
but that the same zeal which will, under a protestant government, expel the
students of the university for praying etc. would, for the same reasons, burn
offenders at a stake, were they favored with a popish king. So that if the
Heads of Houses were less bloody in their designs than their ancestors, it is
not to imputed to want of good will, but to the protestant restraints which
they are under.

It would be endless, my beloved, to point out all the instances in which the
Jewish, and the -- clergy agree; I shall therefore leave them to another
occasion, and shall pass on to another very famous church, in that part of the
world and after that I shall come nearer home, within our own ken. And,

III. This famous church was the church of Diana, at Ephesus; and I wot, in
this church there was many a good living in the gift of the university, and I
trow, that the Heads of Houses were very careful that none should enjoy one of
them unless he was well known to be a true son of the church, that is to say, a
promoter of the sale of the shrines of Diana, and a worshipper of the image
that fell down from Jupiter.

This Diana was in her day, a lady remarkable for hunting of stags, and ever
since, her clergy have been as remarkable for the hunting of (not stags but) a
good benefice. Now* my beloved, this same huntress was the personage worshipped
by most people of Asia, and she had many, very many clergy, who adored her for
the sake of gain: for by this craft we have our wealth, said they.

There was a famous university for the training up of young gentlemen in the
holy craft of making shrines for the goddess, and a lucrative craft they found
it my beloved, for they had it in their power to sell a brazen shrine for a
golden prize; a thing which others besides them practice.

This university was at Ephesus, a very populous city, where water was cheap,
but fire very dear; and here were many colleges and halls for the training up
of young men in the craft of getting wealth. Every hall had a Head, and over
all the Heads of Houses was a Vice Chancellor, the rev. Dr. Demetrius by name.
As for praying, reading, and expounding the scriptures they meddled not with
them, but were to the highest degree, intent upon getting wealth.

Well, they carried on this craft for many years, till at last there came some
itinerant preachers to town, who made it their business to pray to God, to
read, and expound the scriptures, and sing hymns in private houses, contrary to
the sense of that university. This was no small mortification to the clergy who
very well knew that if real religion, or praying, reading, and expounding the
scriptures was tolerated, that it would put an end to their lucrative
priestcraft, and their reverences would fall into disgrace. But to prevent such
a catastrophe the reverend Dr. Demetrius, Vice Chancellor, assembled the Heads
of Houses to consult what was best to be done; and it was resolved nemine
contradicente, to cry out, the church was in danger, that under pretense of
saving this church, they might save their own profits. Well, they cried out,
that the church was in danger, that the church was in danger, till they had
sufficiently inflamed the rabble, then they laid hold on the itinerants, had
them before the Heads of Houses, who gave them such treatment as praying people
may expect to meet with from the clergy of the --. It happened however, as in a
late case, that there was one man of integrity and honor amongst them, much
like the Head of -- Hall, only with this difference, the one was a
Notary-public, and the other is a gentleman in holy orders. Well, this attorney
it seems being recorder of the city, thought that the clergy carried their
authority a little beyond the rules of moderation and decency, a thing by no
means uncommon for some gentlemen of the cap and gown. This town clerk took up
the cause of his itinerants, and in a spirited, sensible manner, defended their
conduct and tenets, not from the thirty-nine articles but from the articles of
natural religion and morality, and spoke very highly of their piety and good
behavior. I cannot but remark that in this affair the town clerk was more
successful than the gentlemen who pleaded the cause of the six methodists at
Oxford; the former overruled the purposes of Diana's clergy; but the
university clergy over ruled the motion of the latter, according to our text:
for though he defended their doctrine from the thirty-nine articles of the
established church, and spoke very highly of their piety and the exemplariness
of their lives, these six young men were expelled the university for praying,
reading, and expounding the scriptures, and for singing hymns in a private
house. For why? why truly, my beloved, because praying, reading, and expounding
the scriptures is not the craft by which we get our wealth. For proof of this
proposition I refer you to stubborn facts; namely, that you shall seldom see a
divine who makes a point of praying, reading, and expounding the scriptures,
and of singing hymns in private or public houses, who keep their equipage, or
possess your fat livings. I wot, my beloved, that one drone eats more honey
than four laborious bees; for proof of this I refer you to the reverend Dr.
Pliny, an author of approved merit and a great divine.

But I pass on to the fourth established church the clergy of which, in all
respects, possessed the spirit of university divines, or Heads of Houses; and I
trow, it is a church of great pretensions, the clergy of which are as
infallible as the most holy mother pope Joan that lady, who was Christ's vicar,
and Peter's successor, and carried the keys of heaven, hell, and purgatory in
her pocket, when she was in her prime, and her moon shone at full. I guess by
this time you know that I mean the good old, one catholic, roman, infallible,
pontifical, universal, mother church, in the bosom of which our forefathers of
the surcingle slept so snug, wrapped about with abbey lands as with warm
blankets. And if I may speak the sentiments of my sable brethren of the
university, we wish for the sake of those lands, that we were all safe rolling
in her bosom once more. But I will not keep you in suspense about this.

IV. Church the conduct of whose clergy was so near a kin to the conduct of the
clergy of --. In the days of Betsey, the vestal queen, the clergy suffered
great discontent. For why? because praying, reading and scripture expounding
people were suffered to live, and were even tolerated in the university, which
was a kind of counterbalance to the emolument their reverences had enjoyed in
the days of Mary of scarlet memory, for as soon as this orthodox lady had
ascended the throne, matters took a very agreeable turn, and the right reverend
bishops, Bonner and Gardener began to work for the good of the church. Like
true bred D -- D -- s they searched every corner of the land for matters to
work upon; and who should they pitch upon, know ye but those ministers and
others who prayed to God, read, and expounded the scriptures, and sung hymns?
For those clergymen were much like unto others, they discouraged praying to any
besides saints of their own cannonization; and as for the scriptures, they
found it for their interest that the sense of them should be concealed. And no
doubt other people of the same practices have reasons equally ponderous to
assign for their conduct.

Who was Cranmer, my beloved? Why truly, though he was primate of England, he
took upon him to pray, read and expound the scriptures, and as one such,
according to the laws of Trent council, he was expelled the convocation and
burnt to death, as an enemy so the clergy, Latimer, and Ridley, and Hooper, and
Tailor, and Bradford, and Hunter, and Philpot, etc. etc. etc. were all of them
guilty of those heinous offenses of praying, of reading, of expounding the
scriptures, and of singing of hymns. The same crimes with which the Oxford
methodists were charged, and for which they were expelled the university.

Thus, beloved, I have with much pleasure gone so far through with my first
proposed plan, and from what I have advanced we may raise the following
remarks; 1. That the spirit of our D -- D -- 's has been the same in all ages,
a noble spirit of opposition to methodistical tenets. The magicians, the
astrologers, the sorcerers, and the chaldeans, the scribes, the pharisees, the
lawyers, the sadducees, and the doctors, and the shrine-makers, and the
inquisitors, and the roman bishops, and the vice chancellors, and the heads of
houses are all of the same religion; namely to oppose praying, reading, and
expounding of the scriptures.

2. That the state of religion in our land is likely to be soon upon a very
respectable sooting, seeing no more than six, out of the vast number of
students at Oxford, took upon them to pray to God, to read, and to expound the
scriptures; so that it is hoped the many parishes in England, will be likely to
have parsons who will let their parishioners have their own way, and go quietly
to hell without disturbing of them. Whereas was not care taken to suppress
praying people in the university, we should have the nation swarming with them,
much to the detriment of p -- c -- ft

3. It is observeable that we have found out more fully what four of those six
gentlemen were, ere they set foot in the university; one was a publican,
another a smith, a third a barber, and a fourth a teacher, under W --, as it is
written by the reverend Dr. Oxoniensis Gazetteer, No. 12199, April 8, 1768, and
I wot, my beloved, though my kindred are professors of such arts they are to be
held as dangerous sciences; therefore must not be tolerated by the clergy.

1st. And foremost the clergy has suffered much discontent from the blacksmith,
and whilst the bitterness of the loss of the abbey lands belcheth from our
stomachs, we prunella gentlemen will never forgive the blacksmiths. Quere, For
why? Ans. Because he was a blacksmith's son, lord Thomas Cromwell by name who
stripped the church, that is to say, the clergy, of those warm, those fat abbey
lands. No more blacksmith's I pray you now -- we'll have none of them.
Therefore Mr. V -- e C -- r did well in expelling the man because he had been a
blacksmith.

2. One other of them was a publican, i. e. a tax gatherer, and I suppose, M. V
-- C -- r thought that the difference betwixt tax gathering and tithe
gathering, being so very trifling that after a young man had sufficiently
learned at home to gather taxes, it was quite needless for him to come to the
university to learn to gather tithes. I wot, my beloved, that the old grudge
betwixt the pharisees and the publicans has not yet subsided. For, as the
learned Oxoniensis observes, the V -- C -- expelled a man, the university, for
having been a publican.

3. And in the next place another had been a barber, That is to say a shaver.
Believe me it is dangerous to play with edge tools, and razors are keen things;
but keeness must not be admitted at O -- d. A shaver if tolerated, might be as
bad as a blacksmith; but no more of this, we'll have no more shavers, my
beloved.

4. A fourth was a teacher in a school, under W -- y. But who, or what, this
same W -- y is, whether an hill, an old abbey, an holy college, or an oak-tree,
the accurate Oxoniensis does not say. But this schoolmaster who taught under
it, be it what it will, was justly expelled. For why? Because he departed so
very far from the rule established among students. The common rule observed by
the hopeful young gentlemen of the gown is, before they have so much as learned
the first lesson of themselves, they conclude that they are able to teach
others; witness so many a dull parson. But this man though he had been
accustomed to teach others, meanly debased himself, so far as to receive
instructions from others; but such a mean opinion of one's self being no way
likely to add weight to the importance of the parson, must not be tolerated. I
shall not now say any more; intending ere long to write a commentary on the
gospel of Oxford, as written by the learned, the just, the accurate, and the
reverend doctor Oxoniensis.

FINIS.

