DOMESTIC MEDICINE; OR, THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN: BEING AN ATTEMPT To render the
MEDICAL ART more generally useful, by showing people what is in their own power
both with respect to the PREVENTION and CURE of Diseases. CHIEFLY Calculated to
recommend a proper attention to REGIMEN and SIMPLE MEDICINES.

BY WILLIAM BUCHAN, M. D.

Sed valetudo sustentatur notitia sui corporis; et observatione, quae res aut
prodesse soleant, aut obesse; et continentia in victu omni atque cultu,
corporis tuendi causa; et praetermittendis voluptatibus; postremo, art eorum
quorum ad scientiam haec pertinent. CIC. DE OFFIC. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by
JOHN DUNLAP, in MARKET-(...) Sold by R. AITKEN, at his BOOK-STORE, (...) site
the LONDON COFFEE-HOUSE, in FRONT-(...). M. DCC. LXXII.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. OF PREVENTING DISEASES.
OF CHILDREN 1 Clothing 8 Food 12 Exercise 17 Bad effects of unwholesome air
24 Faults of nurses 26 A summary view of the directions concerning children 28
General CAUSES of diseases 31 Catching cold ib. Unwholesome food 37
Irregularities in diet, sleep, etc. 44 Bad air 48 Neglect of cleanliness 52
Intemperance 55 Indolence 59 Infection 63 The passions 66 Particular CAUSES of
diseases 71 Laborious employments 74 Sedentary employments 81 Intense study 85
PART II. OF DISEASES.
Of distinguishing diseases 92 Fevers in general 97 Intermitting fevers, or
agues 101 An acute continual fever 108 A pleurisy 113 A peripneumony or
inflammation of the lungs 119 Consumptions 121 A slow or nervous fever 130 A
malignant, putrid, or spotted fever 136 Of the miliary fever 144 The small pox
148 The measles 168 The scarlet fever 171 The erysipelas, or St Anthony's fire
172 The inflammation of the brain 176 The inflammation of the eyes 180 The
quinsey, or inflammation of the throat 184 The malignant quinsey, or ulcerous
sore throat 189 Colds 192 Coughs 195 The chin-cough 198 The inflammation of the
stomach 201 The iliac passion 203 Colics 206 The inflammation of the kidneys
210 The inflammation of the liver 213 The cholera morbus, or vomiting and
looseness 215 A diarrhoea, or looseness 217 The dysentery, or bloody flux 220 A
diabetes, or excessive discharge of urine 226 A suppression of urine 228
Costiveness 230 Involuntary discharges of blood 232 Bleeding at the nose 234
Bleeding and blind piles 236 Spitting of blood 238 Vomiting of blood 241 Bloody
urine 242 Excessive vomiting 243 The headache 246 The toothach 249 The earach
252 The heart-burn 254 Pains of the stomach 255 Worms 257 The jaundice 261 The
dropsy 264 The goat 267 The rheumatism 273 The scurvy 276 The scrophula, or
king's evil 280 The rickets 283 Of the itch 286 The asthma 288 The apoplexy 291
The palsy 294 The epilepsy, or falling sickness 295 Nervous, hysteric and
hypochondriac disorders 299 Melancholy and madness 303 Poisons 308 The stone
and gravel 318 The hiccup 321 The cramp of the stomach 322 Want of appetite 323
Deafness 324 The night mare 325 Swoonings 326 DISEASES of WOMEN 328 Pregnancy
334 Childbirth 336 Barrenness 339 DISEASES of CHILDREN Retention of the
meconium 341 Aphthae or thrush ib. Acidities 342 Galling and excoriations 344
Stoppage of the nose ib. Eruptions 345 Difficult breathing 347 Teething 348
SURGERY Of wounds 350 Burns 354 Bruises 355 Dislocations 356 Broken bones 357
Strains 360 Ulcers ib. Imposthumes or boils 362 Whitlows 363 Ruptures 365
Casualties 366
PART I. OF PREVENTING DISEASES.
CHAP. I.
OF CHILDREN.
TO avoid diseases, it is necessary we should know their causes. These indeed
are numerous; but we shall endeavor to point out such only as have the most
general influence, as too great minuteness in this respect would tend rather to
perplex than instruct the generality of readers.

THE better to trace diseases from their original causes, we shall take a view
of the common treatment of mankind in the state of infancy. In this period of
our lives, the foundations of a good or bad constitution are generally laid; it
is therefore of importance, that parents be well acquainted with the various
causes which may produce diseases in their offspring. It must be owing either
to the ignorance or carelessness of parents, that so many of the human species
perish in infancy. This, we presume, will appear from the following
observations.

THE annual registers of the dead show, that at least one half of the children
born in Great Britain die under twelve years of age. To those who do not
reflect, this appears to be a natural evil, and therefore they think it their
duty ^o submit to it. But whoever accurately examines the matter, will find
that it is an evil of our own making, and, in a great measure, owing to
mismanagement. Were the death of infants a natural evil, other animals should
be as liable to die young as man; but that we see is not the case.

IT may seem strange, that man, notwithstanding his superior reason, should
fall so far short of other animals in the management of his young: But our
surprise will soon cease, if we consider that brutes, guided by instinct, never
err in this respect; while man, trusting solely to art, is seldom right. Were a
catalogue of those children who perish annually by art alone, exhibited to
public view, it would astonish most people.

WHEN parents are above taking care of their children, others must be employed
for that purpose: These will always endeavor to recommend themselves by the
appearance of extraordinary skill and address. By this means so many
unnecessary and destructive articles have been introduced into the diet,
clothing, etc. of children, that it is no wonder so many of them perish.

NOTHING can be more preposterous than for a mother to think it below her to
take care of her own child, or to be so ignorant as not to know what is proper
to be done for it. If we search nature throughout, we cannot find a parallel to
this. Every other creature is the nurse of its own young, and they thrive
accordingly. Were the brutes to bring up their young by proxy, they would share
the same fate with those of the human species.

WE mean not to impose it as a task upon every mother to ^^ckle her own child.
This, whatever speculative writers may say to the contrary, is in many cases
impracticable, and would inevitably prove destructive both to the mother and
child. Women of delicate constitutions, subject to low spirits, hysteric fits,
or other nervous disorders, make very bad nurses: But these complaints are now
so common, that it is rare to find a woman of fashion free from them; for which
cause few women of better station, suppose them willing, are really able to
suckle their own children.

DID mankind live as nature directs, almost every mother would be in a
condition to give suck: But, whoever considers how far we have deviated from
her dictates, will not be surprised to find many of them unable to perform that
necessary office. Mothers, who do not eat enough of solid food, nor enjoy the
benefit of free air and exercise, can neither have wholesome humors
themselves, nor afford proper nourishment to an infant. Children who are
suckled by delicate women, either die young, or are weak and sickly all their
lives. Nor is this at all to be wondered at. If children suck in nervous
diseases with their mother's milk, What have we to expect?

WHEN we say, that every mother is not able to suckle her own child, we would
not be understood as discouraging that practice. Every mother who can, ought
certainly to perform that tender office. But suppose it to be out of her power,
she may, nevertheless, be of great service to her child. The business of
nursing is by no means confined to giving suck. To a woman who abounds with
milk, that is the easiest part of it. Numberless other offices are necessary
for a child, which the mother at least ought to see done. A mother, who
abandons the fruit of her womb, as soon as it is born, to the sole care of an
hireling, hardly deserves that name. A child, by being brought up under the
mother's eye, not only secures her affection, but may reap all the advantages
of a mother's care, though it be suckled by another. How can a mother be better
employed, than in superintending the nursery? This is at once the most
delightful and important office! yet the most trivial business or insipid
amusements are often preferred to it. A strong proof both of the bad taste and
wrong education of modern females.

IT is much to be regretted, that more pains is not bestowed in teaching the
proper management of children to those whom nature has designed for mothers.
This, instead of being made the principal, is seldom considered as any part of
female education. Is it any wonder, when females, so educated, come to be
mothers, that they should be quite ignorant of the duties belonging to that
station? However strange it may seem, it is certainly true, that many mothers,
and those of fashion too, are as ignorant, when they have brought a child into
the world, of what is proper to be done for it, as the infant itself. Indeed,
the most ignorant part of the sex are generally reckoned most knowing in the
business of nursing. Hence, sensible people become the dupes of ignorance and
superstition; and the nursing of children, instead of being conducted by
reason, is the result of whim and caprice.

ONE great design of females, no doubt, is to propagate the species. But to
bring forth a child, is the least part of that important business. Were the
care of a parent to stop here, the whole human race would soon be extinct.
Nature has made it necessary, that a child should depend on its parents during
the state of infancy; and those parents who neglect the proper care of their
offspring, not only violate one of the first and strongest principles of
nature, but actually endeavor to extinguish the human race. An infant may be
as certainly murdered by neglect, as by any act of violence whatever; and, for
one child that loses its life by the latter, a thousand perish by the former,
without being regarded.

WERE the time that is generally spent by females in acquiring useless
knowledge, employed in learning how to bring up their children; how to dress
them so as not to hurt, cramp, or confine their motions; how to feed them with
wholesome and nourishing food; how to exercise their tender bodies, so as best
to promote their growth and strength: Were these the objects of female
instruction, mankind would derive the greatest advantage from it. But, while
the education of females implies little more than what relates to dress and
public show, we have nothing to expect from them but ignorance, even in the
most important concerns. But ignorance can be no excuse, where people have it
in their power to be better informed; and, if children perish by the negligence
of mothers, they must be accountable.

DID mothers know their importance, and lay it to heart, they would embrace
every opportunity of informing themselves of the duties which they owe to their
infant-offspring. It is theirs, not only to form the body, but also to give the
mind its most early cast. They have it very much in their power to make men
healthy or valetudinary, useful in life, or the bane of society.

BUT the mother is not the only person concerned in the management of children.
The father has an equal interest in their welfare, and ought to assist in every
thing that respects either the improvement of the body or mind.

IT is pity that men pay so little regard to this matter. Their neglect is one
reason why females know so little of it. Women will ever be desirous to excel
in such accomplishments as recommend them to the other sex. But men generally
keep at such a distance from even the smallest acquaintance with the affairs of
the nursery, that many would esteem it an affront, were they supposed to know
any thing of it. Not so, however, with the kennel or the stables: A gentleman
of the first rank is not ashamed to give directions concerning the management
of his dogs or horses; but would blush, were he to be surprised in performing
the same office for that being, who derived its existence from himself, who is
the heir of his fortunes, and the future hope of his country. Few fathers
indeed run any hazard of being surprised in this situation; yet, certain it is,
that man needs culture more than any other creature, and that both his body and
mind are capable of the greatest improvement. Nature has left so much in the
power of parents, that children are, in a great measure, what they please to
make them.

PHYSICIANS themselves have not been sufficiently attentive to the management
of children: That has been generally considered as the sole province of old
women, while men of the first rank in physic have even refused to visit
infants when sick. Such conduct in the faculty has not only caused this branch
of medicine to be neglected, but has also encouraged the other sex to assume an
absolute title to prescribe for children in the most dangerous diseases. The
consequence is, that a physician is seldom called till the good women have
exhausted all their skill; when his attendance can only serve to divide the
blame and appease the disconsolate parents.

WE would have nurses do all in their power to prevent diseases; but, when a
child is taken ill, some person of skill should immediately be consulted. The
diseases of children are generally acute, and the least delay is dangerous.

WERE physicians more attentive to the diseases of children, they would not
only be better qualified to treat them properly when sick, but likewise to give
useful directions for their management when well. The diseases of children is
by no means such a difficult study as many imagine. It is true, children cannot
tell their complaints; but the causes of them may be pretty certainly
discovered, by putting proper questions to the nurses and such as are about
them. Besides, the diseases of infants, being less complicated, are easier
cured than those of adults.

IT is really astonishing, that so little attention should in general be paid
to the preservation of infant-lives! What labor and expense are daily bestowed
to prop an old rotten carcass for a few years, while thousands of those, who
might be useful in life, perish without being regarded, and prove no better
than an untimely birth! Mankind are apt to value things not according to their
future but their present utility. This is of all others the most erroneous
method of estimation; yet, upon no other principle is it possible to account
for the general indifference with respect to the death of infants.

OF DISEASED PARENTS.
DISEASED parents cannot beget healthy children. It would be as reasonable to
expect a rich crop from a barren soil, as that strong and healthy children
should be born of delicate parents, worn out with intemperance or disease.

AN ingenious writer observes *, that on the constitution of mothers depends
originally that of their offspring. No one who believes this, will be
surprised, on a view of the female world, to find diseases and death so
frequent among children. A delicate female, brought up within doors, an utter
stranger to exercise and open air, who lives on tea and other slops, may bring
a child into the world, but it will hardly be fit to live. The first blast of a
disease will nip the tender plant in the bud: Or, should it struggle through a
few years existence, its feeble frame, shook with convulsions from every
trivial cause, would be unable to sustain the common functions of life, and
prove a burden to society.

IF to the delicacy of mothers we add the irregular lives of fathers, we shall
see further cause to believe, that children are often hurt by the constitution
of their parents. A sickly frame may be originally induced by hardships or
intemperance, but chiefly by the latter. It is impossible that a course of vice
should not spoil the best constitution: And did the evil terminate here, it
would be a just punishment for the folly of the sufferer; but when once a
distemper is contracted and rivetted in the habit, it is entailed on all
posterity. What a dreadful inheritance is the gout, the scurvy, or the
king's evil, to transmit to our offspring! How happy had it been for the heir of
many a great estate, had he been born a beggar, rather than to inherit his
father's fortunes at the expense of likewise inheriting his diseases!

NO person who labors under any incurable malady, ought to marry, as he
thereby both shortens his own life, and transmits misery to others: But when
both parties are deeply tainted with the scrophula, the scurvy, or the like,
the effects must be still worse. Such will either have no issue at all, or
those whom they have, must be miserable indeed. Want of attention to these
things, in forming connections for life, has rooted out more families than the
plague, famine, or the sword; and while these connections are formed from
mercenary views, that must be the case.

IN our matrimonial contracts, it is amazing so little regard is had to the
health and form of the object. Our sportsmen know, that the generous courser
cannot be bred out of the foundered jade, nor the sagacious spaniel out of the
snarling cur. This is settled upon immutable laws. The man who marries a woman
of a sickly constitution, and descended of unhealthy parents, whatever his
views may be, cannot be said to act a prudent part. A puny scrophulous woman
may prove fertile; should this be the case, the family must become an
infirmary. What prospect of happiness the father of such a family has, we shall
leave any one to judge.

THE Jews, by the positive direction of the Almighty, were forbid to have any
manner of commerce with the diseased; and indeed to this all wise legislators
ought to have a special regard. In some states, the marriage of morbid people
has actually been prohibited. This is an evil of a complicated kind, a natural
deformity, and political mischief; and therefore requires a public
consideration.

SUCH children as have the misfortune to be born of diseased parents, will
require to be nursed with greater care than others. This is the only way to
make amends for the defects of constitution; and it will often go a great
length. A healthy nurse, wholesome air, and enough of exercise, will do
wonders. But, when these are neglected, little is to be expected from any other
quarter. The defects of constitution cannot be supplied by medicine.

THOSE who inherit any family-disease, ought to be very circumspect in their
manner of living. They should consider well the nature of such disease, and
guard against it by a proper regimen. It is certain, that family-diseases have
often, by proper care, been kept off for one generation; and there is great
reason to believe, that, by persisting in the same course, such diseases might
at length be wholely eradicated. This is a subject very little regarded, though
of the last importance. Family-constitutions are as capable of improvement, as
family-estates; and the libertine, who impairs the one, does greater injury to
his posterity, than the prodigal who squanders away the other.

OF THE CLOTHING OF CHILDREN.
THE clothing of an infant is so simple a matter, that it is surprising, how
any person should err in it; yet many children lose their lives, and others are
deformed, by errors of this kind.

NATURE knows no other use of clothes to an infant, but to keep it warm. All
that is necessary for this purpose, is to wrap it in a soft, loose covering.
Were a mother left to the dictates of nature and reason, this is certainly the
method that she would follow. But the business of dressing an infant has long
been out of the hands of mothers, and has at last become a secret, which none
but adepts pretend to understand.

FROM the most early ages it has been thought necessary, that a woman in labor
should have some person to attend her. This in time became a business; and,
like all others, those who were employed in it, strove to outdo one another in
the different branches of their profession. The dressing of a child came of
course to be considered as the midwife's province, who no doubt imagined, that
the more dexterity she could show in this article, the more her skill would be
admired. Her attempts might be seconded by the vanity of parents, who wanting
to make a show of the infant as soon as it was born, were ambitious to have as
much finery heaped upon it as possible. Thus it came to be thought as necessary
for a midwife to excel in bracing and dressing an infant, as for a surgeon to
be expert in applying bandages to a broken limb; and the poor child, as soon as
it came into the world, had as many rollers and wrappers applied to its body,
as if every bone had been fractured in the birth; while these were often so
tight, as not only to gall and wound its tender frame, but even to obstruct the
motion of the heart, lungs, and other organs necessary for life.

IN several parts of Britain the practice of rolling children with so many
bandages is now, in some measure, laid aside; but it would still be a difficult
task to persuade the generality of women, that the shape of a child does not
entirely depend on the midwife's care. So far, however, are all their
endeavors to mend the shape of children, from being successful, that they
constantly operate the contrary way, and mankind become deformed just in
proportion to the means used to prevent deformity. How little deformity of body
is to be found among uncivilized nations? So little indeed, that it is vulgarly
believed they put all their deformed children to death. The truth is, they
hardly know such a thing as a deformed child. Neither should we, if we followed
their example. Savage nations never think of manacling their children. They
allow them the full use of every organ, carry them abroad in the open air, wash
their bodies daily in cold water, etc. By this management their children become
so strong and hardy, that, by the time our puny infants get out of the nurse's
arms, theirs are able to shift for themselves.

AMONG brute animals no art is necessary to procure a fine shape. Though many
of them be extremely delicate, when they come into the world, yet we never find
them grow crooked for want of swaddling-bands. Is nature less generous to the
human kind? No: But we take the business out of nature's hands.

NOT only the analogy of other animals, but the very feelings of infants tell
us, that they ought to be kept easy and free from all pressure. They cannot
indeed speak their complaints; but they can show signs of pain; and this they
never fail to do, by crying, when pinched by their clothes. No sooner are they
freed from their bracings, than they seem pleased and happy; yet, strange
infatuation! The moment they hold their peace, they are again committed to
their chains.

IF we consider the body of an infant as a bundle of soft pipes, replenished
with fluids in continual motion, the danger of pressure will appear in the
strongest light. Nature, in order to make way for the growth of children, has
formed their bodies soft and flexible; and, lest they should receive any injury
from pressure in the womb, has surrounded the foetus every way with fluids.
This shows the care which nature takes to prevent all unequal pressure on the
bodies of infants, and to defend them against every thing that might in the
least cramp or confine their motions.

EVEN the bones of an infant are so soft and cartilaginous, that they readily
yield to the slightest pressure, and easily take on a bad shape, which can
^^ver after be remedied. Hence it is, that so many people appear with high
shoulders, crooked spines and flat breasts, who were born with as good a shape
as others, but had the misfortune to be squeezed into monsters by the
application of stays and bandages.

PRESSURE, by obstructing the circulation, prevents the equal distribution of
nourishment to the different parts of the body, by which means the growth
becomes unequal. One part of the body grows too large, while another remains
too small, and thus in time the whole frame becomes disproportioned and
misshapen. To this we must add, that when a child is cramped in its clothes, it
naturally shrinks from the parts affected, and by putting its body into
unnatural postures, it becomes deformed by habit.

DEFORMITY of body may proceed from weakness or diseases; but, in general, it
is the effect of improper clothing. Nine tenths, at least, of the deformity
amongst mankind must be imputed to this cause. A deformed body is not only
disagreeable to the eye, but injurious to the health. By a bad figure both the
animal and vital functions must be impeded, and of course health impaired.
Hence, few people remarkably misshapen are strong or healthy.

THE new motions which commence at the birth, as the circulation of the blood
through the lungs, respiration, the peristaltic motion, etc. afford another
strong argument for keeping the body of an infant free from all pressure. These
organs, not having been accustomed to move, are easily stopped; but when that
happens, death must ensue. Hardly any method could be devised more effectually
to stop these motions than bracing the body too tight with This is by no means
inweighing against a thing that does not happen. In many parts of Britain at
this day a roller, five or six feet in length, is applied round the child's
body as soon as it is born.
rollers, etc. Were these to be applied in the same manner to the body of an
adult, for an equal length of time, they could hardly fail to hurt the
digestion and make him sick. How much more hurtful they must be to tender
infants, we shall leave any one to judge.

WHOEVER considers these things, will not be surprised, that so many children
die of convulsions soon after the birth. These fits are generally attributed to
some inward cause; but, in fact, they oftener proceed from our own imprudent
conduct. I have known a child seized with convulsion-fits, soon after the
midwife had done swaddling it; but, upon taking off the rollers and bandages,
it was immediately relieved, and never had any convulsion-fits afterward.
Numerous examples of this sort might be brought, were they necessary.

IT would be safer to fix on the clothes of an infant with strings than pins,
as these often gall and irritate their tender skins, and occasion convulsions.
Instances have been known, where pins were found sticking above half an inch
into the body of a child after it had died of convulsion-fits, which, in all
probability, proceeded from that cause.

CHILDREN are not only hurt by the tightness of their clothes, but also by the
quantity. Every child has some degree of fever after the birth; and, if it be
loaded with too many clothes, the fever must be increased. But that is not all;
the child is generally laid in bed with the mother, who is likewise feverish;
to which we may add the heat of the lying-in-bed-chamber, and the wines, and
other heating things too often given to children immediately after the birth.
When all these are combined, which does not seldom happen, they must increase
the fever to such a degree as will endanger the life of the infant.

THE danger of keeping infants too hot, will further appear, if we consider,
that, after being for some time in the situation mentioned above, they are
often sent into the country to be nursed in a cold house *. Is it any wonder,
if a child, from such a transition, catches a mortal cold, or contracts some
other fatal disease? When an infant is kept too hot, its lungs not being
sufficiently expanded, are apt to remain weak and flaccid for life; from whence
proceed coughs, consumptions, and other diseases of the breast.

IT would answer little purpose to specify the particular pieces of dress
proper for an infant. These ever will vary in different places according to
custom and the humor of parents. The great rule to be observed is, That a
child have no more clothes than are necessary to keep it warm, and that they be
quite easy for its body.

STAYS are the very bane of children. A volume would not suffice to point out
all the ill effects of this useless piece of dress. The madness in favor of
stays seems, however, to have been at a height; and it is to be hoped the world
will, in time, become wise enough to know, that the human shape does not solely
depend upon whale-bone and bend leather Stays made of bend-leather are worn by
all the woman of lower station in many parts of England.
.

WE shall only add, with respect to the clothes of children, that they ought to
be kept very clean. Children perspire more than adults; and, if their clothes
be not frequently changed, they become very hurtful. Dirty clothes not only
gall and fret the tender skins of infants, but likewise occasion ill smells;
and, what is worse, tend to produce (...) and cutaneous diseases.

CLEANLINESS is not only agreeable to the eye, but tends greatly to preserve
the health of children. It promotes the perspiration; and, by that means, frees
the body from superfluous humors, which, if retained, could not fa^l to
occasion diseases. A nurse can have no excuse for allowing a child to be dirty.
Poverty may oblige her to give it coarse clothes; but, if she does not keep
them clean, it must be her own fault.

OF THE FOOD OF CHILDREN.
NATURE not only points out the food proper for an infant, but actually
prepares it. This, however, is not sufficient to prevent some who think
themselves wiser than nature, from attempting to bring up their children
without her provision. Nothing can show the disposition which mankind have to
depart from nature more than their endeavoring to bring up children without
the breast. The mother's milk, or that of a healthy nurse, is unquestionably
the best food for an infant. Neither art nor nature can afford a proper
substitute for it. A child may seem to thrive for a few months without the
breast; but when teething, the smallpox, and other diseases incident to
childhood come on, they generally fall a victim. An evident proof, that their
food is unwholesome, and their humors bad.

A child soon after the birth shows an inclination to suck; and there seems to
be no reason why it should not be gratified. It is true, the mother's milk does
not always come immediately after the birth; but is not this the way to bring
it? The first milk that the child can squeeze out of the breast, answers the
purpose of cleansing better than all the drugs in the apothecary's shop, and at
the same time prevents inflammations of the breast, fevers, and other diseases
incident to mothers.

IT is strange how people came to think, that the first thing given to a child
should be drugs. This is beginning with medicines by times, and no wonder that
they generally end with it. It sometimes happens, that a child does not pass
the meconium so soon as could be wished. This has induced physicians in such
cases to give something of an opening nature to cleanse the first passages.
Midwives have improved upon this hint, and never fail to give syrups, oils,
etc. whether they be necessary or not. Cramming an infant with such
indigestible stuff as soon as it is born, can hardly fail to make it sick, and
is more likely to occasion diseases, than prevent them. Children are seldom
long after the birth without having passage both by stool and urine; though
these evacuations may be wanting for some time without any danger.

WERE a child permitted to suck its mother as soon as it shows an inclination
for the breast, it would need no other physic; but if it must have something
before it be allowed the breast, let it be a little simple water-pap, to which
may be added an equal quantity of new milk. If this be given without any wines,
sugars, or spiceries, it will neither heat the blood, load the stomach, nor
occasion gripes.

UPON the first sight of an infant, almost every person is struck with the idea
of its being weak, feeble, and wanting support. This naturally suggests the
need of cordials. Accordingly we find wines universally mixed with the first
food of children. Nothing can be more fallacious than this way of reasoning, or
more hurtful to infants than the conduct founded upon it. Children need very
little food for some time after the birth; and what they receive, should be
thin, weak, light, and of a cooling quality. A very small quantity of wine, or
even sugar, is sufficient to heat and inflame the blood of an infant; but every
person, conversant in these matters, must know, that most of the diseases of
infants proceed from the heat of their humors, as the thrush, etc.

IF the mother or nurse has enough of milk, the child will need little or no
other food before the third or fourth month. It will then be proper to give it,
once or twice a day, a little of some food that is easy of digestion; as
water-pap, milk-pottage, weak broth with bread in it, or the like. This will
ease the mother; it will accustom the child by degrees to take food, and render
the weaning both less difficult and dangerous. All great and sudden transitions
are to be avoided in nursing. For this purpose the food of children ought to be
simple, as near as possible resembling the properties of milk. Indeed milk
itself should make a principal part of their food, not only before they be
weaned, but for a long time after.

NEXT to milk, we would recommend good light bread. Bread may be given to a
child as soon as it shows an inclination to chew, and it may at all times be
allowed as much as it pleases. The very chewing of bread will help to cut the
teeth and promote the discharge of saliva, while by mixing with the nurse's
milk in the stomach, it will afford an excellent nourishment. Children show an
early inclination to chew whatever is put into their hands. Parents observe the
inclination, but generally mistake the object. Instead of giving the child
something which may at once exercise its gums and afford it nourishment, they
commonly put into its hand a piece of hard metal or impenetrable coral. A crust
of bread is the best gum-stick. It not only answers the purpose better than any
thing else, but has the additional properties mentioned above, of nourishing
the child and carrying the saliva down to the stomach, which is too valuable a
liquor to be lost.

BREAD, besides being used dry, may be many ways prepared into food for
children. One of the best methods of preparing it, is to boil it in water,
afterward pouring the water off, and mixing with the bread a proper quantity
of new milk unboiled: Milk is both more wholesome and nourishing this way than
boiled, and is less apt to occasion costiveness. For a child farther advanced,
bread may be mixed in veal or chicken broth, made into puddings or the like.
Bread is a proper food for children at all times, provided it be plain, made of
wholesome grain, and well fermented; but when enriched with fruits, sugars, or
such things, it becomes very unwholesome.

IT is soon enough to allow children animal food when they have got teeth to
eat it. They should never taste it till after they are weaned, and even then
they ought to use it very sparingly. Indeed, when children live wholely on
vegetable food, it is apt to sour on their stomachs; on the other hand, too
much flesh heats the blood and occasions fevers and other inflammatory
diseases. This plainly points out a proper mixture of animal and vegetable food
as most fit for children.

FEW things are more hurtful to children, than the common method of sweetening
their food. It not only makes them grow fat and bloated, but entices them to
take more food than they ought to do. It is pretty certain, if childrens' food
were quite plain, that they would never take more than enough. Thus the
excesses of children are entirely owing to nurses. If a child be gorged with
food at all hours, and enticed to take it, by making it sweet and agreeable to
the palate, is it any wonder if such a child comes in time to crave more food
than it ought to have?

CHILDREN may be hurt by too little as well as too much food. After a child is
weaned, it ought to be fed four or five times a day; but should never be
accustomed to eat in the night; neither should it have too much at one time.
Some lay it down as a rule, that no child ought to be fed above three times in
twenty-four hours; whereas, most adults eat four times in the same space. The
food of children is generally lighter than that of adults; their digestion is
likewise more quickly performed: If to these we add the power of habit, we will
be inclined to think, that children should be fed oftener than up-grown
persons. If a child, who has been accustomed to suck its nurse at all hours, be
suddenly deprived of that, and restricted to three meals a day, bad
consequences must follow. I have often seen the scheme of bringing children to
live on three regular meals a day tried, but never knew it succeed. Children
thrive much better with small quantities of food frequently given. This neither
overcharges the stomach, nor hurts the digestion, and is certainly most
agreeable to nature.

WRITERS on nursing, have inveighed with such vehemence against too much food,
that one would be apt to imagine two thirds of those who die in infancy were
actually crammed to death. This has induced many parents to ruin the
constitutions of their children, by running into the other extreme. The error
of pinching children in their food, is more hurtful than its opposite. Nature
has many ways of relieving herself when overcharged; but a child who is pinched
with hunger will never become a strong or healty man. That errors are
frequently committed on both sides, we are ready to acknowledge; but where one
child is hurt by the quantity of its food, ten suffer from the quality. That is
the principle evil, and claims our strictest attention.

MANY people imagine, that food which they love themselves cannot be bad for
their children: But this notion is very absurd. In the more advanced periods of
life we often acquire an inclination for food which when children we could not
bear to taste. There are many things that may agree very well with the stomach
of an up-grown person, which would be very hurtful to a child; as
high-seasoned, salted, and smoke-dried provisions, etc. It would also be
improper to feed children with fat meat, strong broths, rich soups, gravies, or
the like.

ALL strong liquors are hurtful to children. Some parents teach their children
to guzzle ale, and other strong liquors at every meal; but such a practice
cannot fail to do mischief. These children seldom escape the violence of the
smallpox, measles, hooping-cough, or some other feverish disorder. Milk,
water, butter-milk, or whey, make the most proper drink for children. If they
have any thing stronger, it may be fine small bear, or a little wine mixed with
water. The stomachs of children can digest well enough without the assistance
of warm stimulants. Young people are naturally hot, and consequently are easily
hurt by every thing of a heating quality: Their blood has a constant tendency
to inflammation, which all strong liquors must increase.

FEW things are more hurtful to children than unripe fruits. These not only
sour the stomach, but relax it and weaken the digestion; by which means it
becomes a proper nest for worms of all kinds. Children indeed show the greatest
inclination for fruit, and I am apt to believe, that if good ripe fruit were
allowed them in proper quantity, it would have no bad effects. We seldom find a
natural inclination wrong, if directed to its proper objects. Fruits are
generally of a cooling nature, and correct the heat and acrimony of the
humors. This is what most children want; only care should be taken lest they
exceed. Indeed the best way to prevent children from going to excess in the use
of fruit, or eating that which is bad, is to allow them a proper quantity of
what is good.

ROOTS which contain a crude viscid juice should be sparingly given to
children. They fill the body with gross humors, and tend to produce eruptive
diseases. This caution is peculiarly necessary for the poor; being glad to get
what will fill their children's bellies for a little money, they stuff them two
or three times a day with potatoes and the like. Children had better eat a
small quantity of such food as would yield a wholesome nourishment, than be
crammed with what their digestive powers are unable properly to assimulate.

BUTTER ought likewise to be sparingly given to children. It both relaxes the
stomach, and produces gross humors. Indeed, most things that are fat or oily,
have the same effect. Butter, when salted, becomes still more hurtful. Instead
of butter, so plentifully eat by children in most parts of Britain, we would
recommend honey. Honey is not only more wholesome than butter, but likewise
cheaper. It is cooling, cleansing, and tends to sweeten the humors; whereas
butter is just the reverse. Children who eat honey are seldom troubled with
worms. They are also less subject to the common cutaneous diseases, as itch,
scabbed-head, etc.

MANY people err in thinking the diet of children should be always moist. When
children live entirely upon slops, it relaxes their solids, renders them weak,
and predisposes them to rickets, scrophulas, and other glandular disorders.
Relaxation is one of the most general causes of the diseases of children. Every
thing therefore which tends to unbrace their bodies ought to be carefully
avoided.

WE would not be understood as confining children to any particular kind of
food. Their diet may be frequently varied, provided regard be had to
simplicity. Whatever food we are most accustomed to in youth, we generally love
during life. For this reason children should have a little of any kind of food
that is plain and wholesome, lest they should contract an aversion for it, and
afterward be under the necessity of using it.

OF THE EXERCISE OF CHILDREN.
OF all the causes which conspire to render the lives of children short and
miserable, none has greater influence than the want of proper exercise: Healthy
parents, wholesome food, and proper clothing, will avail little where i^ is
neglected. Enough of exercise will make up for several other defects; but
nothing can supply the want of it. It is absolutely necessary to the health,
the growth, and the strength of children.

THE desire of exercise is almost co-eval with life itself. Were this principle
attended to, many diseases might be prevented. But while indolence and
sedentary employments keep two thirds of mankind from either taking exercise
themselves, or giving it to their children, what have we to expect but diseases
and deformity among their offspring? The rickets, so destructive to children,
never appeared in Britain till manufactures began to flourish, and people,
attracted by the love of gain, left the country to follow sedentary employments
in great towns. It is amongst these people that this disease chiefly prevails,
and not only deforms, but kills many of their offspring.

THE analogy of other animals shows that children require exercise. Every
creature endeavors to make use of its organs as soon as it can, and many of
them, even when under no necessity of moving in quest of food, cannot be
restrained without force. This is evidently the case with the calf, the lamb,
and many other young animals. If these creatures were not permitted to frisk
about, and take exercise, they would soon die. The same inclination appears
very early in the human species; but as they are not able to take exercise
themselves, it is the business of their parents or nurses to assist them.

CHILDREN may be exercised various ways. The best method, while light, is to
carry them about in the nurse's arms. This gives the nurse an opportunity of
talking to the child, and of pointing out every thing that may please and
delight its fancy. It is much safer than swinging an infant in a machine, or
lea^^^g it (...) the care of such as are not fit to take care of themselves.
Nothing can be more foolish than to set on^ child to keep another; that has
proved fatal to many infants, and has rendered others lame for life.

WHEN children begin to walk, the safest and best method of leading them about
is by the hands. The common way of swinging^ children by strings fixed to their
backs, has many bad consequences. It makes them throw their bodies foreward,
and press with their whole weight upon the breast: by that means the breathing
is obstructed, the breast flattened, and (...) ^owels compressed. This hurts
the digestion, and occasions consumptions of the lungs, and other diseases.

IT is a common notion, that if children be set upon their feet too soon, their
legs will become crooked. There is reason to believe, that the very reverse of
this is true. Every member acquires strength in proportion as it is exercised.
The limbs of children are weak indeed, but their bodies are proportionably
light; and had they skill to direct themselves, they would soon be able to
support their own weight. Who ever heard of any other animal that became
crooked by using its legs too soon? Indeed if a child be not permitted to make
use of its legs till a considerable time after the birth, and be then set upon
them with its whole weight at once, there may be some danger of hurting it; but
this proceeds entirely from the child's not having been accustomed to use its
legs from the beginning.

MOTHERS of the poorer sort think they gain a great deal by making their
children lie or sit while they work. In this they are greatly mistaken. By
neglecting to give their children exercise, they are obliged to keep them a
long time before they can do any thing for themselves, and to spend more on
medicine than would have paid for proper care, while it can never supply its
place. To take care of their children, is the most profitable business in which
even the poor can employ themselves: But alas! it is not always in their power.
Poverty often obliges them to neglect their offspring, in order to procure the
necessaries of life. When that is the case, it becomes the interest as well as
the duty of the public to assist them. Ten thousand times more benefit would
accrue to the state, by enabling the poor to bring up their own children, than
from all (...) If we make it the interest of the poor to keep their offspring
alive, we shall lose very few of them. This I have had many opportunities of
observing. A small premium given to the poor annually for every child they have
alive, would save more infant-lives than if the whole revenues of the nation
were expended on hospitals for that purpose. This would make the poor esteem
fertility a blessing; whereas many of them think it the greatest curse that can
befall them; and in place of wishing their children to live, so far does poverty
get the better of natural affection, that they are very happy when they die.
hospitals that ever can be erected for that purpose.

WHOEVER considers the structure of the human body, will soon be convinced of
the necessity of exercise for the health of children. The body is composed of
an infinite number of vessels, whose contents cannot be pushed on without the
action and pressure of the muscles. But if the fluids remain inactive,
obstructions must happen, and the humors will of course be vitiated, which
cannot fail to occasion diseases. Nature has furnished both the vessels which
carry the blood and lymph with numerous valves, in order that the action of
every muscle might push forward their contents; but without action this
admirable contrivance can have no effect. The final cause of this part of the
animal economy proves the necessity of exercise for the preservation of health.

ARGUMENTS to show the importance of exercise might be drawn from every part of
the animal economy: Without exercise the circulation of the blood cannot be
properly carried on, nor the different secretions duly performed; without
exercise the humors cannot be properly prepared, nor the solids rendered
strong or firm. The action of the heart, the motion of the lungs, and all the
vital functions are greatly assisted by exercise. But to point out the manner
in which these effects are produced, would lead us farther into the economy of
the human body, than most of those for whom this treatise is intended, would be
able to follow. We shall therefore only add, that where exercise is neglected,
none of the animal functions can be duly performed; and when that is the case,
the whole constitution must go to wreck.

CERTAINLY our first object in the management of children ought to be a good
constitution. This lays a foundation for their being useful and happy in life;
and whoever neglects it, not only ^ails in his duty to his offspring, but to
society.

ONE very common error of parents, by which they hurt the constitutions of
their children, is sending them too young to school. This is often done solely
to prevent trouble. When the child is at school, he needs no keeper. Thus the
schoolmaster is made the nurse; and the poor child is nailed to a seat seven or
eight hours a day, which ought to be spent in exercise and diversions. Sitting
so long cannot fail to produce the worst effects upon the body; nor is the mind
less injured. Early application weakens the faculties, and often fixes in the
mind such an aversion from books as can never be removed.

BUT suppose this were the way to make children scholars, that ought not to be
done at the expense of their constitutions. Our ancestors, who seldom went to
school before they were men, were not less learned than we. But we imagine the
boy's education will be quite lost unless he be carried to school in his
nurse's arms. No wonder if such hot bed plants seldom become either scholars or
men!

NOT only the confinement in public schools, but the number often proves
extremely hurtful. Children are much injured by being kept in crowds within
doors; their breathing not only renders the place unwholesome; but if any one
of them happens to be diseased, the rest catch the infection. A single child
has been often known to communicate the bloody flux, the hooping-cough, the
itch, or other diseases, to almost every individual in a numerous school.

BUT if fashion will prevail, and infants must be sent to school, we would
earnestly recommend to teachers, as they value the interests of society, not to
confine them too long at a time; but to permit them to run about and play at
such active diversions as may promote their growth and improve their
constitutions. Were boys, instead of being whipped, for stealing an hour to
run, ride, swim, or the like, encouraged to employ their time in these manly
and useful exercises, it would have many excellent effects.

IT would likewise be of great service to boys, if at a proper age, they were
all taught the military exercise. This would improve their strength, courage,
and agility; and, when their country called for their assistance, it would
enable them to act in her defense, without being obliged to undergo a tedious
and troublesome course of instructions, at a time when they are less fit to
learn new motions, gestures, etc.

AN effeminate education will infallibly spoil the best natural constitution;
and, if boys are brought up in a more delicate manner than even girls ought to
be, they never will be men.

BUT the common education of girls is no less hurtful to the constitution than
that of boys. Miss is set down to her frame, before she can put on her clothes;
and is taught to believe, that to excel at the needle is the only thing that
can entitle her to general esteem. It is unnecessary here to insist upon the
dangerous consequences of obliging girls to sit too much. They are pretty well
known, and are too often felt at a certain time of life. But suppose this
critical period to be got over, greater dangers still await them when they come
to be mothers. Women who have been early accustomed to a sedentary life,
generally run great hazard in childbed; while those who have been used to romp
about, and take enough of exercise, are seldom in any danger.

ONE hardly meets with a girl who can, at the same time, boast of early
performances by the needle, and a good constitution. Close and early
confinement generally occasions indigestions, headachs, pale complexions, pain
of the stomach, loss of appetite, coughs, consumptions of the lungs, and
deformity of body. The latter indeed is not to be wondered at, considering the
awkward postures in which girls sit at many kinds of needle work, and the
delicate flexible state of their bodies in the early periods of life.

WOULD mothers, instead of having their daughters instructed in many useless
accomplishments, teach them plain work and housewifery, allowing them enough of
time to run about, they would both make them better mothers and more useful
members of society. I am no enemy to genteel accomplishments, but would have
them only considered as secondary, and always disregarded when they impair
health.

MANY people imagine it a great advantage for children to be early taught to
gain their bread. This opinion is certainly right, provided they be so employed
as not to hurt their health or growth; but, when these suffer, society, in
place of being gainers, are real losers by their labor. There are few
employments, except sedentary ones, by which children can earn a livelihood;
and, if they be set to those too soon, it ruins their constitutions. Thus, by
gaining a few years from childhood, we generally lose twice as many in the
other periods of life, and even render the person less valuable while he does
live.

IN order to be satisfied of the truth of this observation, one needs only look
into the great manufacturing towns, where he will find a puny degenerate race
of people, weak and sickly all their lives, seldom exceeding the middle period
of life; or, if they do, being unfit for business, they become a burden to
society. Thus, arts and manufactures, though they may increase the riches of a
country, are by no means favorable to the health of its inhabitants. Good
policy would therefore require, that such people as labor during life, should
not be set too early to work. Every person conversant in the breeding of
horses, or other work-animals, knows, that, if they be set to hard labor too
soon, they never will turn out to advantage. This is equally true with respect
to the human species.

THERE are nevertheless various ways of employing young people, without hurting
their health. The easier parts of gardening, husbandry, or any business carried
on without doors, are most proper. These are employments that most young people
are ^ond of, and some parts of them may always be adapted to their age, taste
and strength.

SUCH parents, however, as are under the necessity of employing their children
within doors, ought to allow them enough of time for active diversions. This
would both encourage them to do more work, and prevent their constitutions from
being hurt.

SOME imagine, that exercise within doors is sufficient; but they are greatly
mistaken. One hour spent in running, or any other exercise without doors, is
worth ten within. When children cannot go abroad, they ought indeed to be
exercised at home. The best method of doing this, is to make them run about in
a long room, or dance. This last kind of exercise, if not carried to excess, is
of excellent service to young people. It cheers the spirit, promotes
perspiration, strengthens the limbs, etc. An eminent physician used to say,
that he made his children dance, instead of giving them physic. It were well,
if more people followed his example.

AS many of the chronic diseases of children might be prevented by the prudent
use of the COLD BATH, we shall point out some of those mistakes which commonly
prevent its having the desired effect.

THE Cold Bath may be considered as an aid to exercise. By it the body is
braced and strengthened, the circulation and secretions promoted, and, were it
conducted with prudence, many diseases, as the rickets, scrophula, etc. might
thereby be prevented. The ancients, who took every method to render children
hardy and robust, were no strangers to the use of the cold bath; and, if we may
judge from the great number of consecrated wells in this island, many of which
possess no other virtues but those of cold water, yet are said to have been
famous for curing the diseases of children, we will see cause to believe, that
the practice of immersing children in cold water must have been very common
amongst our ancestors.

SO far as I have been able to observe, the cold bath does as much mischief as
good; but that is owing to the want of due care in using it. Children born of
delicate parents are not suddenly to be plunged over the head in cold water.
They must be gradually brought to it by using tepid water at first, and making
it a little cooler every time they are bathed, till by degrees they be able to
bear it quite cold. Children afflicted with internal diseases, as inflammations
or obstructions of the breast, bowels, etc. ought not to be bathed in cold
water. No child should be put into the cold bath, when its body is hot, nor
immediately after a meal.

IT is next to impossible to bring nurses to make a proper use of the cold
bath: Their prejudices are so strong and deep-rooted, that no reasoning is able
to bring them off their own way. I have known some of them, who would not dry a
child's skin after bathing it, lest it should destroy the effect of the water.
Others will even put clothes dipped in the water upon the child, and either put
it to bed, or suffer it to go about in that condition. Some nurses believe,
that the whole virtue of the water depends upon its being dedicated to some
particular saint. These will carry a child 40, 50, or 100 miles to have it once
dipped in a certain well; and this is to cure it of whatsoever disease it labors
under. Others place their confidence in a certain number of dips, as three,
seven, nine, or the like, and the world could not persuade them, if these do
not succeed, to try it a little longer.

THUS, by the whims and caprice of nurses, a valuable medicine is lost, and the
physician is often disappointed in his hopes by their misconduct. When the cold
bath is used as a medicine, it ought always to be by the advice of a physician,
and the nurse should adhere strictly to his directions. I have seen wonderful
cures in the most obstinate scrophulous cases performed by the cold bath. The
salt water in this case is always to be preferred. That will succeed where all
other medicines have failed.

EVERY child, when in health, ought to have its extremities at least washed
with cold water daily. This is a partial use of the cold bath, and is better
than none. In winter this may suffice; but in the warm season, if a child be
relaxed, or seem to have a tendency to the rickets or scrophula, its whole body
ought to be daily immersed in cold water. Care however must be taken not to do
this when the body is hot, or the stomach full. The child should be dipped only
once at a time, should be taken out immediately, and have its skin well rubbed
with a dry cloth.

OF THE BAD EFFECTS OF UNWHOLESOME AIR UPON CHILDREN.
FEW things are more destructive to children than confined or unwholesome air.
This is one reason why so few of those infants live who are put into hospitals,
or parish-workhouses. These places are generally crowded with old, sickly and
infirm people. By that means the air is rendered so extremely pernicious, that
it becomes a poison to infants.

WANT of wholesome air is likewise destructive to many of the children born in
great towns. There the poorer sort of inhabitants live in low, dirty, confined
houses, where the fresh air has no access. Though up-grown people, who are
hardy and robust, may live for a number of years in such situations, yet they
generally prove fatal to their offspring, few of whom arrive at maturity, and
those who do, are weak and deformed. Such people, not being able to carry their
children abroad into the open air, we must lay our account with losing the
greater part of their progeny. But the rich have not that excuse. It is their
business to see that their children be daily carried abroad, and that they be
kept in the open air for a sufficient time. This will succeed better, if the
mother goes along with them. Servants are often negligent in these matters, and
allow a child to sit or lie on the damp ground, in place of leading or carrying
it about. The mother surely needs air as well as her children; and how can she
be better employed than in attending them? Some may think this office below
their dignity; but I know no situation in which a mother appears to such
advantage, as when surrounded by a circle of healthy children.

A very bad custom prevails of making children sleep in small apartments, or
crowding two or three beds into one chamber. In place of that, the nursery
ought always to be the largest and best aired room in the house. When children
are confined in small apartments, the air is not only unwholesome, but such
places being generally too hot, their bodies are relaxed, and this disposes
them to catch cold when they go abroad, and has many other bad effects.

CHILDREN who are kept within doors all day, and sleep all night in warm close
apartments, may, with great propriety, be compared to plants nursed in a
hot-house, in place of the open air. Though such plants, by extraordinary care,
may be kept alive for some time; yet they never will arrive at that degree of
strength, vigor and magnitude, which they would have done in the open air, nor
would they be able to bear it afterward, should they be exposed to it.

CHILDREN brought up in the country, who have been accustomed to fresh open
air, should not be too early sent to great towns, where the air is confined and
unwholesome. This is frequently done with a view to forward their education,
but proves very hurtful to health. Those who are grown up, do not suffer near
so much from bad air as young persons. All schools and seminaries of learning
ought to be so situated as to have fresh, dry, wholesome air, and should never
be too much crowded.

WITHOUT entering into a detail of the particular advantages of wholesome air
to children, we shall only observe, that when they enjoy that blessing, they
generally sleep well, eat well, and thrive accordingly. It braces and
strengthens their bodies, enlivens their spirits, and every way promotes their
growth and health.

OF NURSES.
NURSES are guilty of many faults, which prove fatal to infants. It is
therefore the duty of parents to watch over their conduct with the greatest
care, and to be extremely cautious in the choice of them.

ONE of the most common faults of nurses is to dose children with
stupifactives, or such things as lull them asleep. An indolent nurse, who does
not give a child enough of exercise in the open air to make it sleep, and does
not choose to be disturbed by it in the night, will seldom fail to procure for
it a dose of laudanum, diacodium, saffron, or, what answers the same end, a
dram of spirits, or other strong liquors. These, though they be certain poison
to children, are every day administered by many who bear the character of very
good nurses.

A nurse who has not enough of milk, is apt to imagine, that she can supply
that defect by giving the child wines, cordial waters, or other strong liquors.
This is an egregious mistake. The only thing that has any chance to supply the
place of the nurse's milk, must be somewhat nearly of the same quality, as
cow's milk, ass's milk, or the like, with good bread. It never can be done by
the help of strong liquors. These, in place of nourishing an infant, never fail
to produce the contrary effect.

CHILDREN are often hurt by nurses permitting them to cry long and vehemently.
This strains their tender bodies, and frequently occasions ruptures,
inflammations of the throat, lungs, etc. The nurse who can hear an infant cry
till it has almost exhausted itself, without endeavoring to please it, must be
cruel indeed, and is unworthy to be trusted with the care of a human creature.

NURSES who deal much in medicine, are always to be suspected. They trust to
it, and neglect their duty. I never knew a good nurse who had her Godfrey's
cordials, Daffy's elixirs, etc. at hand. Such generally imagine, that a dose of
these will make up for all defects in food, air, exercise, cleanliness, etc.

A very pernicious custom of indolent nurses is the allowing of children to
continue long wet. This is not only disagreeable, but it galls and frets the
infant, and by relaxing the solids, occasions scrophulas, rickets, and other
fatal diseases.

NATURE often attempts to free the bodies of children from bad humors, by
throwing them out upon the skin: By that means fevers, and other diseases are
prevented. Nurses are apt to mistake such critical eruptions for an itch, or
some other infectious disorder. Accordingly they take every method to drive
them in. In this way many children lose their lives; and no wonder, as nature
is opposed in the very method that she took to relieve them. It ought to be a
rule which every nurse should observe, never to stop any eruption without
proper advice, or being well assured, that it is not of a critical nature. At
any rate it is never to be done without previous evacuations.

LOOSE stools is another method by which nature often prevents the diseases of
infants. If these proceed too far, no doubt they ought to be checked; but this
is never to be done without the greatest caution. Nurses, upon the first
appearance of loose stools, frequently fly to the use of astringents, or such
things as bind the belly. Thus inflammations, fevers, and other fatal diseases
are brought on. A dose of rhubarb, a gentle vomit, or some other evacuation,
should always precede the use of astringent medicines.

ONE of the greatest faults of nurses is concealing the diseases of children
from their parents. This they are extremely ready to do, especially when the
disease is the effect of their own negligence. Every person must have seen
instances of people who were lame for life, by a fall out of the nurse's arms,
while she, through fear, concealed the misfortune till it was past cure. Every
parent who intrusts a nurse with the care of a child, ought to give her the
strictest charge not to conceal the most trifling disorder or misfortune that
may befall it. Parents, instead of being angry, when a nurse informs them of
such accidents, ought to reward her for her honesty; this would encourage her
to do the same upon other occasions. We can see no reason why a nurse should
not be punished who conceals any disorder or misfortune that happens to a child
under her care, till it loses its life. A few examples of this would save many
infant lives; but as there is little reason to expect, that it ever will be the
case, we would earnestly recommend it to all parents to look carefully after
their children, and not to trust so valuable a treasure entirely in the hands
of an hireling.

THESE, and many other faults, being daily committed by those who have the care
of children, it ought surely to rouse the attention of all parents who have any
regard for their offspring, and to make them very circumspect in the choice of
those into whose hands they commit them. They ought at least to take care that
a nurse be sober, cleanly, honest, healthy, not too young, nor the contrary;
that she have the necessaries of life, and a comfortable habitation, etc.

WERE it practicable to have all children nursed and educated in the country,
we should lose very few of them. One seldom sees a country-farmer without a
numerous offspring, most of whom arrive at maturity. Many things conspire to
that end. The children of these people are generally nursed by their mothers;
they eat plain wholesome food, enjoy the benefit of fresh air, and have enough
of proper exercise; they have rural sports and pastimes suited to their age,
and as they grow up, find employments adapted to their strength, agreeable to
their inclinations, and conducive to their health. They learn industry and
sobriety from their parents, and seldom fail to practice these virtues for
life. In fine, we cannot help joining with the learned Mr. Lock On Education.
, in recommending the example of these people as a model to all in the
management of their children.

As many people can understand the meaning of a short rule, who are not able to
attend to a chain of reasoning, we shall reduce the leading principles of
nursing under the following general heads.
1. EVERY mother ought to suckle her own child, if she can do it with safety.

2. A weak, consumptive, nervous, or hysteric mother ought not to give suck,
where a healthy nurse can be had.

3. No child should be brought up without the breast, if it be possible to
obtain a proper nurse.

4. The clothes of an infant should be soft, light, loose and easy for its
body. They ought to be fastened on with strings rather than pins.

5. The cloths of children ought to be kept very clean.

6. A new born infant should not be kept too hot.

7. AN infant should be permitted to suck as soon as it shows an inclination
for the breast.

8. AN infant should neither be crammed with food nor physic as soon as it is
born; but permitted to lie quiet for some time, in order to recover the fatigue
of the birth, etc.

9. IF an infant must have food before it sucks, let it be water-pap mixed with
new milk, free of all wines, sugars, spiceries, or the like.

10. WHILE the child sucks, it seldom needs much of any other food. It will
however be right, about the third or fourth month, to begin to give it once or
twice a day a little of some food that is light and easy of digestion. This
will make the weaning both less troublesome and dangerous.

11. A child should not be weaned all at once, but by degrees; as all sudden
changes in the diet of children are dangerous.

12. THE food of children ought at all times to be simple, but nourishing. It
should consist of a proper mixture of animal and vegetable substances.

13. CHILDREN should not be permitted to eat too much fruit, or roots of any
kind; but all sorts of green trash ought to be kept from them with the greatest
care.

14. CHILDREN ought not to be pinched in their food. They require to eat
oftener than adults. -- If their food be simple, and they know that they can
have it when hungry, they will seldom or never eat more than enough.

15. As soon as children can take exercise, they ought to be allowed as much as
they please; till then it is the business of the nurse to carry and toss them
about.

16. A nurse ought not only to carry an infant about, but to divert and amuse
it so as to keep it in good humor.

17. AN infant should never be suffered to cry long and vehemently.

18. ERUPTIONS, or looseness in children, ought not to be stopped, but with the
greatest caution.

19. NURSES should use no means to force children to sleep; but they may always
be permitted to take as much as they please.

20. CHILDREN ought never to have medicine unless they are diseased.

21. CHILDREN should neither be too early set to school, nor confined to any
mechanical employment within doors.

22. SCHOOLMASTERS, and all who have the care of youth, should allow them
plenty of time for exercise and diversions.

23. ALL children should be nursed and educated in the country, if possible.
When that cannot be done, they ought to be carried abroad every day, and kept
for a sufficient time in the open air.

24. THE children of delicate and diseased parents must be managed with more
care than those of the hardy and robust.

25. A mother should never abandon her child solely to the care of a mercenary
nurse.

LET no one imagine these matters unworthy of his attention. On the proper
management of children depend not only their health and usefulness in life, but
likewise the safety and prosperity of the state to which they belong.
Effeminacy ever must prove the ruin of any kingdom; and when its foundations
are laid in infancy, it can never afterward be wholely eradicated. We would
therefore recommend to all who wish well to their country, to study every
method to render their offspring strong and healthy.

-- By arts like these,
Laconia nursed of old her hardy sons;
And Rome's unconquered legions urged their way,
Unhurt, through every toil in every clime ARMSTRONG on health.
.
CHAP. II.
OF ADULTS.
HAVING endeavored to point out some of the sources from which the diseases
and mortality of infants proceed, we shall next take a view of the more general
causes of diseases, or such things as endanger the health of mankind in the
more advanced periods of life.

NO man, however careful, can at all times avoid diseases; yet nothing is more
certain than that many of them, and those too of the most dangerous nature, are
often owing to the want of care. The smallest causes, when neglected, generally
produce the greatest effects. This is strictly true with respect to diseases. A
little care would often prevent what no medicine can cure.

THE most common cause of diseases in this island is an obstructed
perspiration, or what commonly goes by the name of CATCHING COLD. The
perspiration is by far the most considerable discharge from the body; and so
long as it goes on properly, we have seldom any complaints; but when it is
obstructed, the health must suffer. Men being less sensible of this than of the
other evacuations, are consequently not so attentive to the various causes
which obstruct it: We shall therefore point out some of the most considerable
of them, in order to put people upon their guard.

COMMON CAUSES OF CATCHING COLD.
COLDS are often occasioned by sudden changes in the atmosphere. There is no
country where such changes happen more frequently than in Britain. The degrees
of heat and cold are not only various in the different seasons of the year, but
often change from the one extreme to the other in a few days, and sometimes
even in the course of one day. As these changes cannot fail to increase or
diminish the perspiration, they must of course affect the health.

THE best method of fortifying the body against the changes of the weather, is
to be abroad every day. Those who keep much within doors, are most liable to
catch cold. Such people feel even the slightest changes in the atmosphere, and
by their coughs, pains and oppressions of the breast, etc. become a kind of
living barometers.

THE frequent changes of the weather ought to make us cautious in changing our
apparel. All persons, but especially the valetudinary, should be careful not to
put off their winter-garments too soon, nor to wear their summer ones too long.
The commencement of our warm season is so uncertain, that a few hot days in
April or May often make us believe summer is arrived; when all of a sudden the
weather sets in more intensely cold than at Christmas. The like sudden changes
frequently happen in September or October; and where no care is taken to guard
against their influence, the gout, rheumatisms, fluxes and fevers often ensue.

LABORERS frequently suffer by not attending to the changes of the weather.
They strip to work while it is warm, but neglect to put on their clothes when
it grows cold; some are even thoughtless enough to disregard being wet; such
however, in the end, generally find cause to repent their fool-hardiness.

NOTHING more certainly obstructs the perspiration than WET CLOTHES. Nor is the
most robust constitution proof against their effects. The perspiration is not
only obstructed by wet clothes, but the moisture is likewise absorbed, which
greatly increases the danger.

It is impossible for people who go abroad, always to avoid being wet. But the
danger might generally be lessened, if not wholely prevented, by changing their
clothes soon; when that cannot be done, they should keep in motion till they
dry. So far are many from observing this rule, that they will sit, or even lie
down in the fields with their clothes wet, and frequently sleep whole nights in
that condition. Every person must have known instances of fevers, rheumatisms,
and even consumptions, brought on in this way. Though these happen daily, yet
they are not sufficient to deter others from the like conduct.

EVEN wet feet often occasion fatal diseases. Coughs, inflammations of the
breast, and ulcers in the lungs, frequently proceed from that cause. The
cholic, a fit of the gout, the iliac passion, and cholera morbus, are likewise
often occasioned by wet feet. Habit will, no doubt, render this less dangerous;
but it ought, as far as possible, to be avoided. The delicate, and those who
are not accustomed to have their clothes or feet wet, should be peculiarly
careful in this respect.

THE perspiration is often obstructed by NIGHT-AIR; the absence of the sun
renders it damp and foggy. Even in summer the night-air ought to be avoided.
The dews which fall plentifully after the hottest day, make the night more
dangerous than when the weather is cool. Hence, in warm countries the dews are
more hurtful than where the climate is more temperate.

IT is very agreeable indeed, after a warm day, to be abroad in the cool
evening; but this is a pleasure to be avoided by all who value their health.
The effects of evening dews are gradual and almost imperceptible; but they are
not the less to be dreaded: We would therefore advise travelers, laborers,
and all who are much heated by day, carefully to avoid them. When the
perspiration has been great, these become dangerous in proportion: By not
attending to this, in flat marshy countries, where the exhalations and dews are
copious, laborers often catch intermitting fevers, quinsies, and the like.

DAMP BEDS seldom fail to obstruct the perspiration. Beds become damp, either
from want of use, standing in damp houses, or in rooms without fire. Nothing is
more to be dreaded by travelers than damp beds, which are very common in all
places where feuel is scarce. When a traveller cold and wet arrives at an inn,
he may by means of a good fire, and a dry bed, have the perspiration restored;
but if he be put into a cold room, and laid on a damp bed, it will be more
obstructed, and the worst consequences must ensue. Travelers should avoid inns
which are noted for damp beds, as they would a house infected with the plague;
as no man, however robust, is proof against the danger arising from them.

BUT inns are not the only places where damp beds are to be met with. Beds kept
in private families for the reception of strangers, are no less dangerous. All
kinds of linen and bedding, when not frequently used, become damp. How then is
it possible, that beds which are not slept in above two or three times a year,
should be otherwise? Nothing is more common than to hear of people having
caught cold by changing their bed. The reason is obvious. Were they careful
never to sleep on a bed but what was frequently used, they would seldom find
any ill consequences from a change.

NOTHING is more to be dreaded by a delicate person, when on a visit, than
being laid in the guest-chamber. That ill-judged piece of complaisance becomes
a real injury. All the bad consequences from this quarter might be easily
prevented in private families, by causing their servants to sleep in the spare
beds, and to resign them to strangers when they come. This is the custom of
many families in London, and we would earnestly recommend it to all who value
the health of their friends. In inns where the beds are used almost every
night, nothing else is necessary than to keep the rooms well seasoned by
frequent fires, and the linen dry.

DAMP houses frequently produce the like ill consequences. For this reason
those who build, should be careful to choose a dry situation. A house which
stands on a damp marshy soil, must be hurtful to the health of the inhabitants.
Not only a marshy soil, but being situated in the neighborhood of large woods,
lakes, or standing water, must make a house damp. Large woods both prevent the
free current of air, and send forth great quantities of moist exhalations,
which render all places near them unwholesome. This is one reason why new
discovered countries commonly prove unhealthy, till they be cleared of their
woods. Even in England, at this day, there is greatly more planting in several
parts than is either conducive to the fertility of the soil, or the health of
its inhabitants. This taste, instead of being any improvement, is the way to
reduce the country back to its original state, and to render the climate less
healthy than it otherwise would be.

COLD is not near so hurtful to the health as moisture. Cold, in a moderate
degree, braces and strengthens the body; but moisture relaxes and pre-disposes
it to diseases. That is the reason why intermittents and other fevers are so
frequent in low, damp, marshy countries abounding with woods and standing
water. This likewise shows the danger of inhabiting new houses before they be
thoroughly dry. Nothing is more common than for people, merely to avoid some
trifling inconveniency, to hazard their lives, by inhabiting a house almost as
soon as the masons, plaisterers etc. have done with it. Such houses are not
only dangerous from their dampness, but likewise from the smell of lime,
paints, etc. The asthma's, consumptions, and other diseases of the lungs, so
common to people who work in these articles, are a plain proof of their being
unwholesome.

HOUSES are often rendered damp by an unseasonable piece of cleanliness, I mean
the ridiculous custom of washing rooms immediately before company is put into
them. Many people are sure to catch cold, if they sit but a short while in a
room that has been lately washed. The delicate ought carefully to avoid such a
situation, and even the robust would run less hazard by sitting without doors.
People who are accustomed to live in dry houses, ought, as far as possible, to
shun damp ones, and by all means not to continue long in rooms that have been
lately washed.

ALL houses, unless where the ground is extremely dry, should have the first
floor a little raised. Such servants as are obliged to live for the most part
in cellars and sunk stories, seldom continue long in health; and surely masters
ought to pay some regard to the health of their servants as well as to their
own.

EVEN houses which are built for the poor, ought to be dry. These people
generally live on the ground-floor, and if it be damp, they must suffer. This
is one cause of the aches, cramps and rheumatic pains, which poor people are so
subject to in the decline of life.

BUT nothing so frequently obstructs the perspiration as SUDDEN TRANSITIONS
from heat to cold. Colds are seldom caught, unless when people have been too
much heated. Heat rarifies the blood, quickens the circulation, and increases
the perspiration; but when these are suddenly checked, the consequences must be
bad. It is indeed impossible for laborers not to be too hot upon certain
occasions; but it is generally in their power to put on their clothes when they
leave off work, to make choice of a dry place to rest themselves in, and to
avoid falling asleep in the fields. These easy rules, if observed, would save
many useful lives.

NOTHING is more common than for people, when hot, to drink freely of cold
small liquors. This conduct is extremely dangerous. Thirst indeed is hard to
bear, and the inclination to gratify that appetite, frequently gets the better
of reason, and makes us do what our judgment disapproves. Every peasant knows,
if his horse be permitted to drink his belly full of cold water after violent
exercise, and be immediately put into the stable, or suffered to remain at
rest, that it will kill him. This they take the utmost care to prevent. It were
well, if they were equally attentive to their own safety.

THIRST may be quenched many ways without swallowing large quantities of cold
liquor. The fields afford variety of acid fruits and plants, the very chewing
of which would abate thirst. Water kept in the mouth for some time, and spit
out again, if frequently repeated, will have the same effect. If a bit of bread
be eat along with a few mouthfuls of water, it will both quench thirst more
effectually, and make the danger less. When a person is extremely hot, a
mouthful of brandy, or other spirits, ought to be preferred to any thing else,
if it can be obtained. But if any one has been so foolish, when hot, as to
drink freely of cold liquor, he ought to continue his exercise at least, till
what he drank be thoroughly warmed upon his stomach.

IT would be tedious to enumerate all the bad effects which flow from drinking
cold thin liquors when the body is hot. Sometimes this has occasioned immediate
death. Hoarseness, quinseys, and fevers of various kinds, are its common
consequences. Neither is it safe, when warm, to eat freely of raw fruits,
sallads, or the like. These indeed have not so sudden an effect on the body as
cold liquors, but they are notwithstanding dangerous, and ought to be avoided.

SITTING in a warm room, and drinking hot liquors till the pores are quite
open, and immediately going into the cold air, is extremely dangerous. Colds,
coughs, and inflammations of the breast, are the usual effects of this conduct:
Yet how common is it? Many people, after having drank warm liquors for several
hours, walk or ride a number of miles in the coldest night; while others sit up
at their bottle all night, or ramble about in the streets. Such conduct is one
cause why coughs and colds are so common in the winter-season.

PEOPLE are very apt, when a room is hot, to throw open a window, and to sit
near it. This is a most ready way to catch cold. A delicate person had better
sit without doors than in such a situation, as the current of air is directed
against one particular part of the body. Inflammatory fevers and consumptions
have often been occasioned by sitting or standing thinly clothed near an open
window. Nor is sleeping with open windows less to be dreaded. That ought never
to be done even in the hottest season. I have known mechanics frequently
contract fatal diseases, by working stripped at an open window, and would advise
all of them to beware of such a practice.

NOTHING exposes people more to catch cold than keeping their own houses too
warm; such persons may be said to live in a sort of hot-houses; they can hardly
stir abroad to visit a neighbor, but at the hazard of their lives. Were there
no other reason for keeping houses in a moderate degree of warmth, that alone
is sufficient. But no house that is too hot, can be wholesome. Heat destroys
the spring and elasticity of the air, and renders it less fit for expanding the
lungs, and other purposes of respiration. Hence it is, that consumptions and
other diseases of the lungs prove so fatal to people who work in forges,
glasshouses, and the like.

SOME are even so foolhardy, as to bathe themselves, when hot, in cold water.
Not only fevers, but madness itself, has frequently been the effect of this
conduct. Indeed it looks too like the action of a madman to deserve a serious
consideration.

WE shall conclude these observations on the common causes of catching cold, by
recommending it to every one to avoid, with the utmost attention, all sudden
transitions from heat to cold, and to keep the body in as uniform a temperature
as possible; or, where that cannot be done, to take care to cool gradually.

IT may be thought, that too strict an attention to these things would tend to
render people delicate. So far however is this from being our design, that the
first rule laid down for preventing colds, is to harden the body, by enuring it
daily to bear the open air.

It is a true saying, that colds kill more than plagues. On examining patients,
one finds most of them impute their diseases either to violent colds, or to
slight ones which had been neglected. This shows the importance of guarding
against every thing that may obstruct the perspiration, and likewise of using
proper means immediately to remove such obstruction when it does happen. The
want of due attention to these costs Britain annually some thousands of useful
lives.

UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
AS our bodies consist of what we eat and drink, unwholesome food must be
dangerous. There is no question but the whole constitution of body may be
changed by diet. This is often done more quickly than people would imagine. A
diet consisting too much of alkaline substances will soon render the humors
putrid. On the other hand, if acids be used too freely, they will receive a
taint of an opposite nature. The solids may be relaxed or weakened by the use
of oily or watery substances, or they may be too much constricted by eating
spiceries, austere vegetables, etc.

IT is not easy to ascertain the exact quantity and quality of food proper for
every age, sex and constitution: But a scrupulous nicety here is by no means
necessary. The best rule is to avoid all extremes. Mankind were never intended
to weigh and measure their food. Nature teaches every creature when it has
enough of food, and a very small degree of reason is sufficient for the choice
of it. Men seldom err in this respect through ignorance. The most knowing are
generally the most guilty.

THOUGH moderation be the only rule necessary with respect to the quantity of
food, yet the quality of it merits further attention. Many people, if they can
satisfy the appetites of hunger and thirst, are very indifferent what they eat
or drink. The following observations will show the danger of such conduct.

PROVISIONS may be rendered unwholesome various ways. Bad seasons may either
prevent the ripening of grain, or damage it afterward. Wet and cold summers
seldom bring the fruits of the earth to maturity; and if the harvest likewise
prove rainy, they are often so damaged as to be very hurtful. These indeed are
acts of Providence; it is therefore our duty to submit to them. But surely no
punishment can be too severe for those who suffer provisions to be spoilt, by
hoarding them on purpose to enhance the price. The soundest grain, if kept too
long, must become unfit for use.

THE poor are generally the first who suffer by unsound provisions: But the
lives of the laboring poor are of the greatest importance to the state.
Besides, diseases occasioned by unwholesome food often prove infectious, and by
that means reach people in every station. The poor judge ill in buying
low-priced and coarse provisions. They had better have a smaller quantity of
what is sound and good; as that would both afford more nourishment, and be
attended with less danger.

ANIMAL as well as vegetable food becomes unwholesome when kept too long. All
animal substances have a constant tendency to putrefaction, and when that has
proceeded too far, they not only become offensive to the senses, but hurtful to
health. Diseased animals, and such as die of themselves, ought not to be eaten.
It is common enough in grasing countries for servants and poor people to eat
such animals as die of any disease in the spring or winter, or are killed by
accident. I have been frequently told by people who live in places where this
is done, that when much flesh of that kind is eaten, it never fails to occasion
fevers.

THE injunctions given to the Jews, not to eat any creature which died of
itself, seem to have a strict regard to health, and ought to be observed by
Christians as well as Jews. Animals never die of themselves without some
previous disease; but how a diseased animal should be wholesome food, is
inconceivable. Even those which die by accident, must be hurtful, as their
blood is mixed with the flesh, and soon turns putrid.

ANIMALS which feed gross, as tame ducks, swine, etc. are neither easily
digested, nor afford wholesome nourishment. No animal can be wholesome food
which does not take sufficient exercise. Most of our stalled cattle, hogs, etc.
are crammed with gross food, but not allowed exercise nor free air, by which
means they indeed grow fat, but their humors not being properly prepared or
affimulated, they must remain crude. The flesh of an animal which has not
properly digested its own food, can never be easily digested by another: Yet
such are the delicacies of modern luxury, and such the animals daily devoured
even by the weak and valetudinary. Is it any wonder, that such should complain
of crudities, indigestions, and oppression of the spirits? Let them eat the
same quantity of an animal which runs wild, and they will not feel any load on
their stomach, or difficulty of digestion. We would not have people live on
carrion; but surely the opposite extreme of eating animals which are gorged
with gross food till they are unfit to live, must be as pernicious.

ANIMALS may likewise be rendered unwholesome by being overheated. Heat causes
a fever, exhalts the salts of the animal, and mixes the blood so intimately
with the flesh, that it cannot be separated. For this reason people ought not
to eat freely of such animals as are hunted down, their flesh being apt to
occasion putrid fevers. Butchers should also be careful not to over-drive their
cattle. No person would choose to eat the flesh of an animal which had died in a
high fever; yet that is the case with all overdrove cattle, and the fever is
often raised even to the degree of madness.

NO people in the world eat such quantities of animal food as the English. That
is one reason why they are so generally tainted with the scurvy, and its
numerous train of consequences, as indigestion, low spirits, hypochondriacism,
etc. Animal food was surely designed for man, and with a proper mixture of
vegetables, it will be found the most wholesome; but to gorge beef, mutton,
pork, fish and fowl twice or thrice a day, is certainly too much. All who value
health, ought to be contented with making one flesh-meal in the twenty-four
hours, and this ought to consist of one kind only.

THE most obstinate scurvy has often been cured by a vegetable diet; nay, milk
alone will frequently do more in that disease than any medicine. From hence it
is evident, that if vegetables and milk were more used in diet, we should have
less scurvy, and likewise fewer putrid and inflammatory fevers.

OUR aliment ought neither to be too moist, nor too dry. Moist aliment relaxes
the solids, and renders the body feeble. Thus we see females who live much on
tea and other watery diet, generally become weak, and unable to digest solid
food; from whence proceed hysterics, and all their dreadful consequences. On
the other hand, food that is too dry, renders the solids in a manner rigid, and
the humors viscid, which predisposes the body to inflammatory fevers,
scurvies, and the like.

THE arts of cookery render many things unwholesome, which are not so in their
own nature. By jumbling together a number of different ingredients, in order to
make a poignant sauce, or rich soup, the composition proves almost a poison.
All high-seasoning, pickles, etc. are only incentives to luxury, and never fail
to hurt the stomach. It were well for mankind, if cookery, as an art, were
entirely prohibited. Plain rosting or boiling is all that nature points out,
and all that the stomach requires. These alone are sufficient for people in
health, and the sick have still less need of a cook.

THE liquid part of our aliment likewise claims our attention. Water is not
only the basis of most liquors, but also composes a great part of our solid
food. Good water must therefore be of the greatest importance in diet. The best
water is that which is most pure, and free from any mixture of foreign bodies.
Water takes up parts of every body with which it comes in contact; by which
means it is often impregnated with metals and minerals of a hurtful or
poisonous nature.

THE inhabitants of some hilly countries have peculiar diseases, which in all
probability proceed from the water. Thus the people who live near the Alps in
Switzerland, and the inhabitants of the Peak of Derby in England, have large
tumors or wains on their necks. This disease is generally imputed to the
snow-water; but there is more reason to believe it is owing to the minerals in
the mountains through which the waters pass. Were it owing to the snow-water,
it should happen to the inhabitants of all mountainous countries, where snow
lies long; but there are many parts of Britain where the snow lies much longer
than in the Peak of Derby; yet the inhabitants have no such disease. The Peak
of Derby is well known to be a bed of minerals of different kinds; and, as far
as what is called the mineral country extends, these tumors are common, and
generally go by the name of Derby (...).

WHEN water is impregnated with foreign bodies, it generally appears by its
weight, color, taste, smell, heat, or some other sensible quality. Our
business therefore is to choose such water, for common use, as is lightest, and
without any particular color, taste or smell. In most places of Britain the
inhabitants have it in their power to make choice of their water, and ^ew
things would contribute more to health than a due attention to this article.
But mere indolence often induces people to make use of the water that is
nearest them, without considering its qualities.

BEFORE water be brought into great towns, the strictest attention ought to be
paid to it is qualities, as epidemic distempers are often occasioned by bad
water; and when it has been procured at a great expense, we are unwilling to
give it up.

THE common methods of rendering water clear by filtration, of soft by exposing
it to the sun and air, etc. are so generally known, that it is unnecessary to
spend time in explaining them. We shall only in general advise all to avoid
waters which stagnate long in small lakes, ponds, or the like. Such waters
often become putrid with insects and other (...), which breed and die in them.
Even cattle frequently suffer by drinking, in dry seasons, water which has
stood long in small reservoirs, without being supplied by springs, or freshened
with showers. All wells ought to be kept clean, and to have a free
communication with the air. When either animal or vegetable substances are
suffered to lie at the bottom of wells, they corrupt and taint the water. Even
the air itself, when confined in wells, becomes poisonous, and must of course
render the water unwholesome.

MUCH noise has been made about the use of fermented liquors. They
notwithstanding still continue to be the common drink of almost every person
who can afford them. As this is, and in all probability will be the case, we
shall rather endeavor to assist people in their choice of these liquors, than
pretend to condemn what custom has established. It is not the moderate use of
sound fermented liquors which hurts mankind; i^ is excess, or the abuse of
them, and using such as are ill-prepared or vitiated.

FERMENTED liquors which are too strong hurt digestion, instead of assisting
it, by which means their intention is lost, and the body, in place of being
strengthened by them, is weakened and relaxed. Many imagine, that hard labor
could not be supported without drinking strong liquors: This, though a common,
is a very erroneous notion. Men who never taste strong liquors, are not only
able to endure more fatigue, but also live much longer than those who use them
daily. But suppose strong liquors did enable men to do more work, they must
nevertheless waste the powers of life, and of course occasion premature old
age. They keep up a constant fever, which wastes the spirits, heats and
inflames the blood, and predisposes the body to numberless diseases.

BUT fermented liquors may be too weak as well as too strong: When that is the
case, they must either be drank new, or they become sour and dead. When such
liquors are drank new, the fermentation not being over, they generate air in
the bowels, and occasion flatulencies; and when kept till stale, they sour on
the stomach, and greatly hurt digestion. For this reason all malt-liquor,
cider, etc. ought to be of such strength as will make them keep till they be
ripe, and then they should be used. When such liquors are kept too long, though
they should not become sour, yet they generally contract a hardness, which
renders them unwholesome. Hence it is, that bottled ale hurts the stomach,
occasions the gravel, etc.

ALL families, who can, ought to prepare their own liquors. Since preparing and
vending of liquors became one of the most general branches of business, every
method has been tried to adulterate them. The great object both of the makers
and venders of liquor is, to render it intoxicating. But it is well known, that
this may be done by other ingredients than those which ought to be used for
that purpose. It would be imprudent even to name those things which are daily
made use of to render liquors heady. It is sufficient to observe, that the
practice is very common, and all the ingredients used for that purpose, are of
an opiate or stupifactive nature. But as all opiates are of a poisonous
quality, it is easy to see what must be the consequence of their general use.
Though they do not kill suddenly, yet they hurt the nerves, relax and weaken
the stomach, and of course spoil the digestion.

WERE fermented liquors faithfully prepared, not too strong, nor too weak, kept
to a proper age, and used in moderation, they would prove real blessings to
mankind. But while they are ill prepared, various ways adulterated, and taken
to excess, they must have many bad consequences. These however we shall not
mention at present, as they will be pointed out under another article.

TO specify the different kinds of aliment, to explain their nature and
properties, and to point out their effects in different constitutions, would
far exceed the limits of our design. Instead of a detail of this kind, which in
all probability would be very little attended to, and would not be generally
understood, we shall only mention the following easy rules with respect to the
choice of aliment.

THOSE whose solids are weak and relaxed, ought to avoid all viscid food, or
such things as are hard of digestion; and to take plenty of exercise in a dry
open air.

SUCH as abound with blood, should be sparing in the use of every thing that is
highly nourishing, as fat meat, rich wines, strong ale, etc. Their food should
consist mostly of bread and other vegetable substances, and their drink ought
to be milk, whey, and the like.

FAT people should not eat freely of oily nourishing diet. They ought
frequently to use raddish, garlic, spices, or such things as are heating, and
promote perspiration and urine. Their drink should be water, coffee, tea, or
the like; and they ought to take much exercise and little sleep.

THOSE who are too lean, must follow an opposite course.

SUCH as abound with acidities, or whose food is apt to sour on their stomach,
should live much on flesh-meats; and those who are troubled with alkaline
eructations, or heat of the stomach, ought to use a diet consisting chiefly of
acid vegetables.

PEOPLE who are affected with the gout, low spirits, hypochondriac or hysteric
disorders, ought to avoid all flatulent food, every thing that is viscid or
hard of digestion, all salted or smoke-dried provisions, and whatever is
austere, acid, or apt to sour on the stomach. Their food should be light,
spare, cool, and of an opening quality.

THE diet ought not only to be suited to the age and constitution, but also to
the manner of life. A sedentary or studious person should live more sparingly
than one who labors hard without doors. Food will nourish a peasant very well,
which would be almost indigestible to a citizen; and the latter will live upon
a diet on which the former would starve.

DIET ought not to be too uniform. The constant use of one kind of food might
have bad effects. Nature points out this by the great variety of aliments which
she has provided for man, and likewise by giving him an appetite for different
kinds of food.

THOSE who labor under any particular disease, ought to avoid such aliments as
have a tendency to increase it. For example, a gouty person should not use rich
wines, strong soups, or gravies, and should avoid all acids. One who is
troubled with the gravel, ought to shun all austere and astringent aliments;
and those who are scorbutic, should not indulge in animal food, etc.

IN the first period of life our food ought to be light, nourishing, and of a
diluting nature, but frequently used. Food that is solid, with a sufficient
degree of tenacity, is most proper for the state of manhood. The diet suited to
the last period of life, when nature is upon the decline, approaches near to
that of the first. It should be lighter, and more diluting than that of
vigorous age, and likewise more frequently taken.

IRREGULARITIES IN DIET, SLEEP, etc.
IT is not only necessary for health, that our diet be wholesome, but also that
it be taken at regular periods. Some imagine, that long fasting will atone for
excess; but that, instead of mending the matter, never fails to make it worse.
When the stomach and intestines are over distended with food, they lose their
proper tone, and by long fasting they become weak, and inflated with wind. Thus
either gluttony or fasting destroys the powers of digestion.

THE frequent repetition of aliment is not only necessary for repairing the
continual waste of our bodies, but likewise to keep the humors sound and
sweet. Our humors, even in the most healthy state, have a constant tendency to
become putrid, which can only be prevented by frequent supplies of fresh
nourishment: When that is wanting too long, the putrefaction often proceeds so
far, as to occasion very dangerous fevers. From hence we may learn the
necessity of regular meals. No person can enjoy a good state of health, whose
vessels are either frequently overcharged, or the humors long deprived of
fresh supplies of chyle.

LONG fasting is extremely hurtful to young people; it vitiates their humors,
and prevents their growth and strength. Nor is it less injurious to the aged.
Many in the decline of life are afflicted with wind: That complaint is not only
increased, but even rendered dangerous, and often fatal, by long fasting. Old
people, when their stomachs are empty, are frequently seized with giddiness,
headachs and faintness. These complaints may generally be removed by a bit of
bread and a glass of wine, or taking any other solid food; which plainly points
out the method of preventing them. It is more than probable, that many of the
sudden deaths which happen in the advanced periods of life, are occasioned by
fasting too long, as it exhausts the spirits, and fills the bowels with wind;
we would therefore advise people, in the decline of life, never to allow their
stomachs to be too long empty. Many take nothing but a few cups of tea and a
bit of bread, from nine o'clock at night till two or three next afternoon. Such
may be said to fast almost three fourths of their time. This can hardly fail to
ruin the appetite, vitiate the humors, and fill the bowels with wind; all
which might be prevented by a solid breakfast. That would tend more to
strengthen the nerves, and expel wind, than all the cordial or carminative
medicines which can be administered.

THE strong and healthy do not indeed suffer so much from fasting as the weak
and delicate; but they run great hazard from its opposite, viz. repletion, Many
diseases, especially fevers, are the effect of a plethora, or too great fullness
of the vessels. Strong people, in high health, have generally a great quantity
of blood and other humors. When these are suddenly increased by an overcharge
of rich and nourishing diet, the vessels become distended, and being unable to
contract themselves, obstructions and inflammations ensue. Hence so many people
are seized with inflammatory and eruptive fevers, after a feast or debauch.
This shows the danger of all sudden transitions from a spare to a full and
luxurious diet.

EXCESS in diet is not peculiar to the rich and opulent; the poor are often
guilty of it, and frequently feel its bad effects. The poor seldom lose an
opportunity of gorging themselves either with meat or drink, when they can
obtain it, and the less they are accustomed to it, the danger is the greater.

WHEN we recommend regularity in diet, we would not be understood as condemning
every small deviation from it. It is next to impossible for people at all times
to avoid some degree to excess, and living too much by rule might make even the
smallest deviation dangerous. It may therefore be prudent to vary a little,
sometimes taking more, sometimes less than the usual quantity of meat and
drink, provided always that regard be had to moderation.

SLEEP as well as diet ought to be duly regulated. Too little sleep exhausts
the spirits, weakens the nerves, and occasions diseases; and too much renders
the mind dull, the body gross, and disposes it to apoplexies, lethargies, etc.
A medium therefore ought to be observed; but that is not easy to fix. The young
require more sleep than those who are grown, the laborious than the idle, and
such as eat and drink freely than those who live abstemiously. Besides, the
real quantity of sleep cannot be measured by time; as one person will be more
refreshed by five or six hours of sleep, than another by eight or ten. The best
way to make sleep ^ound and refreshing is to rise by times. The indolent custom
of lolling a-bed for nine or ten hours relaxes the body, unbraces the nerves,
and greatly hurts the constitution.

CHILDREN may be allowed as much sleep as they choose; but for adults six or
seven hours is certainly enough, and none ought to exceed eight. Those who lie
more than eight hours a-bed may slumber, but they can hardly be said to sleep;
such generally toss and dream away the forepart of the night, sink to rest
toward morning, and dose till noon. Instead of encouraging a habit of this
kind, rising early would make them fall into a ^ound sleep as soon as they went
to bed, and they would seldom wake till morning, when they would find
themselves sufficiently refreshed.

NATURE points out night as the proper time for sleep. Those who think it too
vulgar to sleep in that season, seldom enjoy health. Nothing more certainly
destroys the constitution than night-watching. It is great pity that a practice
so destructive to health should be so much in fashion. How quickly the want of
rest in due season will blast the most blooming complexion, or ruin the best
constitution, is evident from the ghastly countenances of those who, as the
phrase is, turn day into night, and night into day.

TO make sleep refreshing, the following things are necessary. First, that we
take enough of exercise in the open air, through the day; next, to eat a light
supper; and lastly, to lie down with a mind cheerful and serene.

IT is certain, that too much fatigue will prevent sleep, as well as too
little. We seldom, however, hear the active and laborious complain of restless
nights. It is the indolent and slothful who generally have these complaints. Is
it any wonder, that a bed of down should not be refreshing to a person who
lolls all day in an easy chair? A great part of the pleasure of life consists
in alternate rest and motion; but they who neglect the latter can never relish
the former. The labourer enjoys more true luxury in plain food and ^ound sleep,
than is to be found in sumptuous tables and downy pillows, where exercise is
wanting.

THAT light suppers cause sound sleep, is true even to a proverb. Many, if they
exceed the least at that meal, are sure to have uneasy nights; and if they drop
asleep, the load and oppression on their stomach and spirits occasion frightful
dreams, broken and disturbed repose, with nightmares, etc. Were the same
persons to go to bed with a light supper, or ^it up till what they eat were
pretty well digested they might enjoy ^ound sleep, and rise refreshed and
cheerful.

NOTHING more certainly disturbs our repose than anxiety. When the mind is not
at ease, we seldom enjoy ^ound sleep. That greatest of human blessings often
flies the wretch who needs it most, and visits the happy, the cheerful, and the
gay. This is a good reason why every man should endeavor to be as easy in his
mind as possible, when he goes to rest. Many, by neglecting this rule, and by
indulging grief and anxious thoughts, have banished sleep so long, that they
could never afterward enjoy it.

FEW things contribute more to health than keeping the belly regular. When the
foeces lie too long in the bowels, they become acrid, and spoil the humors;
and when they are discharged too soon, the body is not properly nourished.
Regular stools depend greatly upon regularity in eating and drinking, and
proper exercise; people have reason to suspect a fault in one or other of
these, whenever the belly is not regular.

TO prevent costiveness, one good rule is, to rise betimes and go abroad in the
open air. Not only the posture in bed is unfavourable to regular stools, but
likewise the warmth. This, by promoting the perspiration, cannot fail to lessen
all the other discharges. Mr. Lock's advice, to solicit nature by going
regularly to stool every morning, is a very good one, and has more effect than
most people would imagine. Any habit will in time become natural. It is always
more safe to keep the belly regular by proper diet, exercise, etc. than by the
use of drugs. Those who have frequent recourse to medicine for that purpose,
seldom fail to ruin their constitutions. But if opening medicines must be used,
the safest is fine rhubarb, which may either be taken in small doses in powder,
or a little of it chewed daily. Custom will render this sufficiently agreeable.

SUCH as are troubled with habitual looseness, ought to suit their food to the
nature of their complaint. Looseness may often be removed by a change of diet:
For example, boiled milk may be used in place of raw, wheat bread instead of
that which is mixed, red wine, or brandy and water may be drank in place of
malt-liquor, white broths may be eat instead of flesh, and (...) or sago
gruels, with light flour puddings, in place of barley or oat meal. An habitual
looseness is often occasioned by an obstructed perspiration. In that case as
flannel vest and thick shoes are the best medicines.

BAD AIR.
BAD air is a very common cause of diseases. Few are aware of the danger
arising from it; people generally pay some attention to what they eat and
drink, but seldom regard what goes into the lungs, though the one often proves
fatal as well as the other.

PERHAPS no air is perfectly pure; that, however, which has fewest noxious
particles in it, is no doubt the best. Air as well as water takes up parts of
most bodies with which it comes into contact, and is often so replenished with
those of a noxious quality, as to occasion immediate death. But such violent
effects seldom happen, as people are generally on their guard against them. The
less perceptible influences of bad air prove more hurtful to mankind; we shall
therefore endeavor to point out some of these, and to show wherein the danger
consists.

AIR may become noxious many ways. Whatever destroys its spring or elasticity,
renders it unfit for respiration: Wherever therefore great numbers of people
are crowded into one place, if the air has not a free current, it soon becomes
unwholesome. Hence it is that delicate persons are so apt to faint or be sick,
in crowded churches, assemblies, or any place where the air is exhausted by
breathing, fires, candles, or the like.

IN great cities so many things tend to pollute the air, that it is no wonder
it proves so fatal to the inhabitants. The air in cities is not only breathed
over and over by thousands, but is likewise exhausted by fires, loaded with
sulphur, smoke, and other exhalations, besides the vapors continually arising
from innumerable putrid substances. All possible care should be taken to keep
the streets of large towns open and wide, that the air may have a free current.
They ought likewise to be kept very clean. Nothing tends more to pollute and
contaminate the air than dirty streets, dunghills, slaughter-houses, etc.

IT is very common in this country to have churchyards in the middle of
populous cities. Whether that be the effect of ancient superstition, or owing
to the increase of such towns, is a matter of no consequence. Whatever gave
rise to the custom, it is a bad one. It is habit alone which reconciles us to
these things; by means of it, the most ridiculous, nay, pernicious customs,
often become sacred. Certain it is, that thousands of putrid carcases, so near
the surface of the earth, in a place where the air stagnates, cannot fail to
taint it; and that such air being breathed into the lungs, and mixed with the
blood, must occasion diseases In most eastern countries it is customary to bury
the dead at some distance from any town. It were to be wished the inhabitants
of Europe would follow this example.
.

WHEREVER air stagnates long, it becomes unwholesome. Hence the unhappy inmates
of jails not only contract malignant fevers themselves, but often communicate
them to others. Nor are many of the holes, for we cannot call them houses,
possessed by the poor in great towns, much better than jails. These low dirty
habitations are the very lurking places of bad air and contagious diseases.
Such as live in them seldom enjoy good health; and their children commonly die
young. In the choice of a house, the greatest attention ought always to be paid
to free air.

THE various methods which luxury has invented to make houses close and warm,
contribute not a little to render them unwholesome. No house can be wholesome
unless the air has a free passage through it. For which reason, houses ought
daily to be ventilated by opening opposite windows, and admitting a current of
fresh air into every room. This would expel any noxious vapor, and could not
fail to promote the health of the inhabitants. In hospitals, jails, ships, etc.
where that cannot be conveniently done, ventilators should be used. The method
of expelling foul, and introducing fresh air, by means of ventilators, is a
most salutary invention, and is indeed the most useful of all our modern
medical improvements. We wish, for the benefit of mankind, it were more
generally regarded. It is capable of universal application, and fraught with
numerous advantages, both to those in health and sickness.

AIR not only loses its spring, and becomes unwholesome from heat and
stagnation, but likewise from moisture. Thus, in low marshy countries, the air
is generally bad, as also in countries overrun with wood, or any thing that
sends forth moist exhalations.

AIR that stagnates in mines, wells, cellars, etc. must be noxious. That kind
of air is to be avoided as the most deadly poison. It often kills almost as
quick as lightening. For this reason, people should be very cautious in opening
cellars that have been long shut, or going down into deep wells, especially if
they have been close covered.

MANY people who have splendid houses, choose to sleep in small apartments. This
conduct is very imprudent. A bedchamber ought always to be well aired; as it
is generally occupied in the night only, when all doors and windows are shut.
If a fire be kept in it, the danger becomes still greater. Many have been
stifled when asleep by a fire in a small apartment. Some are even so
inconsiderate as to make fires in bed-chambers which have no chimneys, and
imagine by using that kind of coal which has little or no smoke, that they are
safe; whereas the danger becomes thereby the greater, such coal generally
abounding with sulphur. The most fatal consequences are always to be dreaded
from every attempt of this nature.

THOSE who are obliged, on account of business, to spend the day in close
towns, ought, if possible, to sleep in the country. Breathing good air in the
night will, in some measure, make up for the want of it through the day. This
practice would have a greater effect in preserving the health of citizens than
is commonly imagined.

CARE should be taken to admit a constant stream of fresh air into all crowded
places, as churches, assembly-rooms, colleges, courts of justice, etc. The
neglect of this has had so many fatal consequences, that it is sufficient only
to mention it.

IT was necessary in former times, for safety, to surround cities, colleges,
and even single houses, with high walls. These, by obstructing the current of
air, never fail to render such places damp and unwholesome. As such walls are
now, generally speaking, become useless, they ought to be thrown down, and
every method taken to admit a free passage to the air. Were proper attention
paid to AIR and CLEANLINESS, it would tend more to preserve the health of the
inhabitants of great towns than all the endeavors of the Faculty.

IF fresh air be necessary for those in health, it is still more so for the
sick, who often lose their lives for the want of it. The notion that sick
people must be kept very hot, is so common, that one can hardly enter the
chamber where a patient lies, without being ready to faint, by reason of the
hot suffocating smell. How this must affect the sick, any one may judge. No
medicine is so beneficial to the sick as fresh air. It is the most reviving of
all cordials, if it be administered with prudence. We are not, however, to throw
open doors and windows at random upon the sick. Fresh air is to be let into the
chamber gradually, and, if possible, by opening the windows of some other
apartment.

THE air of a sick person's chamber may be greatly freshened, and the patient
much revived, by sprinkling the floor, bed, etc. frequently with vinegar, juice
of lemon, or any other strong vegetable acid.

IN places where numbers of sick are crowded into the same house, or, which is
often the case, into the same apartment, fresh air becomes absolutely
necessary. Infirmaries, hospitals, etc. often become so noxious for want of
proper ventilation, that the sick run more hazard from them than from the
disease; this is particularly the case when dysenteries, putrid fevers, or
other infectious diseases prevail.

PHYSICIANS, surgeons, and others who attend hospitals, ought, for their own
sake, to take care that they be properly ventilated. They are obliged to spend
much of their time amongst the sick, and run great hazard of being themselves
infected when the air is bad. All hospitals, and places for the sick, ought to
have an open situation, at some distance from any great town.

WANT OF CLEANLINESS.
THE want of cleanliness is a fault which admits of no excuse. Where water can
be had for nothing, it is surely in the power of every person to be clean. The
continual discharge from our bodies by perspiration renders frequent changes of
apparel necessary. Change of apparel greatly promotes the secretion from the
skin, so necessary for health. When that matter which ought to be carried off
by perspiration, is either retained in the body, or re-absorbed from dirty
clothes, it is apt to occasion fevers and other diseases.

MOST diseases of the skin proceed from want of cleanliness: These indeed may
be caught by infection; but they will seldom continue long where cleanliness
prevails. To the same cause must we impute the various kinds of vermin which
infest the human body, houses, etc. These may generally be banished by
cleanliness alone. Perhaps, the intention of nature in permitting such vermin
to annoy mankind, is to induce them to the practice of this virtue.

ONE common cause of putrid and malignant fevers is the want of cleanliness.
These fevers commonly begin among the inhabitants of close, dirty houses, who
breathe bad air, take little exercise, use unwholesome food, and wear dirty
clothes. There the infection is generally hatched, which often spreads far and
wide, to the destruction of many. Hence cleanliness may be considered as an
object of public attention. It is not sufficient that I be clean myself, while
the want of it in my neighbor affects my health as well as his own. If dirty
people cannot be removed as a common nuisance, they ought at least to be
avoided as infectious. All who regard their health should keep at a distance
even from their habitations.

IN places where great numbers of people are collected, cleanliness becomes of
the utmost importance. It is well known, that infectious diseases are
communicated by tainted air. Every thing, therefore, which tends to pollute the
air, or spread the infection, ought, with the utmost care, to be avoided. For
this reason, in great towns, no filth of any kind should be permitted to lie
upon the streets. Nothing is more apt to convey infection than the excrements
of the diseased. These, in many cases, are known to be highly infectious. The
streets in many great towns are little better than dunghills, being frequently
covered with ashes and nastiness of every kind. How easily might this be
prevented by active magistrates, who have it always in their power to make
proper laws relative to things of this nature, and to enforce the observance of
them?

WE are sorry to say, that the importance of general cleanliness does by no
means seem to be sufficiently understood. It were well if the inhabitants of
Britain would imitate their neighbors the Dutch in the cleanness of their
streets, houses, etc. Water, indeed, is easily obtained in Holland; but the
situation of most towns in Britain is more favorable to cleanliness. Nothing
can be more agreeable to the senses, more to the honor of the inhabitants, or
conducive to their health, than a clean town; nor does any thing impress a
stranger sooner with a disrespectful idea of any people than its opposite.

THE peasants in most countries seem to hold cleanliness in a sort of contempt.
Were it not for the open situation of their houses, they would often feel the
bad effects of this disposition. One seldom sees a farm-house without a
dunghill before the door, and frequently the cattle and their masters lodge
under the same roof. Peasants are likewise extremely careless with respect to
change of apparel^ keeping their skins clean, etc. These are merely the effects
of indolence and a dirty disposition. Habit may indeed render them less
disagreeable; but no habit can ever make it salutary to wear dirty clothes, or
breathe unwholesome air.

IN camps the strictest regard should be paid to cleanliness. By negligence in
this matter, infectious diseases are often spread amongst a whole army; and
frequently more die of these than by the sword. The Jews, during their
encampments in the wilderness, received particular instructions with respect to
cleanliness Thou shall have a place also without the camp, whither thou shall
go forth abroad; and thou shall have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be,
when thou shall ease thyself abroad, thou shall dig therewith, and shall turn
back, and cover that which comes from thee, etc. Deuter. chap. xxiii. ver. 12.
13.
The rules enjoined them ought to be observed by all in the like situation.
Indeed the whole system of laws delivered to that people, has a manifest
tendency to promote cleanliness. Whoever considers the nature of their climate,
and the diseases to which they were liable, will see the propriety of such laws.

IT is remarkable, that in most eastern countries cleanliness makes a great
part of their religion. The Mohammedan, as well as the Jewish religion, enjoins
various bathings, washings and purifications. No doubt these were designed to
represent inward purity; but they are at the same time calculated for the
preservation of health. However whimsical these washings may appear to some,
few things would tend more to prevent diseases than a proper attention to many
of them. Were every person, for example, after handling a dead body, visiting
the sick, etc. to wash before he went into company, or sat down to meat, he
would run less hazard either of catching the infection himself, or
communicating it to others.

FREQUENT washing not only removes the filth and ^ordes which adhere to the
skin, but likewise promotes the perspiration, braces the body, and enlivens the
spirits. Even washing the feet tends greatly to preserve health. The sweat and
dirt with which these parts are frequently covered, cannot fail to obstruct the
perspiration. This piece of cleanliness would often prevent colds and fevers.
Were people careful to bathe their feet and hands in warm water at night, after
being exposed to cold or wet through the day, they would seldom experience any
of the fatal effects which often proceed from these causes.

A proper attention to cleanliness is no where more necessary than on
shipboard. If epidemical distempers break out there, no one can be safe. The
best way to prevent them is to take care that the whole company be cleanly in
their clothes, diet, etc. When infectious diseases do break out, cleanliness is
the most likely means to prevent their spreading. Above all things, the
clothes, bedding, etc. of the sick ought to be carefully washed, and fumigated
with brimstone, or the like. Infection will lodge a long time in dirty clothes,
and will afterward break out in the most terrible manner.

IN places where great numbers of sick people are kept, cleanliness ought most
religiously to be observed. The very smell in such places is often sufficient
to make one sick. It is easy to imagine what effect that is likely to have upon
the diseased. A person in perfect health has a greater chance to become sick,
than a sick person has to get well, in an hospital or infirmary, where
cleanliness is neglected.

THE brutes themselves set us an example of cleanliness. Most of them seem
uneasy, and thrive ill, if they be not kept clean. A horse that is kept
thoroughly clean, will thrive better on a smaller quantity of food, than with a
greater, where cleanliness is neglected. Even our own feelings are a sufficient
proof of the necessity of cleanliness. How refreshed, how cheerful and
agreeable does one feel on being shaved, washed and dressed; especially when
these offices have been long neglected? Most people esteem cleanliness; and
even those who do not practice it themselves, often admire it in others.
Superior cleanliness sooner attracts our regard than even finery itself, and
often gains esteem where the other fails.

TO point out the numerous advantages arising from cleanliness of person,
houses, streets, etc. would be a very useful and agreeable task; but as our
plan only permits us to name things, we must conclude this article by
recommending the practice of that virtue to people of all stations and
conditions in life. We do not indeed pretend to rank cleanliness amongst the
cardinal virtues; but we would recommend it as necessary for supporting the
dignity of human nature, as useful and agreeable to society, and as highly
conducive to health.

INTEMPERANCE.
A modern author Rousseau.
observes, that temperance and exercise are the two best physicians in the
world. He might have added, that if these were duly regarded, there would be
little occasion for any other. Temperance may justly be called the parent of
health; but numbers of mankind act as if they thought diseases and death too
slow in their progress, and by intemperance and debauch seem, as it were, to
solicit their approach.

THE danger of intemperance appears from the very construction of the human
body. Health depends on that state of the solids and fluids which fits them for
the due performance of the vital functions; and so long as these go regularly
on, we are sound and well; but whatever disturbs them, necessarily impairs
health. Intemperance never fails to disorder the whole animal economy; it
spoils the digestion, relaxes the nerves, renders the different secretions
irregular, vitiates the humors, and of course occasions diseases.

THE analogy between the nourishment of plants and animals affords a strong
proof of the danger of intemperance. Moisture and manure greatly promote
vegetation; but an over-quantity of either will entirely prevent it. The best
things become hurtful, nay destructive, when carried to excess. From hence we
learn, that the greatest pitch of human wisdom consists in regulating our
appetites and passions so as to avoid all extremes. It Is that alone which
entitles us to the character of rational beings. The slave of appetite will
ever be the disgrace of human nature.

THE Author of nature has endued us with various passions, for the propagation
of the species, the preservation of the individual, etc. Intemperance is the
abuse of these passions; and in the proper regulation of them moderation
consists. Men, not content with satisfying the simple calls of nature, create
artificial wants, and are perpetually in search after something that may
gratify them; but imaginary wants can never be gratified. Nature is content
with a little; but luxury knows no bounds. The epicure, the drunkard and the
debauchee seldom stop in their career till cash or constitution fails: Then
indeed they generally see their error, when too late.

IT is impossible to lay down determined rules of temperance, on account of the
different constitutions of mankind. The most ignorant person however certaily
knows what is meant by excess; and it is in the power of every man to avoid it,
if he chooses. The great rule in regulating our diet, is to study simplicity.
Nature delights in the most plain and simple food, and every animal, except
man, follows her dictates. Man alone riots at large, and ransacks the whole
creation in quest of luxuries, to his own destruction. An elegant writer
Addison.
of the last age speaks thus of intemperance: For my part, when I behold a
fashionable table set out in all its magnificence, I fancy that I see gouts and
dropsies, fevers and lethargies, with other innumerable distempers, lying in
ambuscade among the dishes.

INTEMPERANCE does not hurt it is votaries alone; the innocent too often feel
the direful effects of it. How many wretched orphans are to be seen embracing
dunghills, whose parents, regardless of the future, spent in riot and debauch
what might have served decently to feed and cloth their offspring? How often
do we behold the miserable mother, with her helpless infants, pining in want,
while the cruel father is indulging even at the expense of their lives!

FAMILIES are not only reduced to misery, but extirpated by means of
intemperance. Nothing tends so much to prevent propagation, and to shorten the
lives of children. The poor man who labors all day, and at night lies down
contented with his humble fare, can boast a numerous offspring, while his
pampered lord, sunk in ease and luxury, has neither son nor nephew. Even states
and empires feel the influence of intemperance, and rise or fall as it prevails.

INSTEAD of mentioning the different kinds of intemperance, and pointing out
their influence upon health, we shall confine our observations to one
particular species of that vice, viz. the abuse of intoxicating liquors.

EVERY act of intoxication puts nature to the expense of a fever, in order to
discharge the superfluous load; but when that is repeated almost every day, it
is easy to foresee the consequences. That constitution must be strong indeed
which is able long to hold out under a daily fever! But fevers occasioned by
drinking do not always go off in a day; they frequently end in an inflammation
of the breast, liver or brain, and produce fatal effects.

THOUGH the drunkard should not fall by an acute disease, he seldom escapes
those of a chronic nature. Intoxicating liquors, when used to excess, weaken
the bowels and spoil the digestion; they destroy the power of the nerves, and
occasion paralytic and convulsive disorders; they heat and inflame the blood,
destroy it is balsamic quality, render it unfit for circulation, and the
nourishment of the parts, etc. Hence obstructions, atrophies, dropsies, and
consumptions of the lungs. These are the common ways in which drunkards make
their exit. Diseases of this kind, when brought on by hard drinking, seldom
admit of a cure.

MANY people injure their health by drinking, who seldom get drunk. The
continual habit of soaking, as it is called, though its effects be not so
violent, is no less pernicious. When the vessels are kept constantly full and
upon the stretch, the different digestions can neither be duly performed, nor
the humors properly prepared. Hence most people of this character are
afflicted with the gout, the gravel, ulcerous sores in the legs, etc. If these
disorders do not appear, they are seized with low spirits, hypochondriacal
disorders, and other symptoms of indigestion.

ALL intoxicating liquors may be considered as poisons. However disguised, that
is their real character, and sooner or later they will have their effect.
Consumptions are now so common, that it is thought one tenth of the inhabitants
of great towns die of that disease. Drunkenness is one of the causes to which
we must impute the increase of consumptions. The great quantities of viscid
malt-liquor drank by the common people of England, cannot fail to render the
blood ^izy and unfit for circulation; from whence proceed obstructions and
inflammations of the lungs. There are few great ale-drinkers who are not
phthisical; nor is that to be wondered at, considering the glutinous and almost
indigestible nature of strong ale. Those who drink ardent spirits or strong
wines, do not run less hazard; these liquors heat and inflame the blood, and
tear the tender vessels of the lungs in pieces.

THE habit of drinking proceeds frequently from misfortunes in life. The
miserable fly to it for relief. It affords them indeed a temporary ease. But
alas, this solace is short-lived, and when it is over, the spirits sink as much
below their natural pitch, as they had before been raised above it. Hence a
repetition of the dose becomes necessary, and every fresh dose makes way for
another, till the unhappy wretch becomes a slave to the bottle, and at length
falls a sacrifice to what nature intended only as a medicine. No man is so
dejected as the drunkard when his debauch is gone off. Hence it is, that those
who have the greatest flow of spirits while the glass circulates freely, are of
all others the most melancholy when sober, and often put an end to their own
miserable existence in a fit of spleen or ill humor.

DRUNKENNESS not only proves destructive to health, but likewise to the
faculties of the mind. It is strange, that creatures who value themselves on
account of a superior degree of reason to that of brutes, should take pleasure
in sinking so far below them. Were such as voluntarily deprive themselves of
the use of reason, to continue ever after in that condition, it would seem but
a just punishment. Though that be not the consequence of one act of
drunkenness, it seldom fails to succeed a course of intoxication. By a habit of
drinking, the greatest genius is often reduced to a mere dunce.

INACTIVITY.
MANY look upon the necessity man is under of earning his bread by labor as a
curse. Be that as it may, it is evident from the structure of the body, that
exercise is not less necessary for the preservation of health, than food. Those
whom poverty obliges to labor for daily bread, are not only the most healthy,
but generally the most happy. Industry seldom fails to place such above want,
and activity serves them instead of physic. This is peculiarly the case with
those who live by the culture of the ground. The great increase of inhabitants
in infant-colonies, and the common longevity of such as follow agriculture
every where, evidently prove it the most healthful as well as the most useful
employment.

THE love of activity shows itself very early in man. So strong is this
principle, that a healthy youth cannot be restrained from exercise, even by the
fear of punishment. Our love of motion is surely a strong proof of its utility.
Nature implants no disposition in vain. Some imagine, that the love of motion
was implanted in man, because without it he could not obtain the necessaries of
life; but suppose the necessaries of life could be universally obtained without
motion, it would nevertheless be indispensable. It seems to be a catholic law
throughout the whole animal creation, that no creature, without exercise, can
enjoy health. Every creature, except man, takes as much exercise as is
necessary. He alone, and such animals as are under his direction, deviate from
this original law, and they suffer accordingly.

INACTIVITY never fails to bring on universal relaxation of the solids, which
occasions innumerable diseases. When the solids are relaxed, neither the
digestion, nor any of the secretions, can be duly performed. In this case the
worst consequences must ensue. How can those who loll all day in easy chairs,
and sleep all night on a bed of down, fail to be relaxed? Nor do such greatly
mend the matter, who never stir abroad but in a coach, or sedan, etc. These
elegant pieces of luxury are become so common, that the inhabitants of great
towns seem to be in some danger of losing the use of their limbs altogether.
It Is now below any one to walk who can afford to be carried. How ridiculous
would it seem to a person unacquainted with modern luxury, to behold the young
and healthy swinging along on the shoulders of their fellow creatures! or to
see a fat carcass, overrun with diseases occasioned by inactivity, dragged
through the streets by half a dozen horses.

GLANDULAR obstructions generally proceed from inactivity. These are the most
obstinate of all maladies. So long as the liver, kidneys, and other glands,
duly perform their functions, health is seldom impaired; but when they fail,
nothing can preserve it. Exercise is almost the only cure we know for glandular
obstructions; indeed it does not always succeed, but there is reason to
believe, that it would seldom fail to prevent these complaints. One thing is
certain, that amongst those who take enough of exercise, glandular diseases are
very little known; whereas the indolent and inactive are seldom free from them.

WEAK nerves are the constant companions of inactivity. Nothing but exercise
and open air can brace and strengthen the nerves, or prevent the endless train
of diseases which proceed from a relaxed state of these organs. We seldom hear
the active or laborious complain of nervous diseases; these are reserved for
the sons of ease and affluence. Many have been completely cured of nervous
disorders by being reduced from a state of opulence to labor for their daily
bread. This plainly points out the sources from whence such diseases flow, and
the means by which they may be prevented.

IT is absolutely impossible to enjoy health without a free perspiration; but
that necessary discharge never goes properly on where exercise is wanting. When
the matter which ought to be thrown off by perspiration, is retained in the
body, it cannot fail to vitiate the humors. Hence proceed the gout, fevers,
rheumatism, etc. In a word, none of the vital or animal functions can be duly
performed when exercise is neglected. It alone would prevent many diseases
which cannot be cured, and would remove others where medicine proves
ineffectual.

A late author (...)
, in his excellent treatise on health, says, that the weak and valetudinary
ought to make exercise a part of their religion. We would recommend this, not
only to the weak and valetudinary, but to all whose business does not oblige
them to take sufficient exercise, as sedentary artificers, shopkeepers,
studious people, etc. Such ought to take exercise as regularly as they take
food. This, were people careful to husband their time well, might be done
without any interruption to business or study.

No piece of indolence hurts the health more than the modern custom of lolling
a-bed too long in a morning. This is universally the case in great towns. The
inhabitants of cities seldom do much business before breakfast; but that is the
best time for exercise, while the stomach is empty, and the body refreshed with
sleep. Rising early would not only give those who cannot leave their business
through the day, an opportunity of taking exercise, but it would prevent the
bad effects of loitering in bed too long. The morning air braces and
strengthens the nerves, and, in some measure, answers the purpose of a cold
bath. Let any one who has been accustomed to lie a-bed till eight or nine
o'clock, rise by six or seven, spend a couple of hours in walking, riding, or
any active diversion without doors, and he will find his spirits cheerful and
serene through the day, his appetite keen, and his body braced and
strengthened. Custom soon renders early rising agreeable, and nothing
contributes more to the preservation of health.

EXERCISE, if possible, ought always to be taken in the open air. When that
cannot be done, various methods may be contrived for exercising the body within
doors, as dancing, fencing, the dumb bell, playing at tennis, etc. It is not
necessary to adhere strictly to any particular kind of exercise. The best way
is to take them by turns, and to use that longest which is most suitable to the
strength and constitution. These kinds of exercise which give action to most of
the bodily organs, are always to be preferred, as riding, walking, running,
digging, swimming, and such like.

IT is much to be regretted, that active and manly diversions are now so little
regarded. Diversions make people take more exercise than they otherwise would
do, and are of the greatest service to such as are not under the necessity of
laboring for their bread. As active diversions lose ground, those of a
sedentary kind seem to prevail. Sedentary diversions are of no other use than
to consume the time which might be employed in exercise: Instead of relieving
the mind, they often require more thought than either study or business. Every
thing that induces people to sit still, unless it be some necessary employment,
ought to be avoided.

THE diversions which afford the best exercise are, hunting, shooting, playing
at cricket, hand-ball, golff Golff is a diversion very common in North-Britain.
It is well calculated for exercising the body, and may always be taken in such
moderation, as neither to over-heat nor fatigue. It has greatly the preference
over cricket, tennis, or any of those games which cannot be played without
violence.
, etc. These exercise the limbs, promote perspiration, and the other
secretions. They likewise strengthen the lungs, and give firmness and agility
to the whole body.

SUCH as can, ought to spend two or three hours a day on horseback; those who
cannot, should employ the same time in walking. The best time for taking
exercise is in the morning, or at least before dinner; but it should never be
continued too long. Over fatigue prevents the benefit of exercise, and weakens
instead of strengthening the body.

EVERY man should lay himself under some sort of necessity to take exercise.
Indolence, like all other vices, when indulged, gains ground, and at length
becomes agreeable. Hence, many who were fond of exercise in the early part of
life, become quite averse to it afterward. This is the case of most
hypochondriac and gouty people, which renders their diseases in a great measure
incurable.

IN some countries laws have been made, obliging every man, of whatever rank,
to learn some mechanical employment. Whether such laws were designed for the
preservation of health, or encouragement of manufacture, is a question of no
importance. Certain it is, that if gentlemen were frequently to amuse and
exercise themselves in this way, it might have many good effects. They would,
at least, derive as much honor from a few masterly specimens of their own
workmanship, as from the character of having ruined most of their companions by
gaming or hard drinking. Besides, men of leisure, by applying themselves to the
mechanical arts, might improve them, to the great benefit of society. This
would afford a more comfortable reflection at the close of life, than the
consciousness of having lived in the world for no other purpose than to eat and
drink.

INDOLENCE not only occasions diseases, and renders men useless to society, but
promotes all manner of vice. To say a man is idle, is perhaps, in the strongest
terms, to call him vicious. The mind, if not engaged in some useful pursuit, is
constantly in quest of ideal pleasures, or impressed with the apprehension of
some imaginary evil. From these sources proceed most of the miseries of
mankind. Sure man never was intended to be idle. Inactivity frustrates the very
design of his creation. An active life is the best guardian of virtue, and the
greatest preservative of health.

INFECTION.
MOST diseases are infectious. Every person ought, therefore, as far as he can,
to avoid all communication with the diseased. The common practice of visiting
the sick, though well meant, has many ill consequences. Far be it from us to
discourage any act charity or benevolence, especially toward those in
distress; but we cannot help blaming such as endanger their own or neighbors
lives by a mistaken friendship, or an impertinent curiosity.

THE houses of the sick, especially in the country, are generally crowded from
morning till night with idle visitors. It is customary, in such places, for
servants and young people to wait upon the sick by turns. It would be a miracle
indeed should such always escape. Experience teaches us the danger of this
conduct. People often catch fevers in this way, and communicate them to others,
till at length they become epidemic.

IT would be thought highly improper for one who had not had the smallpox, to
wait upon a patient in that disease; yet many other fevers are almost as
infectious as the smallpox, and not less fatal. Some imagine, that fevers prove
more fatal in villages than in great towns, for want of proper medical
assistance. How far that is true, we will not pretend to say; but we are
inclined to think, that it rather proceeds from the cause above mentioned.

WERE a plan to be laid down for communicating infection, it could not be done
more effectually than by the common method of visiting the sick. Such visitors
not only endanger themselves and their connections, but likewise hurt the sick.
By crowding the house, they render the air unwholesome, and by their private
whispers and dismal countenances, disturb the imagination of the sick and
depress his spirits. Sick persons, especially in fevers, ought to be kept as
quiet as possible. The sight of strange faces, and every thing that disturbs
the mind, hurts them.

THE common practice in country places of inviting great numbers of people to
funerals, and crowding them into the same apartment where the corpse lies, is
another way of spreading infection. The infection by no means dies with the
patient. In many cases it rather grows stronger as the body becomes putrid.
This is peculiarly the case of those who die of malignant fevers, or other
putrid diseases. Such ought not to lie long unburied; and people should keep at
a distance from them. It is very common for people, after attending the funeral
of a friend, to be seized with the same disease of which he died, and to share
the same fate.

IT would tend greatly to prevent the spreading of infectious diseases, if
those in health were kept at a proper distance from the sick. The Jewish
Legislator, among many other wise institutions for preserving health, has been
peculiarly attentive to the means of preventing infection, or defilement, as it
is called, either from a diseased person or a dead body. In many cases the
diseased were to be separated from those in health; and it was deemed a crime
even to approach their habitations. If a person only touched a dead body, he
was appointed to wash himself in water, and to keep for some time at a distance
from society.

INFECTIOUS diseases are often communicated by clothes. It is extremely
dangerous to wear apparel which has been worn by the diseased, as infection
will lodge in it a long while, and afterward produce very tragical effects.
This shows the danger of buying at random the clothes which have been used by
other people.

INFECTIOUS disorders are frequently imported. Commerce, together with the
riches of foreign climes, brings us also their diseases. These do often more
than counterbalance all the advantages of that trade, by means of which they
are introduced. It is to be regretted that so little care is commonly taken,
either to prevent the introduction or spreading of infectious diseases. Some
attention, indeed, is generally paid to the plague; but other diseases pass
unregarded.

INFECTION is often spread by jails, hospitals, etc. These are frequently
situated in the very middle of cities, or populous towns; and when infectious
diseases break out in them, it is impossible for the inhabitants to escape.
Were magistrates to pay any regard to the health of the people, this evil might
be easily remedied.

MANY are the causes which tend to diffuse infection through populous cities.
The whole atmosphere of a large town is one contaminated mass, abounding with
every kind of infection, and must be pernicious to health. The best advice that
we can give to such as live in cities, is to choose an open situation; to avoid
narrow, dirty, crowded streets; to keep their own houses and offices clean; to
admit the fresh air every day into their apartments; and to be as much abroad
as their time will permit.

IT would tend greatly to prevent the spreading of infectious diseases, were
proper nurses every where employed to take care of the sick. This might often
save a family, or even a whole town, from being infected by one person. We do
not mean that people should abandon their friends or relations in distress, but
only to put them on their guard against being too much in company with those
who are afflicted with diseases of an infectious nature.

SUCH as wait upon the sick in infectious diseases, ought to stuff their noses
with tobacco, or some other strong smelling herb, as rue, tansy, or the like.
They ought likewise frequently to sprinkle the room where the patient lies with
vinegar, or other strong acids; and to avoid the patient's breath as much as
they can.

HOWEVER easy these hints may seem; yet a proper attention to them would save
many lives. A fever, or other infectious disease, seldom breaks out in a
family, but it affects the most of them, and frequently seizes every
individual. The scenes of calamity and distress produced by this means, are too
often witnessed by those who attend the sick.

YOUNG people are peculiarly liable to catch infection; and therefore ought to
be kept at the greatest distance from the diseased. Their minds are easily
affected with scenes of distress, and they often catch diseases even by the
force of imagination.

WE would not only recommend it to magistrates, to take proper measures to
prevent the spreading of infectious diseases, but also to masters of families.
A single servant may spread a disease amongst a whole family, which may prove
fatal to many of them. For this reason, when a servant is seized with a fever,
or other infectious disease, he ought to be kept in some separate apartment, or
rather sent to an hospital or infirmary. Servants would not only be taken
better care of in this way, but fatal diseases might be often prevented.

INFECTION is often caught by sleeping with the diseased. Every person knows
that this is the case in consumptions of the lungs; but other diseases are
infectious as well as consumptions: Nay, we hardly know any disease that is not
so in some degree. If a sound person communicates health, surely a diseased one
must have the contrary effect. Were this attended to in the choice of
companions for life, it would save many from a premature end.

NOT only the diseases of the body, but also those of the mind are infectious.
For this reason, our companions ought to be of a sound mind, as well as a sound
body. A melancholy person, for example, diffuses a gloom all around him, and
generally taints the minds of his companions with the temper of his own. Those
who would be healthy and happy, ought therefore to associate with the young,
the cheerful, and good humoured.

THE PASSIONS.
THE passions have great influence both in the cause and cure of diseases. How
mind acts upon matter, will, in all probability, ever remain a secret. It is
sufficient for us to know, that there is established a reciprocal influence
betwixt the mental and corporeal parts, and the whatever disorders the one
likewise hurts the other.

THE passion of anger ruffles the mind, distorts the countenance, hurries on
the circulation of the blood, and disorders the whole vital and animal
functions. It often occasions fevers, with other acute diseases; and sometimes
brings on sudden death. This passion is peculiarly hurtful to the delicate, and
those of weak nerves. I have known a hysteric woman lose her life by a violent
fit of anger; all such ought to guard against the excess of this passion with
the utmost ca^e.

IT is not always in our power of prevent being angry; but we may surely avoid
harboring resentment in our breast. Resentment preys upon the mind; it
occasions the most obstinate chronical disorders, and gradually wastes the
constitution. Nothing shows true greatness of mind more, than to forgive
injuries: It promotes the peace of society, and greatly conduces to our own
ease, health, and felicity.

SUCH as value health should avoid violent gusts of anger, as they would the
most deadly infection. They ought never to indulge resentment, but to endeavor
at all times to keep their minds calm and serene. Nothing tends so much to the
health of the body as a constant tranquillity of mind.

THE influence of fear, both in occasioning and aggravating diseases, is very
great. No man ought to be blamed for a decent concern about life; but too great
a desire to preserve it, is often the way to lose it. Fear and anxiety, by
depressing the spirits, pre-dispose us to diseases, and often render those
fatal, which an undaunted mind would overcome.

SUDDEN fear has generally violent effects. Epilectic fits, and other
convulsive disorders, are often occasioned by it. Hence the danger of that
practice, so common among young people, of frightening one another. By this
many have lost their lives, and others have been rendered useless ever after.
It is dangerous to tamper with the human passions. They may easily be thrown
into such disorder as never again to act with regularity.

BUT the gradual effects of fear prove more generally hurtful. The constant
dread of some future evil, by dwelling upon the mind, often occasions the very
evil itself. Hence it comes to pass, that so many die of these diseases, of
which they long had a dread, or which some accident, or foolish prediction, had
impressed on their minds. This often happens to women in childbed. Many of
those who die in that situation, are impressed with the notion of their death a
long while before it happens; and there is reason to believe, that such
impressions are often the cause of it.

THE methods taken to impress the minds of women with apprehensions of the
great danger and peril of childbirth, are very hurtful. Few women die in
labor, though many lose their lives after it; which may be thus accounted for.
A woman after delivery finding herself weak and exhausted, immediately
apprehends she is in danger; but fear seldom fails to obstruct the necessary
evacuations, upon which her recovery depends. Thus the sex often fall a
sacrifice to their own imaginations, when there would be no danger, did they
apprehend none.

IT seldom happens, that two or three women, who are generally known, die in
childbed, but their death is followed by many others. Every woman of their
acquaintance who is with child, dreads the same fate, and the disease becomes
epidemical by the mere force of imagination. This should induce pregnant women
to despise fear, and by all means to avoid those tattling gossips, who are
continually telling them the misfortunes of others. Every thing that may in the
least alarm a pregnant or childbed woman, ought with the greatest care to be
guarded against. Many women have lost their lives in childbed by the old
superstitious custom, still kept up in most parts of Britain, of tolling the
parish-bell for every person who dies. People who think themselves in danger,
are very inquisitive; and if they come to know, that the bell tolls for one who
died in the same situation, what must be the consequence?

BUT this custom is not pernicious to childbed women only. It is hurtful in
many other cases. When low fevers in which it is difficult to support the
patient's spirits, prevail, what must be the effect of a funeral peal sounding
five or six times a day in his ears? His imagination will no doubt suggest,
that others died of the same disease, which he labors under. Nor will the
matter be at all mended by endeavoring to persuade him of the contrary. This
will tend rather to confirm than remove his suspicions.

IF this childish custom cannot be abolished, we ought to keep the sick as much
from hearing it as possible, and from every thing else that may tend to alarm
them. So far is this from being attended to, that many make it their business
to visit the sick, on purpose to whisper dismal stories in their ears. Such may
pass for sympathizing friends, but they ought rather to be reckoned enemies,
and ranked amongst murderers. All who wish well to the sick, ought to keep such
persons at the greatest distance from them.

A custom has long prevailed among physicians of prognosticating, as they call
it, the patient's fate, or foretelling the issue of the disease. Vanity no
doubt introduced this practice, and still supports it, in spite of common sense
and the safety of mankind. I have known a physician barbarous enough to boast,
that he pronounced more sentences than all his Majesty's judges. Would to God
that such sentences were not often equally fatal! It may be alleged, that the
doctor does not declare his opinion before the patient. So, much the worse. A
sensible patient had better hear what the doctor says, than learn it from the
disconsolate looks, the watery eyes, and the broken whispers of those about
him. It seldom happens, when the doctor gives an unfavourable opinion, that it
can be concealed from the patient. The very emberassment which generally
appears in disguising what he has said, is sufficient to discover the truth.

WE do not see what right any man has to announce the death of another,
especially if such a declaration has a chance to kill him. Mankind are indeed
very fond of prying into future events, and seldom fail to importune the
physician for his opinion. A doubtful answer, however, or one that may tend to
encourage the hopes of the patient, is surely the most safe. This conduct could
neither hurt the patient nor the physician. Nothing tends more to destroy the
credit of physic than those bold prognosticators, who, by the by, are generally
the most ignorant. The mistakes which daily happen in this way, are so many
standing proofs of human vanity, and the weakness of science.

THE vanity of foretelling the fate of the sick is not peculiar to the Faculty.
Others follow their example, and those who think themselves wiser than their
neighbors, often do much mischief, in this way. Humanity surely calls upon
every one to comfort the sick, and not to add to their affliction, by alarming
their fears. A physician may often do more good by a mild and simpathizing
behavior than by medicine, and should never neglect to administer that
greatest of all cordials, HOPE.

GRIEF is the most destructive of all the passions. Its effects are permanent,
and when it sinks deep into the mind, it generally proves fatal. Anger and fear
being of a more violent nature, seldom last long; but grief often changes into
a fixed melancholy, which preys upon the spirits, and wastes the constitution.
We should beware of the indulging this passion. It may generally be conquered
at the beginning; but when it has gained strength, all our attempts become vain.

NO person can prevent misfortunes; but it shows true greatness of mind to bear
them with serenity. Many make a merit of indulging grief, and when misfortunes
happen, they obstinately refuse all consolation, till the mind, overwhelmed
with melancholy, sinks under the load. Such conduct is not only destructive to
health, but inconsistent with reason, religion and common sense.

CHANGE of ideas is as necessary for health as change of posture. When the mind
dwells long upon one object, especially of a disagreeable nature, it hurts the
whole functions of the body. Thus grief indulged spoils the digestion, and
destroys the appetite. By that means the spirits are depressed, the nerves
relaxed, the bowels inflated with wind, and the humors, for want of fresh
supplies of chyle, vitiated. Thus many an excellent constitution has been
ruined by a family-misfortune, or any thing that occasioned excessive grief.

IT is utterly impossible, that any person of a dejected mind should enjoy
health. Life may indeed be dragged on for a few years: But whoever would live
to a good old age, must be good humoured and cheerful. This indeed is not
altogether in our own power; yet our temper of mind, as well as actions,
depends greatly upon ourselves. We can either think of agreeable or
disagreeable objects, as we choose; we can go into cheerful or melancholy
company; we can mingle in the amusements and offices of life, or ^it still and
brood over our calamities. These, and many such things, are certainly in our
power, and from these the mind generally takes its cast.

THE variety of scenes which present themselves to the senses, were certainly
designed to prevent our attention from being too long fixed upon any one
object. Nature abounds with variety, and the mind, unless fixed down by habit,
delights in contemplating new objects. This at once points out the method of
relieving the mind in distress. Turn the attention to other objects. Examine
them with accuracy. When the mind begins to recoil, shift the scene. By this
means a constant succession of new ideas may be kept up, till the disagreeable
ones entirely disappear. Thus traveling, the study of any art or science,
reading or writing on such subjects as engage the attention, will sooner expel
grief than the most sprightly amusements.

IT has already been observed, that exercise is absolutely necessary for the
health of the body; but it is no less so for that of the mind. Indolence
nourishes grief. When the mind has nothing else to think of but calamities, no
wonder that it dwells there. Few people who pursue business with attention, are
hurt by grief. Instead of abstracting ourselves from the world or business,
when misfortunes happen, we ought to engage in it with more than usual
attention, to discharge with double diligence the functions of our station, and
to mix with friends of an easy social temper.

INNOCENT amusements are by no means to be neglected. These, by leading the
mind insensibly to the contemplation of agreeable objects, help to dispel the
gloom which misfortunes cast over it. They make time seem less tedious, and
have many other happy effects.

SOME, when overwhelmed with grief, betake themselves to drinking. This is
making the cure worse than the disease. It seldom fails to end in the ruin of
fortune, character and constitution.

THE best way to counteract the violence of any passion is to encourage its
opposite. Thus, under the most pressing calamities, HOPE is always to be kept
in view. Hope is the very support of life, and absolutely necessary to the
happiness of a rational being.

SHOULD all other means of comfort fail, the Christian religion affords an
inexhaustible source of consolation. It teaches us, that the sufferings of this
life are designed to prepare us for a future state of happiness, and that all
who pursue the paths of virtue, shall at last arrive at complete felicity.

CHAP. III.
OF ARTIFICERS, LABORERS, etc.
THAT men are exposed to particular diseases from the occupations which they
follow, is a fact well known; but to remedy that evil, is a difficult matter.
People are under a necessity of pursuing the employments in which they are
bred, whether they be favorable to health or not. Hence all that we can
propose, under this article, is to point out those diseases to which men are
more immediately exposed from their particular occupations; and to show how far
such diseases, by due care, may be avoided.

THE first cause of the diseases of artificers that we shall mention, is the
unwholesome smells and noxious exhalations which often proceed from those
materials in which they are employed. Thus tallow-chandlers, boilers of oil,
^^^ssers of leather, and all who work upon putrid animal substances, are
afflicted with diseases of the stomach and lungs. Ill smells not only create a
nausea and hurt the digestion, but even taint the humors themselves, and
frequently prove the cause of fevers, consumptions, etc.

THESE occupations are not only hurtful to those as are employed in them, but
likewise to those who live in the neighborhood of the places where they are
carried on; for which reason they ought always to be at a proper distance from
any town.

THE best advice that we can give to such as are employed in this way, is, to
pay the utmost attention to cleanliness. They are indeed obliged to wear dirty
clothes while at work; but the moment they leave off, they ought to wash
themselves, strip of their dirty clothes, put on clean ones, and remove at a
proper distance from the smell of their workshops, etc. No one who has not made
the trial, can imagine how far an attention to these, and other pieces of
cleanliness, will go in preserving the health of those artificers who are
obliged to follow such employments.

CHEMISTS, founders, glass-makers, etc. besides the noxious exhalations from
those bodies in which they work, are forced to breathe an air that is in a
manner burnt, or at least too much rarefied to expand the lungs, or answer the
important purposes of respiration. Such people are generally thin, pale, and of
a weak consumptive habit. They are melted down with sweat, in order to supply
which evacuation, large quantities of liquor become necessary. Thus by hard
working and fast living their constitutions are worn out in a few years.

SUCH artists ought to work by turns, and should never continue long near the
furnace at a time. They should be careful, when they leave off work, to cool
gradually, avoiding every thing that may suddenly check the perspiration. The
places where these occupations are carried on, should be properly constructed
for discharging the smoke and other exhalations, and admitting a free current
of fresh air; otherwise the people who work in them, can never enjoy health.

THE exhalation from metals and minerals is not only hurtful to founders,
chemists, and others who manufacture them for particular purposes, but likewise
to miners, or those who dig them out of the earth. Fallopius observes, that
such as work in mines of mercury, seldom live above three or four years. They
are generally affected with pals^^^, vertigos, and other diseases of the
nerves, which soon put an end to their miserable lives. Those also who work in
lead-mines are very liable to paralytic disorders, with gripes, cholics, and
other complaints of the bowels.

MINERS suffer from their situation as well as from the metals in which they
work. The air in mines being totally excluded from the sun's rays, by
stagnation loses its spring, and often becomes damp. This kind of air is to be
avoided as the most deadly poison: Besides, mines are often wet, which renders
them still more hurtful. This is one reason why miners are very subject to
aches, cramps, and rheumatic pains, etc.

MINERS should never continue too long under ground at a time; neither ought
they at any time to go to work fasting, nor to suffer their stomachs to be
empty while they continue in the mines. They ought not to live too low; and
their liquor should be generous. They should by all means avoid costiveness, by
either taking food of an opening nature, or, when that does not succeed, a
gentle purge. Oils are found to be a good preservative against gripes from the
affluvia of metals. Oils both open the belly, and sheath the coats of the
intestines, which prevents their being hurt by the poisonous particles of the
metal.

MINERS should by all means take care that the air have a free current through
the mines, and that neither it nor the water be suffered to stagnate. All who
work in mines or metals ought to wash when they leave off work, and to change
their clothes. Those parts of the metal which adhere to the skin or the
clothes, being continually absorbed into the body, must necessarily do hurt.
People are too apt to look upon such circumstances as unworthy their attention;
but these small causes, by being neglected, never fail to produce the most
dreadful effects.

PLUMBERS, painters, gilders, and all who work in metals, are subject to the
same diseases as those who dig them. They are afflicted with colics, asthmas,
palsies, etc. and should observe the same precautions as miners. It is
impossible for people thus employed, at all times to avoid some degree of
danger; but it consists with observation, that, by ^^e care, they may prolong
their lives to a good old age, ^^th a tolerable share of health. We have seldom
seen a person in danger from any of the above causes, but it proceeded from his
own foolhardiness or want of care.

AS it would greatly exceed our bounds to specify the disorders peculiar to
every occupation, we shall therefore consider mankind under the following
general classes, viz. Laborious, Sedentary and Studious.

The LABORIOUS.
THOUGH those who follow laborious employments are in general the most healthy.
yet the nature of their occupations, and the places where they are carried on,
expose them to many diseases. Husbandmen, for example, are exposed to all the
vicissitudes of the weather, which are often very great and sudden. They are
likewise forced to work hard, and often to carry loads above their strength,
which by overstraining the vessels, occasion many diseases, as asthmas, fevers,
ruptures, etc.

INTERMITTENT fevers, or agues, are very common amongst those who labor
without doors. These are occasioned by the frequent vicissitudes of heat and
cold to which they are exposed, by the bad water which they are often obliged
to drink, by the low marshy situation of their houses, and by their frequent
exposure to the evening dews, night-air, etc.

ASTHMAS and inflammations of the breast are very incident to the laborious.
These are occasioned by the violent exercise and the frequent extremes of heat
and cold to which they are exposed. Those who bear heavy burdens, as porters,
etc. are obliged to draw in the air with much greater force, and also to keep
their lungs distended with more violence than is necessary for common
respiration: By this means the tender vessels of the lungs are over distended.
and often burst, insomuch that a spitting of blood or fevers ensues.
Hippocrates mentions an instance to this purpose of a man. who, upon a wager,
had carried an ass. The man, he says, was immediately seized with a fever, a
vomiting of blood, and a rupture.

CARRYING very heavy burdens is often the effect of mere indolence, which
prompt people to do at once, what should be done at twice. It likewise proceeds
frequently from bravado, or an emulation to outdo others. Hence it is that the
strongest men are most generally hurt by heavy burdens, hard labor, or feats
of activity. It is rare to find one who excels in this way, without a hernia, a
haemoptoe, or some other disease, which he enjoys as the fruit of his folly.
One would imagine, that the daily instances we have of the fatal effects of
carrying great weights, running, wrestling, etc. should be sufficient to put a
stop to such practices.

THERE are indeed some employments which necessarily require a violent exertion
of strength, such as blacksmiths, carpenters, etc. None ought to follow these
occupations but men of a strong body; and they should never exert their
strength to the utmost, nor work too long. When the muscles are violently
strained, frequent rest is necessary, in order that they may recover their
tone; where that is neglected, the strength and constitution will soon be wore
out, and a premature old age brought on.

THE quinsy and erisipelas, or St. Anthony's fire, are likewise diseases very
incident to the laborious. These are occasioned by whatever gives a sudden
check to the perspiration, as drinking cold liquor when the body is warm,
keeping on wet clothes, sitting or lying on the cold ground, damp houses, wet
feet, etc. As the great danger of these practices has already been pointed out,
it is unnecessary to insist upon them here.

THE laborious are often afflicted with the iliac passion, the colic, and other
complaints of the bowels. These are often occasioned by wet feet, or wet
clothes; but they more generally proceed from flatulent and indigestable food.
Laborers eat unfermented bread made of peace, beans, rye, and other windy
ingredients. They also eat great quantities of unripe fruits, baked, stewed, or
raw, with various kinds of roots and herbs, upon which they drink sour milk,
stale small beer, etc. Such a composition cannot fail to fill the bowels with
wind, and occasion diseases. Accordingly we find these people in the decline of
life universally complaining of flatulencies; a disorder which renders many of
them very unhappy, and for which no cure is yet known. The best advice that we
can give them is to avoid windy food as far as possible.

INFLAMMATIONS, whitlows, and other diseases of the extremities, are very
common amongst them who labor without doors. These diseases are often
attributed to venom, or some kind of poison; but they generally proceed either
from sudden heat after cold, or the contrary. When such people come from the
fields cold and wet, they run to the fire, and often plunge their hands in warm
water, by which means the blood and other humors in these parts are suddenly
expanded, the vessels not yielding so quickly, a strangulation happens, and an
inflammation or mortification ensues.

WHEN laborers come home cold, they ought to keep at a distance from the fire
for some time, to wash their hands in cold water, and to rub them well with a
dry cloth. It sometimes happens that people are so benumbed with cold, as to
lose the use of their limbs altogether. In such a case the only remedy is to
rub the parts affected with snow, or, failing it, with cold water. If they be
held near the fire, or plunged into warm water, a mortification will certainly
ensue.

LABORERS in the hot season are apt to lie down and sleep in the sun. This
practice is so dangerous, that they often rise in a high fever. The burning
fevers which prove so fatal about the end of summer, and beginning of autumn,
are often occasioned by this means. When laborers leave off work, which they
ought always to do during the heat of the day, they should go home, or, at
least, get under some cover, where they may repose themselves in safety.

THE different seasons of the year expose those who labor without doors to
different diseases. Thus in the spring agues are frequent: in summer, as has
been observed, burning fevers abound; and in autumn, dysenteries and fluxes
prevail. The latter proceed not only from the perspiration being, at that time,
obstructed, but also from the green trash, or unripe fruits, which country
people eat in great quantities. Indeed if fruit be ripe, and eat in moderation,
it rather prevents than occasions dysenteries; but it is equally certain, that
much bad fruit will bring on a flux.

LABORERS are often hurt by long fasting. They frequently follow their
employments in the fields from morning till night, without eating any thing.
This cannot fail to hurt their health. However homely their fare be, they ought
to have it at regular times, and the harder they work, the more frequently
should they eat.

LABORERS likewise suffer from the nature of their food. They are extremely
careless with respect to what they eat or drink, and often through mere
indolence, eat unwholesome food, when they might, for the same expense, have
that which is wholesome. The poor often hurt their health for want of a proper
method of living, and in the end save nothing by it. In many parts of Britain,
the peasants are too careless to take the trouble of dressing their victuals,
though they have feuel for nothing. Such people will live upon one meal a day
in indolence, rather than labor, though it were to procure them the greatest
affluence.

POVERTY is doubtless a very general cause of diseases among the laboring part
of mankind. Few of them have ^^ch foresight; and if they had, it seldom is in
their power to lay any thing up against hard times. They are glad to make a
shift to live from day to day; and when any disease renders them unfit for
work, their families are ready to starve. Here the God-like virtue of charity
ought ever to exert herself. To relieve the industrious poor when in distress,
is surely the most exalted act of religion, and can never lose its reward. They
alone who witness those scenes of calamity, can form a notion of what numbers
perish in diseases for want of proper assistance, and even for want of the
necessaries of life. It were to be wished, for the honor of human nature, as
well as for the good of society, that these things were more looked into.

FEVERS of a very bad kind are often occasioned by what is called poor living.
When the body is not sufficiently nourished, the humors become bad, and the
spirits sink; from whence the most fatal consequences must ever ensue. Poor
living is likewise productive of cutaneous diseases. It is remarkable that
cattle, when pinched in their food, are generally affected with diseases of the
skin. These diseases seldom fail to disappear when they are put upon good
pasture: which shows how much a good state of the humors depends upon a
sufficient quantity of proper nourishment.

LABORERS often suffer from a foolish emulation, which prompts them to vie
with one another, till they drop down dead, or over-heat themselves to such a
degree as to occasion a fever. As this is the effect of vanity, it ought always
to be checked by those who have the superintendance of them. Such as wantonly
throw away their lives in this manner, deserve to be looked upon in no better
light than self-murderers. It is pity that poor widows and fatherless children
should suffer by such childish conduct: Could we speak to the passions of men,
we would bid them think of these, and then consider of how great importance
their lives are.

THE office of a soldier in time of war, may be ranked amongst laborious
employments. Soldiers suffer many hardships from the inclemency of seasons,
long marches, hunger, bad provisions, etc. These occasion fevers, fluxes,
rheumatisms, and other fatal diseases, which often do more execution than the
sword, especially when campaigns are continued too late in the season. One week
of cold rainy weather will kill more men than many months when it is dry and
warm.

EVERY commander should take care that his soldiers be well clothed and well
fed. He ought also to endeavor to put an end to the campaign in due season,
and to provide his men with winter quarters that are dry and well-aired. These
easy rules, with taking care to keep the sick at a proper distance from those
in health, will go a great length in preserving the lives of the soldiery.

IT is indeed to be regretted, that soldiers suffer no less by indolence and
intemperance in time of peace, than from hardships in time of war. When men are
idle, they will be vicious. It would therefore be of the greatest importance,
could a scheme be formed for rendering the military in time of peace less
vicious, more healthy, and more useful to society. All those desirable objects
might certainly be promoted by only employing them five or six hours every day,
and advancing their pay in proportion. By this means idleness, the mother of
vice, would not only be prevented, but the price of labor might be lowered.
Public works, as harbors, canals, turn-pike roads, etc. might be made without
hurting manufactures; and soldiers might be enabled to marry, and bring up
children.

A SCHEME of this kind might be so conducted as to raise instead of depressing
the martial spirit, provided the men were never allowed to work above a certain
number of hours, and obliged always to work without doors. No soldier should
ever be allowed to work too long, nor permitted to follow any sedentary
employment. Sedentary employments render men weak and effeminate, and quite
unfit for the hardships of war; whereas working a few hours daily without doors
would innure them to the weather, brace their nerves, and promote their
strength and courage.

SAILORS may also be numbered amongst the laborious. They undergo great
hardships from change of climate, the violence of weather, hard labor, bad
provisions, etc. Sailors are of so great importance both to the trade and
safety of this kingdom, that too much pains can never be bestowed in pointing
out the proper means of preserving their lives.

EXCESS is one great source of the diseases of seafaring people. When they get
on shore, after being long at sea, without regard to the climate, or their own
constitutions, they plunge headlong into all manner of riot, and often persist
till a fever puts an end to their lives. Thus intemperance, and not the
climate, is often the cause why so many of our brave sailors die on foreign
coasts. We would not have seafaring people live too low; but they will find
temperance the best defense against fevers, and many other maladies.

SAILORS when on duty are often exposed to cold and wet. When that happens,
they should change their clothes as soon as they are relieved, and take every
proper method to restore the perspiration. In this case they should not have
recourse to spirits, or other strong liquors, but should rather drink such as
are weak and diluted, of a proper warmth, and go immediately to bed, where a
sound sleep and a gentle sweat will set all to rights.

THE health of sailors suffers most from unwholesome food. The constant use of
salted provisions vitiates the whole humors, and occasions the scurvy, and
other obstinate maladies. It is no easy matter to prevent this disease in long
voyages; yet we cannot help thinking, that much might be done toward effecting
so desirable an end, were due pains bestowed for that purpose. For example,
various roots, greens, and fruits might be kept a long time at sea, as
potatoes, cabbages, lemons, oranges, tamarinds, apples, etc. When fruits cannot
be kept the juices of them either fresh or fermented, may. With these all the
drink, and even the food of the ships company, ought to be acidulated in long
voyages. But suppose the vegetable acids should fail, yet the chemical, as
cream of tartar, elixir of vitriol, etc. may be kept for any length of time;
and as they are attended with no expense, it is in the power of every sailor to
lay in enough of these for the longest voyage. These, though not so good as
vegetable acids, are still better than none, and should always be used when the
others fail.

STALE bread and beer likewise contribute to vitiate the humors. Meal will
keep for a long while on board, of which fresh bread might frequently be made.
Malt too might be kept on board, and infused with boiling water at any time.
This liquor, when drank even in the form of wort, is very wholesome, and is
found to be an excellent antidote against the scurvy. Small wines and cider
might likewise be plentifully laid in, and should they turn sour, they would
still be useful, as vinegar. Vinegar is a very great antidote against diseases,
and should be used by all travelers, especially at sea.

SUCH animals as can be kept alive ought likewise to be carried on board, as
hens, ducks, pigs, etc. Fresh broths made of portable soup, and puddings made
of peace, or other vegetables, ought to be used frequently. Many other things
will occur to people conversant in these matters, which would tend to preserve
the health of that brave and useful set of men. Pity it is that so little
attention should be paid to these things by such as have it in their power to
rectify them; but interest binds the eyes of some, while others, totally
regardless of the future, will make no provision against diseases till they
feel them.

THERE is reason to believe, if care were taken with respect to the diet, air,
clothing, etc. of seafaring people, that they would be the most healthy set
of men in the world; but when these are not duly regarded, the very reverse
must happen.

PERUVIAN bark is the best medical antidote that we can recommend to sailors or
soldiers on foreign coasts. This will often prevent fevers, and other fatal
diseases. A dram or so of it may be chewed every day, or if this should prove
disagreeable, an ounce of bark, with half an ounce of orange-pill, and two
drams of snake-root coarsely powdered, may be infused for two or three days in
an English quart of brandy, and half a wine glass of it taken twice or thrice
a day, when the stomach is most empty. This has been found to be an excellent
antidote against fluxes, putrid, intermitting, and other fevers, in unhealthy
climates. It is not material in what form this medicine be administered. It may
either be infused in water, wine, or spirits, as recommended above, or made
into an electuary with syrup of lemons, oranges, or the like.

The SEDENTARY.
THOUGH nothing can be more contrary to the nature of man than a sedentary
life, yet the far greater part of the human species are comprehended under this
class. Almost the whole female world, and, in manufacturing countries, the
major part of the males, may be reckoned sedentary.

AGRICULTURE, the first and most healthful of all employments, is now followed
by few who are able to carry on any other business. Those who imagine that the
culture of the earth is not sufficient to employ all its inhabitants, are
greatly mistaken. An ancient Roman, we are told, could maintain his family from
the produce of one acre of ground. So might a modern Briton, if he could be
contented to live like a Roman. This shows what an immense increase of
inhabitants Britain might admit of, and all of them live by the culture of the
ground. Agriculture is the great source of domestic riches. It is of all
employments the most favorable to health and population. When it is neglected,
whatever wealth may be imported from abroad, poverty, wretchedness, and misery
will abound at home. Such is, and ever will be, the fluctuating nature of
manufactures, that ten thousand people may be in bread today, and in beggary
tomorrow. This can never happen to those who cultivate the ground. They can
eat the fruit of their labor, and can always by industry obtain, at least, the
necessaries of life.

THOUGH sedentary employments be necessary, yet there seems to be no reason why
any person should be confined for life to these alone. Were such employments
intermixed with the more active and laborious, they would never do hurt. It is
constant confinement that ruins the health. A man many not be hurt by sitting
four or five hours a day, who, were he obliged to sit ten or twelve, would soon
contract diseases.

BUT it is not want of exercise alone which hurts sedentary people; they often
suffer from the unwholesome air which they breathe. It is very common to see
ten or a do^^^ tailors, or stay-makers, for example, crowded into one small
appartment, where there is hardly room for one ^^^gle person (...) freely. In
this situation they generally continue for many hours at a time, with often the
addition of sundry candles, which help to waste the air, and render it less fit
for respiration. Air that is breathed over and over, loses its spring, and
becomes unfit for expanding the lungs. This is one cause of the phthisical
coughs, and other complaints of the breast, so incident to sedentary artificers.

EVEN the perspiration from a great number of bodies pent up together, renders
the air unwholesome. The danger from this quarter is greatly increased, if any
of them happens to have bad lungs, or to be other ways diseased. Those who sit
near him, being forced to breathe the same air, can hardly fail to be infected.
It would be a rare thing indeed to find a dozen of sedentary people all sound.
The danger of crouding them together must therefore be evident to every one.

MANY of those who follow sedentary employments are constantly in a bending
posture, as shoemakers, tailors, cutlers, etc. Such a situation is extremely
hurtful. A bending posture obstructs all the vital motions, and of course must
ruin the health. Accordingly we find such artificers generally complain of
indigestions, flatulencies, headaches, pains of the breast, etc. In such people
the first concoction is generally bad, and as that fault can never be mended in
any of the subsequent ones, it cannot fail to induce a total vitium of the
humors, which paves the way to innumerable diseases.

THE aliment in sedentary people, instead of being pushed forwards by an erect
posture, the action of the muscles, etc. is in a manner confined in the bowels.
Hence costiveness, wind, and other hypocondriacal symptoms, the never failing
companions of the sedentary. Indeed none of the secretions can be duly
performed where exercise is wanting, and when any one of these is retained too
long in the body, it must have bad effects, as it is again taken up into the
mass of humors.

A bending posture is very hurtful to the lungs. When this organ is compressed,
the air cannot have free access into all its parts, so as to expand them
properly. Hence tubercles, adhesions, etc. are formed, which often end in
consumptions. The proper action of the lungs is likewise necessary for making
good blood. When that organ fails, the humors soon (...) universally depraved,
and the whole constitution go^^ to wreck. (...) fine, both the pectoral and
abdominal viscera ought to be kept as free and easy as possible. Their
continual action is absolutely necessary to life, and being of a soft texture,
their functions are easily obstructed by any sort of pressure.

THE sedentary are not only hurt by pressure on the bowels, but also on the
inferior extremities, which obstructs the circulation in these parts, and
renders them weak and feeble. Thus tailors, shoemakers, etc. frequently lose
the use of their legs altogether; besides the blood and other humors, by
stagnating in these parts, are vitiated; from whence proceed the scab, ulcerous
sores, foul blotches, and other cutaneous diseases, so common among sedentary
artificers.

A bad figure of body is a very common consequence of close application to
sedentary employments. The spine, for example, by being continually bent, puts
on a crooked shape, and generally remains so ever after. But a bad figure of
body has already been observed to be hurtful to health, as the vital functions,
etc. are thereby impeded.

A sedentary life never fails to occasion an universal relaxation of the
solids. This is the grand source from whence most of the diseases of sedentary
people flow. The scrofula, consumption, rickets, and many other maladies which
now abound, were little known in this country before sedentary artificers
became so numerous; and they are very little known still among such of our
people as follow active employments without doors, though in the great
manufacturing towns, at least two thirds of the inhabitants are afflicted with
them.

IT is the more difficult to remedy those evils, because many who have been
accustomed to a sedentary life, like rickety children, lose all inclination for
exercise; we shall however give a few hints with respect to the most likely
means for preserving the health of this useful set of people, which some of
them, we hope, will be wise enough to observe.

IT has been observed, that sedentary artificers are often hurt by their
bending posture. They ought therefore to stand or sit as erect as the nature of
their employments will permit. They should likewise change postures frequently,
and should never sit too long at a time, but leave off work and walk, ride,
run, or do any thing that will promote the vital functions.

SEDENTARY artificers are allowed too little time for exercise; yet, short as
it is, they seldom employ it properly. A journeyman tailor or weaver, instead
of walking abroad for exercise and fresh air, at his hours of leisure, chooses
often to spend them in a public house, or in pursuing some sedentary
diversion, at which he generally loses both his time and money.

THE awkward postures in which many sedentary artificers work, seem rather to
be the effect of custom than necessity. For example, a table might surely be
contrived for ten or a dozen tailors to sit round it, with liberty for their
legs either to hang down, or rest upon a foot-board, as they should choose. A
place might be cut out in the table for every person to sit in, by which means
his work would lie as ready to his hand, as in the present mode of sitting
cross-legged.

WE would recommend to all sedentary artificers the most religious regard to
cleanliness. Both their situation and occupations render this highly necessary.
Nothing would contribute more to preserve sedentary artificers in health, than
a strict attention to this rule; and such of them as neglect it, not only run
the hazard of losing their health, but of becoming a nuisance to society.

SEDENTARY people should live spare. They ought likewise to avoid food that is
windy, or hard of digestion, and should pay the strictest regard to sobriety. A
person who works hard without doors will soon throw off an overcharge of
liquor, but one who sits has by no means an equal chance. Hence it often
happens, that sedentary people are seized with fevers after hard drinking. When
such people feel their spirits low, instead of running to the tavern for
relief, they should ride, or walk into the fields. This would remove the
complaint more effectually than strong liquor, and would never hurt the
constitution.

INSTEAD of multiplying rules for preserving the health of the sedentary, we
shall recommend the following general plan, viz. That every person who follows
a sedentary employment should cultivate a piece of ground with his own hands.
This he might dig, plant, sow, and weed at his leisure-hours, so as to make it
both an exercise and amusement, while it produced many of the necessaries of
life. After working an hour in a garden, a man will return with more keenness
to his employment within doors, than if he had been all the while idle.

LABORING the ground is every way conducive to health. It not only gives
exercise to every part of the body, but the very smell of the earth and fresh
^^^bs, revive and cheer the spirits, whilst the perpetual prospect of something
coming to maturity, delights and entertains the mind. We are so made as to be
always pleased with somewhat in prospect, however distant or however trivial.
Hence the happiness that most men feel in planting, sowing, building, etc.
These seem to have been the chief employments of the early ages; and when kings
and conquerors cultivated the ground, there is reason to believe, that they
knew as well wherein true happiness consisted as we do.

IT may seem romantic to recommend gardening to manufacturers in great towns;
but observation proves, that the plan is very practicable. In the town of
Sheffield, in Yorkshire, where the great iron manufacture is carried on, there
is hardly a journeyman cutler who does not occupy a piece of ground which he
cultivates as a garden. This practice has many salutary effects. It not only
induces these people to take exercise without doors, but also to eat many
greens, roots, etc. of their own produce, which they would not think of
purchasing. There seems to be no reason why manufacturers in any other town in
Great Britain should not follow this example.

MECHANICS are too much inclined to crowd into great towns. This situation may
have some advantages, but many disadvantages. All mechanics who live in the
country, have it in their power, and indeed most of them do, occupy a piece of
ground, which not only gives them exercise, but enables them to live more
comfortably. So far at least as our observation reaches, mechanics who live in
the country are far more happy than those in great towns. They enjoy better
health, live in greater affluence, and seldom fail to rear a healthy and
numerous-offspring.

IN a word, exercise without doors, in one shape or other, is absolutely
necessary to health. Those who neglect it, though they may for a while drag out
life, can hardly be said to enjoy it. Their humors are generally vitiated,
their solids relaxed and weak, and their spirits low and depressed.

The STUDIOUS.
INTENSE thought is so destructive to health, that few instances can be
produced of studious persons who live to an extreme old age. Hard study always
implies a sedentary life; and when ^ant of exercise is joined to intense
thinking, the consequences must be bad. We have frequently known even a few
months intense study ruin an excellent constitution, and bring on a train of
nervous complaints, which never could be removed. Man is evidently not formed
for continual thought more than for perpetual action, and would be as soon worn
out by the one as by the other.

SO great is the power of the mind over the body, that by its influence the
whole vital motion may be accelerated or retarded, to almost any degree.
Cheerfulness and mirth quicken the circulation, and promote all the secretions;
whereas sadness and profound thought never fail to retard them. Thus even a
degree of thoughtfulness is necessary to health. The perpetual thinker seldom
enjoys either health or spirits; while the person who can hardly be said to
think at all, seldom fails to enjoy both. The mind, by a habit of thinking, in
some measure, loses the power of unbending itself. This may be called a disease
of the mind, and should be as carefully guarded against as any other malady.

PERPETUAL thinkers, as they are called, seldom think to much purpose. Such
people, in a course of years, generally become quite stupid, and exhibit a
melancholy proof how readily the greatest blessings may be abused. Thought,
like all other things, when carried to extreme, becomes a vice. Hence nothing
can afford a greater proof of wisdom than for a man frequently and seasonably
to unbend his mind. This may always be done by a cheerful company, active
diversions, music, or the like.

THE gout is the common companion of the studious. This excruciating disease
generally proceeds from indigestions, and an obstructed perspiration. It is
impossible that the man who ^its all day in a closet should either digest his
food, or have any of the secretions in due quantity. When that matter, which
should be thrown off by the skin, is retained in the body, it cannot fail to
vitiate the humors, and of course to produce the gout, or some other malady.

THE studious are often afflicted with the stone and gravel. Motion greatly
assists the secretion and discharge of urine; consequently a sedentary life
must have the contrary effect. Of this any one may be sensible by observing,
that he passes much more urine by day than in the night, and also when he walks
or ^ides than when he ^its. A f^^e discharge of urine not only prevents the
gravel and stone, but many other diseases. When the (...) or other humors are
disordered, nature generally attempts to free herself of the offending cause,
by the urinary passages; but when these become unfit for performing their
proper functions, this attempt must fail, and consequently diseases will ensue.

OBSTRUCTIONS of the liver prove often fatal to the studious. Diseases of that
organ are very obstinate, and generally complicated. The circulation in the
liver being slow, obstructions can hardly fail to be the consequence of
inactivity. Hence sedentary people are frequently afflicted with schirrous
livers, the jaundice, etc. The proper secretion and discharge of the bile is so
necessary a part of the animal economy, that where it is not duly performed,
the health must needs be impaired. Indigestion, loss of appetite, and a wasting
of the whole body, seldom fail to be the consequences of a vitium, or
obstructions of the bile.

FEW diseases prove more fatal to the studious than consumptions of the lungs.
It has already been observed, that this organ cannot be duly expanded in those
who do not take proper exercise, and where that is the case, obstructions,
adhesions, etc. must ensue. Not only want of exercise, but the posture in which
studious people often sit, is very hurtful to the lungs. Those who read or
write much are apt to contract a habit of bending forwards, and often press
with their breast upon a table or bench, etc. It is impossible this posture
should fail to hurt the lungs. It ought therefore to be avoided with the utmost
care.

THE studious are often afflicted with want of appetite and indigestions. These
lay the foundation of numerous diseases. When the digestions fail, the humors
must soon be depraved, to which succeed low spirits, weak nerves, with the
whole train of hysteric and hypochondriac maladies.

HEADACHES often afflict the studious. These proceed from long and intense
thinking, and sometimes they are aggravated by costiveness. The best way to
prevent them is never to study too long, and to keep the belly regular either
by proper food, or taking frequently a little of some opening medicine.

Diseases of the eyes often afflict the studious. Such therefore as read or
write much should early accustom themselves to use preserves. Night-study is
most destructive to the ^ight, and should never be prolonged too late. Indeed
late studi^^ ^e not only hurtful to the eyes, but to the whole body. Nothing
more certainly ruins the health, than the practice of spending those hours in
the closet which should be allotted to sleep. Studious persons will find their
eyes greatly strengthened by bathing them frequently in cold water, or brandy
and water mixed.

THE dropsy is another of those diseases which commonly affect the studious,
and very often puts an end to their lives. It has already been observed, that
the secretions are generally defective in the studious, and that various
diseases, among which is the dropsy, are occasioned by the retention of these
humors which ought to be thrown off in that way. Any person may observe, that
sitting makes his legs swell, and that this will go off by exercise; which
clearly points out the method of prevention to all who can take it. To those
who cannot take exercise, we would recommend the use of the flesh-brush, cold
bathing, and such food as is of a bracing and strengthening nature.

FEVERS, especially of the nervous kind, are often the effect of study. Nothing
is so destructive to the nerves as intense thought. It is able, in a manner, to
unhinge the whole machine. It not only hurts the vital motions, but disorders
the mind itself. Hence a delirium, melancholy, and even madness, are often the
effect of close application to study. There is no disease which can proceed
either from a bad state of the humors, a defect of the usual secretions, or a
debility of the nervous system, which may not be brought on by intense thinking.

BUT the most afflicting of all the diseases which attack the studious, are the
hypochondriacal. These seldom fail to be the companions of deep thought, and
may rather be called a complication of maladies than a single one. To what a
wretched pass are the best of men often reduced by these maladies? Their
strength and appetite fail. A perpetual gloom hangs over their minds. They live
in the constant dread of death, and are continually in search of relief from
medicine, where, alas! it is not to be found. This disease far exceeds all
description, and those who labor under it, though they be often made the
subject of ridicule, justly claim our highest sympathy and compassion.

NOTHING can be more preposterous than for any man to make study his sole
business. A mere student is seldom a^ useful member of society. Indeed it
rarely happens, th^^ an useful invention is the effect of study. The farther
that men dive into profound researches, they generally deviate the more from
common sense, and too often lose sight of it altogether. Hence it is that
profound speculations, instead of making men wiser or better, generally render
them mere skeptics, and overwhelm them in doubt and uncertainty. All that is
necessary for man to know, in order to be happy, is easily obtained, and the
rest, like the forbidden tree, serves only to increase his misery.

STUDIOUS people, in order to relieve their minds; must not only discontinue to
read and write, but engage in some employment or amusement, that will so far
occupy the thought as to make them forget the business of the closet. A
solitary ride or walk are so far from relieving the mind, that they rather
encourage thought. Nothing can divert the mind, when it gets into a train of
serious thinking, but an attention to subjects of a more trivial nature. These,
when compared with the other, prove a kind of play to the mind, and
consequently relieve it.

THINKING men are apt to contract a contempt for what they call trifling
company. They are ashamed to be seen with any but philosophers. This however is
no proof of their being philosophers themselves. No man deserves the name of a
philosopher who is ashamed to unbend his mind by associating with the cheerful
and gay. Even the society of children will relieve the mind, and expel the
gloom which application to study is too apt to occasion. It is remarkable, that
such as have numerous families; whatever hardships they may labor under, are
generally the most cheerful and happy.

AS studious people are necessarily much within doors, they should make choice
of a large and well-aired place for study. That would not only prevent the bad
effects which attend confined air, but would cheer the spirits, and have a most
happy influence both on the body and mind. It is said of Euripides, the
Tragedian, that he used to retire to a dark cave to compose his tragedies; and
of Demosthenes, the Grecian orator, that he chose a place for study where
nothing could either be heard or seen. With all deference to such venerable
names, we cannot help condemning this taste. A man may surely think to as good
purpose in an elegant apartment as in a cave; and may have as happy ideas where
the all-cheering rays of the sun ^^^der the air wholesome, as in places where
they never reach.

THOSE who read or write much should be very attentive to their posture. They
ought to sit and stand by turns, always keeping as near an erect posture as
possible. Those who dictate may do it walking. It has an excellent effect
frequently to read or speak aloud. This not only exercises the lungs, but
almost the whole body, Hence studious people are greatly benefited by
delivering discourses in public. Such indeed sometimes hurt themselves by
over-acting their part; but that is their own fault. The man who dies a martyr
to mere vociferation merits not our sympathy.

THE morning has by all medical writers been reckoned the best time for study.
It is so. But it is also the most proper season for exercise, while the stomach
is empty, and the spirits refreshed with sleep. Studious people should
therefore frequently spend the morning in some manly diversion abroad. This
would make them return to study with greater alacrity, and would be of more
service than twice the time after their spirits are worn out with fatigue. It
is not sufficient to take diversion only when we can think no longer. Every
studious person should make it a part of his business, and should let nothing
interrupt his hours of recreation more than those of study.

MUSIC has a most happy effect in relieving the mind. It would be well if every
studious person were so far acquainted with that science as to amuse himself
after severe thought, by playing such airs as have a tendency to rouse the
spirits, and inspire cheerfulness and good humor.

STUDIOUS persons generally spend their mornings in the closet, and their
evenings in company. It were better to invert this rule. It is the reproach of
learning, that so many of her sons, to relieve the mind after study, betake
themselves to the use of strong liquors. This indeed is a remedy; but it is a
desperate one, and always ends in destruction. Would such persons, when their
spirits are low, get on horseback, and gallop ten or a dozen miles, they would
find it a more effectual remedy than all the strong liquors in the world. A
good horse is the best preventive medicine that we can recommend to the
studious. This is better than all the nervous antidotes of the shops, and will
in the end be found much cheaper.

IT is really to be regretted that men, while in health, pay so little regard
to these things! How common is it to see a wretch, overrun with nervous
diseases, bathing, walking, riding, and in a word, doing every thing for health
after it is gone; yet if any one had recommended these things by way of
prevention, his advice would have been treated with contempt, or, at least,
with neglect. Such is the weakness of human nature, and such the folly and want
of foresight, even of those who ought to be the wisest of mankind!

PART II. OF DISEASES.
CHAP. IV.
OF DISTINGUISHING DISEASES.
BEFORE we proceed to the particular treatment of diseases, it will be
necessary to lay down some general rules for distinguishing one disease from
another, as the danger of mistaking the disease often deters people from
attempting to relieve the sick.

TO distinguish diseases is the most difficult part of the practice of physic.
So near a resemblance do the symptoms of one disease often bear to those of
another, that they may deceive the most skilful physician. We do not mean in
this place to give the distinguishing marks of every particular disease, but
only to put the reader upon his guard by pointing out a few of those diseases
which have the nearest resemblance to one another, and which the unwary and
inattentive may be most apt to mistake.

THE smallpox and measles are both preceded by chilness and shivering, with
heat and cold by turns, a quick pulse, great thirst, and other symptoms of a
fever. In both the eruption appears about the third or fourth day in little
spots resembling flea-bites. Thus far the disease cannot be certainly known;
but on the second or third day from the eruption, the smallpox begin to rise
and to fill with matter; which plainly shows the nature of the disease.

THE petechial or spotted fever, may be known from the miliary by this mark,
that in the former the spots never rise above the skin; whereas in the latter
the skin is rough, and before the eruption appears the patient complains of
chilness, itching in the skin, and oppression of the breast.

THOUGH there be a great similarity in the first symptoms of all fevers, yet an
attentive observer may generally discover to what class they belong. Thus a
burning fever may be known by the intense heat of the whole body, a dry parched
skin, a chapt tongue, and unquenchable thirst. An inflammatory fever generally
affects one particular part, as the lungs, the stomach, the brain, etc. This
kind of fever has a natural tendency to a mortification. Malignant fevers are
generally owing to infection. They may be known by the patient's sudden loss of
strength, perpetual watching, etc. A catarrhal fever is known by a running at
the nose, a hoarseness, and a sense of ^ulness in the breast.

THE peripneumony and pleurisy may be distinguished by this, that in the latter
the pain is more acute, and in the former the oppression of the breast, and
difficulty of breathing are greater, and the spittle is generally tinctured
with blood.

INTERMITTENT fevers or agues are known by their leaving the patient, and
returning at certain periods, as once a day, once in two days, three days, or
the like. They are denominated from the space between the fits, as quotidian,
or every day agues, tertian, or such as return every other day, quartan, etc.

A hectic fever may be known by its supervening to some other disorder, as the
dropsy, consumption, scurvy, etc. It differs from a slow fever in this, that
the pulse is always quick, but remarkably so in the morning; whereas the pulse
in a slow fever is more natural in a morning, and before meals, though it be
more quick after eating: Besides, in a slow fever the weakness is not so great
as in a hectic.

AN inflammation of the stomach may be distinguished from a cardialgia, an
inflammation of the liver, etc. by a sense of the most intense heat in the
stomach, a fever attended with a quick, unequal and weak pulse, and a
prodigious uneasiness upon taking any thing into the stomach.

AN inflammation in the concave part of the liver may be distinguished from the
bastard pleurisy, by the fever being less violent, the breathing easier, and
the pain lower down. Besides, the bastard pleurisy generally goes off on the
seventh day; whereas the inflammation of the liver is a tedious disease, and
often ends in an abs^^ss, which occasions a hectic fever or a dropsy, etc.

A phrenzy, or inflammation of the membranes of the brain, may be distinguished
from madness, a common delirium, the hydrophobia, etc. by the burning ^ever,
the continual watching, and the violent pulsation of the arteries about the
head and temples, which always attend it. It differs from a delirium in being
more violent, from madness in being an accute disease, and from the hydrophobia
in this, that the patient has no aversion from liquids.

A nephritis, or inflammation of the kidneys, may be distinguished from a fit
of the gravel, by a fixed, dull, pressing pain in the loins, which continues
long; whereas the pain in a fit of the gravel is more violent, less fixed, and
generally extends downwards.

EXTERNAL inflammations are easily distinguished. An erysipelas, or St.
Anthony's fire, only affects the skin with redness, tumor and pain; whereas a
phlegmon reaches to the subjacent muscles, and a gangrene penetrates not only
the muscles, but even the tendinous and nervous parts, and is attended with
great heat, pain, and redness, which at length change into a livid or black
color.

A stone descending by the uriters may easily be mistaken for a fit of the
colic, as both are attended with violent pain, vomiting, etc. In the former,
however, the pain is more fixed in the loins, is attended with shiverings, and
as the stone descends, the pain reaches downwards, and occasions a numbness of
the thigh on the side affected; there is also a frequent inclination to pass
water, with some degree of strangury; whereas in the colic the pain is chiefly
about the navel, and the belly is generally distended with wind.

THE gout may be distinguished from the rheumatism by its attacking the
extremities chiefly, and being attended with a greater inflammation, and more
violent pain. It may likewise be distinguished from venereal pains, by its
being more violent in the day; whereas they are most severe in the night.

THE piles may be mistaken for a dysentary, as both tinge the stools with
blood, though the one be a dangerous disease, and the other in many cases a
salutary evacuation. In the piles however the blood flows without pain or
gripes; whereas in the dysentary the stools are attended with the most violent
gripes, spasms, etc.

COUGHS may be owing to cold, an ulcer in the lungs, an asthma, etc. The best
way to distinguish them is to examine into the cause, to observe what the
patient spits, and to mark the continuance of the disease. A cough occasioned
by catching cold is generally attended with a discharge of phlegm, and is
seldom of long continuance. That which is owing to an ulcer of the lungs is
generally attended with an hectic fever, and the spittle is mixed with matter.
An asthmatic cough is generally owing to wind or spasms, and seldom admits of
relief from medicine.

A headache, which proceeds from too great a quantity of blood being forced into
the vessels of the brain, is generally attended with heat, redness, and a
swelling of the face, a great pulsation of the arteries of the neck, etc. That
kind of headache, which is the effect of venereal contageon, may be known by its
being generally worst in the night. When the headache is owing to an effusion of
serum or blood into the sinuosities of the bones of the forehead, the pain is
obstinate, sharp and fixed; it is generally situated in the bottom of the
forehead, and above the eyes. When the head is disordered from crudities in the
stomach or wind, it may be known from belching, and the increase of the
disorder upon using flatulent food, etc.

AN apoplexy may be distinguished from a syncope or fainting fit, by the color
of the face, the breathing, and the pulse continuing much the same as in
health; whereas in a syncope the pulse and breathing are imperceptible, the
face is pale, and the body grows cold. An apoplexy may be distinguished from a
catalepsy, because the latter comes on suddenly, and keeps the member quite
rigid, and in the same posture as at the time of the attack

A proper attention to the age, sex, constitution, temper of mind, etc. of the
patient would greatly assist us in finding out and distinguishing diseases.
Thus, in children the fibers are lax and soft; in adults, rigid and tense. In
young people the nerves are extremely irritable, and the fluids thin. In old
age the nerves become almost insensible, and many of the vessels imperviable.
These, and numberless other peculiarities, render the diseases of the young and
those of the aged very different; and of course they must require different
treatment.

NOT only the age, but also the sex of the patient, claims our attention.
Females are liable to many peculiar diseases. Their nervous system being weak
and delicate, they are easier affected with spastic or convulsive disorders
than males. This is the true source of most of the diseases of the fair sex,
and ought always to be kept in view in the treatment of their disorders.

WE ought likewise to attend to the particular constitution. This not only
predisposes persons to peculiar diseases, but likewise makes it necessary, that
their diseases be treated in a very different manner. For example, a delicate
person with weak nerves, can neither bear bleeding, nor any other evacuation,
to the same extent as one whose constitution is hardy and robust.

THE temper of mind ought likewise to be attended to in diseases. Fear,
anxiety, and a fretful temper both occasion and aggravate diseases. The
medicine of the mind is too little regarded. In vain do we apply medicines to
the body to remove diseases which proceed from the mind. When that is the case,
the best medicine is to sooth the passions, divert the mind from anxious
thought, and to cherish the hopes of the patient.

ATTENTION ought likewise to be paid to the place where the patient lives, the
air he breathes, his diet, occupation, etc. Such as live in low marshy
countries, are subject to many diseases which are unknown to the inhabitants of
the high countries. Those who breathe the impure air of cities have many
maladies, to which the more happy rustics are strangers. Such as feed gross,
and indulge in strong liquors are liable to diseases which do not affect the
temperate and abstemious. The situation of life, as has been observed, likewise
predisposes men to peculiar diseases. Thus the laborious, the sedentary, the
studious, etc. are liable to particular maladies from the very occupations
which they follow.

IT is necessary to enquire whether or not the patient has been guilty of any
excess in eating or drinking, if he has overstrained himself, has drank cold
liquor when he was warm, lain on the damp ground, changed his usual clothing,
or, in a word, done any thing that might obstruct the perspiration. It will
also be proper to inquire, if any usual evacuation, as sweating of the feet,
issues, etc. has been stopped. The state of the belly should likewise be
enquired into. Costiveness alone will occasion diseases, and the removing of it
will cure them.

IT is likewise necessary to inquire what diseases the patient has formerly
been most liable to, and what medicines were most beneficial. If medicines have
been administered, it will be proper to enquire into their effect. It will
likewise be necessary to inquire, what kind of medicines are most agreeable to
the patient, or if he has an aversion to any particular drug, etc.

IT is also necessary to inquire whether the patient can perform with ease all
the animal and vital functions, or which of them gives him pain; and also to
inquire, if all the different secretions go duly on, as the perspiration,
discharge of urine, etc.

THE nature of the disease is likewise to be inquired into, as whether it be
primary or secondary; whether simple or complicated with some other disease;
whether it be external or internal* whether epidemic or not; whether it be the
effect of age, intemperance, infection, or owing to a vitiated state of the
humors, etc. etc.

OF FEVERS IN GENERAL.
A Fever is the most general disease incident to mankind. It attacks every age,
sex, and constitution, and effects every part of the body; nor is the mind
itself free from its influence. A fever is known by a quick pulse, an increased
heat, and a difficulty in performing some of the vital or animal functions, as
breathing, walking, etc.

FEVERS are divided into continual, remitting, and intermitting. By a continual
fever is meant that which never leaves the patient during the whole course of
the disease, or which shows no remarkable increase or abatement in the
symptoms. This kind of fever is likewise divided into acute, flow, and
malignant. The fever is called acute, when its progress is quick, and the
symptoms violent; but when these are more gentle, it is generally denominated
flow. When livid or petechial spots, show a putrid state of the humors, the
fever is called malignant, putrid, or petechial.

A remitting fever differs from a continual, only in degree. It has frequent
increases and decreases, or exacerbations and remissions, but never wholly
leaves the patient during the course of the disease. Intermitting fevers, or
agues, are those which, during the time that the patient may be said to be ill,
have evident intervals or remissions of the symptoms.

AS a fever is nothing else but an effort of nature to free herself from an
offending cause, it is the business of those who have the care of the sick, to
observe with diligence which way nature points, and to endeavor to assist her
operations. Our bodies are so framed as to have a constant tendency to expel or
throw off whatever is injurious to health. This is generally done by urine,
sweat, stool, expectoration, vomit, or some other evacuation.

THERE is reason to believe, if the efforts of nature, at the beginning of a
fever, were duly attended to and promoted, it would seldom continue longer than
twenty-four hours; but when her attempts are either neglected, or counteracted,
it is no wonder if the disease be prolonged. There are daily instances of
persons, who, after catching cold, have all the symptoms of a beginning fever;
but by keeping warm, drinking diluting liquors, bathing their feet in warm
water, etc. the symptoms in a few hours disappear, and the danger is prevented.
In a word, almost every fever proceeding from an obstructed perspiration, might
be carried off, or its danger prevented, by timely care.

OUR design is not to enter into a critical inquiry into the nature, causes,
etc. of fevers, but to mark their most obvious symptoms, and to point out the
proper treatment of the patient with respect to his diet, drink, air, warmth,
etc. in the different stages of the disease. In these articles the inclinations
of the patient will, in a great measure, direct our conduct.

ALMOST every person in a fever complains of great thirst, and calls out for
drink, especially of a cooling nature. This at once points out the use of
water, which we may venture to call the greatest febrifuge in nature. What is
so likely to abate the heat, attenuate the humors, remove spasms and
obstructions, promote perspiration, increase the quantity of urine, and, in
short, produce every salutary effect in an ardent or inflammatory fever, as
drinking plentifully of warm water, thin gruel, or any other weak, diluting
liquor, of which water is the basis? The necessity of diluting liquors is
pointed out by the dry tongue, the parched skin, and the burning heat, as well
as by the unquenchable thirst of the patient.

MANY cooling liquors, which are extremely grateful to patients in a fever, may
be prepared from fruits, roots, and acid vegetables, as decoctions of
tamarinds, apple-tea, orange-whey, and the like. Mucilaginous liquors might
also be prepared from marsh-mallow roots, linseed, lime-tree-buds, and many
other vegetables. These liquors, especially when acidulated, are highly
agreeable to the patient, and should never be denied him.

AT the beginning of a fever, the patient generally complains of great
lassitude or weariness, and has no inclination to move. This evidently shows
the propriety of keeping him easy, and, if possible, in bed; that relaxes the
spasms, abates the violence of the circulation, and gives nature an opportunity
of exerting all her force to overcome the disease. The bed alone would often
remove a fever at the beginning; but when the patient struggles with the
disease, instead of driving it off, he only fixes it the deeper, and renders it
more dangerous. This observation is often verified in travelers, who happen,
when on a journey, to be seized with a fever. Their anxiety to get home,
induces them to travel with the fever upon them, which conduct seldom fails to
render it fatal.

IN fevers, the mind as well as the body should be kept easy. Company is seldom
agreeable to the sick. Indeed, every thing that disturbs the imagination
increases the disease* for which reason, every person in a fever ought to be
kept perfectly quiet, and neither allowed to see nor hear any thing that may in
the least affect or discompose his mind.

THOUGH the patient in a fever has the greatest inclination for drink, yet he
seldom has any appetite for solid food; from whence we may see the impropriety
of loading his stomach with victuals. Much solid food in a fever is every way
hurtful to the patient. It oppresses nature, and instead of nourishing the
patient, serves only to feed the disease. What food the patient takes should be
in small quantity, light, and easy of digestion. It ought to be chiefly of the
vegetable kind, as water-pap, roasted apples, groat-gruel, and such like.

POOR people, when any of their family are taken ill, run directly to their
rich neighbors for cordials, and pour wines, spirits, etc. into the patient,
who perhaps never had been accustomed to taste such liquors when in health. If
there be any degree of fever, this conduct must increase it, and if there be
none, this is the ready way to raise one. Stuffing the patient with sweat-meats
and other delicacies, is likewise very pernicious. These are always harder to
digest then common food, and cannot fail to hurt the stomach.

NOTHING is more desired by a patient in a fever than fresh air. It not only
removes his anxiety, but cools the blood, revives the spirits, and proves every
way beneficial. Many patients are in a manner stiffled to death in fevers, for
want of fresh air; yet such is the unaccountable infatuation of many people,
that the moment they think a person in a fever, they imagine he should be kept
in a close chamber, into which not one particle of fresh air must be admitted.
There ought to be a constant stream of fresh air into a sick person's chamber,
so as to keep it always in a temperate degree of warmth, which ought never to
be greater than is agreeable to one in perfect health.

NOTHING spoils the air of a sick person's chamber, or hurts the patient more
than a number of people breathing in it. When the blood is inflamed, or the
humors in a putrid state, air that has been breathed over and over will
greatly increase the disease. Such air not only loses its spring, and becomes
unfit for the purposes of respiration, but acquires a noxious quality, which
renders it in a manner poisonous to the sick.

IN fevers, when the patient's spirits are low and depressed, he is not only to
be supported with cordials, but every method should be taken to cheer and
comfort his mind. Many, from a mistaken zeal, when they think a person in
danger, instead of solacing his mind with the hopes and consolations of
religion, fright him with the views of hell and damnation, etc. It would be
unsuitable here to dwell upon the impropriety and dangerous consequences of
this conduct; it often hurts the body, and there is reason to believe, seldom
benefits the soul.

AMONGST common people, the very name of a fever generally suggests the
necessity of bleeding. This notion seems to have taken its rise from most
fevers having been formerly of an inflammatory nature; but true inflammatory
fevers are now seldom to be met with. Sedentary occupations, and a different
manner of living, has so changed the state of diseases in Britain, that there
is now hardly one fever in ten where the lance^ is necessary. In most low,
nervous, and putrid fevers, which are now so common, bleeding is really
hurtful, as it weakens the patient, and sinks his spirits, etc. We would
recommend this general rule, never to bleed at the beginning of a fever, unless
there be evident signs of an inflammation. Bleeding is an excellent medicine
when necessary, but should never be wantonly performed.

IT is likewise a common notion, that it is always necessary to raise a sweat
in the beginning of a fever. As fevers often proceed from an obstructed
perspiration, this notion is not ill founded. If the patient only lies in bed,
bathes his feet and legs in warm water, and drinks freely of water gruel, or
any other weak, diluting liquor, he will seldom fail to perspire freely. The
warmth of the bed, and the diluting drink, will relax the universal spasm,
which generally affect the solids at the beginning of a fever; it will open the
pores, and promote the perspiration, by means of which the fever may often be
carried off. But instead of this, the common practice is to heap clothes upon
the patient, and to give him things of a hot nature, as spirits, spiceries,
etc. which fire his blood, increase the spasms, and render the disease more
dangerous.

IN all fevers a proper attention should be paid to the patient's longings.
These are the calls of nature, and often point out what may be of real use.
Patients are not to be wantonly indulged in every thing that the sickly
appetite may crave; but it is generally right to let them have a little of what
they eagerly desire, though it may not seem altogether proper. What the patient
longs for, his stomach will generally digest; and such things have sometimes a
very happy effect.

WHEN a patient is recovering from a fever, great care is is necessary to
prevent a relapse. Many persons, by too soon imagining themselves well, have
relapsed, or contracted some other disease of an obstinate nature. As the body
after a fever is weak and delicate, it is necessary to guard against catching
cold. Moderate exercise in the open air will be of use; agreeable company will
also have a good effect. The diet must be light, but nourishing. It should be
taken frequently, but in small quantities. It is very dangerous at such a time
to eat as much as the stomach craves.

OF INTERMITTING FEVERS OR AGUES.
INTERMITTING fevers afford the best opportunity both of observing the nature
of a fever, and also the effects of medicine. No person can be at a loss to
distinguish an intermitting fever from any other disease, and the proper
medicine for it is now almost universally known.

THE several kinds of intermitting fevers, as has been observed, take their
names from the period in which the fit returns, as quotidians, tertians,
quartans, etc.

CAUSES. -- Agues are occasioned by moist air. This is evident from their
abounding in rainy seasons, and being most frequent in countries where the soil
is marshy, as in Holland, the fens of Cambridgeshire, the Hundreds of Essex,
etc. This disease is also occasioned by eating too much stone-fruit, a poor
watery diet, damp houses, evening dews, lying upon the wet ground, etc. When
the inhabitants of a high country remove to a low one, they seldom fail to
catch an intermitting fever, and to such the disease is most apt to prove
fatal. In a word, whatever relaxes the solids, diminishes the perspiration, or
obstructs the circulation in the capillary or small vessels, predisposes the
body to agues.

SYMPTOMS. -- An intermitting fever generally begins with a pain of the head
and loins, weariness of the limbs, coldness of the extremities, stretching,
yawning, with sometimes great sickness and vomitting; to which succeed
shivering and violent shaking. Afterward the skin becomes moist, and a profuse
sweat breaks out, which generally terminates the fit or paroxysm. Sometimes,
indeed, the disease comes on suddenly, when the person thinks himself in
perfect health; but it is more commonly preceded by listlessness, loss of
appetite, and the symptoms mentioned above.

REGIMEN. -- While the fit continues, the patient may drink feely of
water gruel, orange-whey, weak camomile-tea; or, if his spirits be low, small
wine-whey, sharpened with the juice of lemon. His drink ought to be a little
warm, as that will assist in bringing on the sweat, and consequently shorten
the paroxysm.

BETWEEN the paroxysms the patient must be supported with food that is
nourishing, but light and easy of digestion, as veal or chicken broths,
sago-gruel, with a little wine, light puddings, etc. His drink may be small
negas, acidulated with the juice of lemons or oranges, and sometimes a little
weak punch. He ought also to drink infusions of bitters, as camomile, wormwood,
or water trefoil tea, and may now and then take a glass of small wine, in which
gentian root, centaury, or some other bitter, has been infused.

AS the chief intentions of cure in an ague are to brace the solids, and
promote perspiration, the patient ought to take as much exercise between the
fits as he can bear. If he be able to go abroad, riding on horseback, or in a
machine, will be of great service. But if he cannot bear that kind of exercise,
he ought to take such as his strength will permit. Nothing tends more to
prolong an intermitting fever, than indulging a lazy, indolent disposition.

INTERMITTING fevers, under a proper regimen, will generally cure of
themselves; and when the disease is mild, in an open dry country, there is
seldom any danger from allowing it to take its course; but when the patient's
strength is exhausted, and the paroxysms are so violent, that his life is in
danger, medicine ought immediately to be administered. This however should
never be done till the disease be properly formed, that is to say, till the
patient has had several fits of shaking and sweating.

MEDICINE. -- The first thing to be done in the cure of an intermitting fever,
is to cleanse the first passages. This not only renders the application of
other medicines more safe, but likewise more efficacious. In this disease the
stomach is generally overcharged with cold viscid phlegm, and frequently great
quantities of bile are discharged by vomit; which plainly points out the
necessity of such evacuations. Vomits are therefore to be administered before
the patient takes any other medicine. A dose of ipecacuanha will generally
answer this purpose very well. Half a dram of the powder will be sufficient for
an adult, and for a younger person the dose must be less in proportion. After
the vomit begins to operate, it may be wrought off by drinking plentifully of
weak camomile tea. The vomit should be taken two or three hours before the
coming on of the fit, and may be rep^^^ed two or three times at the distance of
three or four days from each other. Vomits not only cleanse the stomach, but
increase the perspiration, and all the other secretions, which render them of
such importance, that they often cure intermitting fevers without the
assistance of any other medicine. Of this I have seen many instances, and
remember myself to have been completely cured of a regular tertian, by taking
two vomits of ipecacuanha, and observing proper regimen.

PURGING medicines are likewise useful, and often necessary, in intermitting
fevers. A smart purge has been known to cure an obstinate ague, after the
Jesuits bark and other medicines had been used in vain. Vomits, however, are
more suitable in this disease, and render purging less necessary; but if the
patient be afraid to take a vomit, he ought in this case to cleanse the bowels
by a dose or two of Glauber's salts, jalap, or rhubarb, etc.

BLEEDING may sometimes be proper at the beginning of an intermitting fever,
when excessive heat, a delirium, etc. give reason to suspect an inflammation;
but as the blood is very seldom in an inflammatory state in intermitting
fevers, this operation is rarely necessary.

AFTER proper evacuations, the patient may safely use the Jesuits bark, which
may be taken in any way that is most agreeable to him. As it would answer no
purpose to multiply forms, we shall only mention the following.

Two ounces of the best Jesuits bark, half an ounce of Virginian snake-root,
and a quarter of an ounce of ginger, all fine powdered, may be divided into
twenty-four doses. These may be either made into bolusses, as they are used,
with a little syrup of lemon, or mixed in a glass of red wine, a cup of
camomile-tea, water gruel, or the like.

IN an ague which returns every day, a dose of the above may be taken every two
hours during the interval of the fit. By this method the patient will be able
to take five or six doses between each paroxysm. In a tertian, or third-day
ague, it will be sufficient to take a dose every third hour, during the
interval, and in a quartan every fourth. If the patient cannot take so large a
dose of the bark, he may divide each of the powders into two parts, and take
one every hour. For a young person, a smaller quantity of this medicine will be
sufficient, and the dose must be adapted to the age, constitution, etc.

THE above will seldom fail to remove an ague; but the patient ought not to
leave off taking the medicine so soon as the paroxysms are stopped, but should
continue to use it till such time as there is reason to believe the disease is
entirely overcome. Most of the failures in the cure of this disease are owing
to the patients not continuing to use the medicine long enough. They are
generally directed to take it till their fits are stopped, then to leave it
off, and begin again at some distance of time; by which means the disease
gathers strength, and often returns with as much violence as before. A relapse
may always be prevented by the patient's continuing to take small doses of the
medicine for sometime after the symptoms disappear. This is both the most safe
and effectual method of cure.

THOUGH the bark alone will generally cure intermitting fevers; yet it may be
assisted by alkaline salts, acid and astringent vegetables, etc. Many have been
cured of an intermitting fever, after the bark had failed, by taking twice or
thrice a day a dram of the salt of wormwood in water gruel. Some have stopped
an ague by eating a boiled lemon, with the rind, immediately before the coming
on of the fit. We would rather recommend a medicine which is the result of
these two when joined together, than either of them separately. Thus, a dram of
salt of wormwood may be dissolved in an ounce and half of fresh lemon juice, to
which may be added three or four ounces of boiling water, and half a glass of
brandy. These will make an agreeable medicine; a tea cupful of which may be
taken three or four times a day.

AN ounce of gentian root, calamus aromaticus, and orange-peel of each half an
ounce, with three or four handfuls of camomile flowers, and an handful of
coriander seed, all bruised together in a mortar, may be used in form of
infusion or tea. About half an handful of these ingredients may be put into a
tea-pot, and an English pint of boiling water poured on them. A cup of this
infusion may be drank three or four times a day. This strengthens the stomach,
rectifies the blood, and greatly promotes the cure. Such patients as cannot
drink the watery infusion, may put two handfuls of the same ingredients into a
bottle of white wine, and take a glass of it twice or thrice a day. If patients
drink freely of the above, or any other proper infusion of bitters, a much
smaller quantity of bark than is generally used, will be sufficient to cure an
ague.

THERE is reason to believe, that sundry of our own plants or barks, which are
very bitter and astringent, would succeed well enough in the cure of
intermitting fevers, especially when assisted by aromatics. But as the Jesuits
bark has been long approved in the cure of this disease, and is now to be
obtained at a very reasonable rate, it is of less importance to search after
new medicines. We cannot however omit taking notice, that the Jesuits bark is
very often adulterated, and that it requires considerable skill to distinguish
between the genuine and the false. This ought to make people very cautious of
whom they purchase it.

THOSE who cannot swallow the bark in substance, may take it in decoction or
infusion. An ounce of bark in powder may be infused in a bottle of white wine
for four or five days, frequently shaking the bottle, afterward let the powder
subside, and pour off the clear liquor. A wineglass may be drank three or four
times a day, or oftener, as there is occasion. If a decoction be more
agreeable, an ounce of the bark, and two drams of snakeroot bruised, with a
dram of salt of wormwood, may be boiled in a proper quantity of water, into
half an English pint. To the strained liquor may be added an equal quantity of
red wine, and a glass of it taken thrice a day, or oftener, if necessary.

IN obstinate agues the bark will be found much more efficacious when assisted
by warm cordials, than if taken alone. This I have had frequently occasion to
observe in a country where intermitting fevers were endemical. The bark seldom
succeeded unless assisted by snakeroot, ginger, canella alba, or some other
warm aromatic. When the fits are very frequent and violent, in which case the
fever often approaches toward an inflammatory nature, it will be safer to
leave out the ginger, and to add in its place half a^ ounce of salt of
wormwood. But in obstinate tertians or quartans, in the end of autumn, or
beginning of winter, warm and cordial medicines are absolutely necessary.

AS autumnal and winter agues generally prove much more obstinate than those
which attack the patient in spring or summer; it will be necessary to continue
the use of medicines longer in the former than in the latter. A person who is
seized with an intermitting fever in the beginning of winter, ought frequently,
if the season proves rainy, to take a little medicine, although the disease be
cured, to prevent a relapse, till the return of the warm season. He ought
likewise to take care not to be much abroad in wet weather, especially in cold,
moist, easterly winds.

WHEN agues are not properly cured, they often degenerate into obstinate
chronical diseases; as the dropsy, jaundice, etc. For this reason, all possible
care should be taken to have them radically cured, before the humors be
vitiated, and the constitution spoiled.

THOUGH nothing is more rational than the method of treating intermitting
fevers, yet, by some strange Infatuation, more charms and whimsical remedies
are daily used for removing this than any other disease. There is hardly an old
woman who is not possessed of a nostrum for stopping an ague; and there is
reason to fear, that many by trusting to them lose their lives. Those in
distress eagerly grasp at any thing that promises sudden relief; but the
shortest way is not always the safest in the treatment of diseases. The only
method to obtain a safe and lasting cure, is gradually to assist nature in
removing the cause of the disease.

SOME people try bold, or rather foolhardy experiments to cure agues, as
drinking strong liquors, jumping into a river, etc. These may sometimes have
the desired effect, but must always be attended with danger. When there is any
degree of inflammation, or the least tendency to it, such experiments may prove
fatal. The only person whom I remember to have seen die in an intermitting
fever, evidently killed himself by drinking strong liquor, which some person
had persuaded him would prove an infallible remedy.

MANY out of the way things are extolled for the cure of intermitting fevers,
as cobwebs, snuffings of candles, etc. Though these may sometimes succeed, yet
their very nastiness is sufficient to set them aside, especially when cleanly
medicines will answer the purpose better. The only medicine that can be
depended upon, for thoroughly curing an intermitting fever, is the Jesuits
bark. It may always be used with safety: And I can honestly declare, that in
all my practice I never knew it fail, when properly applied, and duly persisted
in.

WHERE agues are endemical, even children are often afflicted with that
disease. Such patients are very difficult to cure, as they can seldom be
brought to take the bark, or any other disagreeable medicine. One method of
rendering this medicine more palatable is, to make it into a mixture with
distilled waters and syrup, and afterward to give it an agreeable sharpness
with the elixir of spirit of vitriol. This both improves the medicine, and
takes off the nauseous taste. The bark may be administered to children in form
of clyster when they will not take it by the mouth. Wine whey is a very proper
drink for a child in an ague; to half an English pint of which may be put a
tea-spoonful of the spirit of hartshorn. Exercise is likewise of considerable
service; and when the disease proves obstinate, the child ought, if possible,
to be removed to a warm dry air. Their food ought to be nourishing, and they
should sometimes have a little generous wine.

WE have been the more full upon this disease, because it is very common, and
because few patients in an ague apply to physicians unless in extremities.
There are, however, many cases in which the disease is very irregular, being
complicated with other diseases, or attended with sypmtoms which are both very
dangerous, and difficult to understand. All these we have purposely passed
over, as they would only bewilder the generality of readers. When the disease
is very irregular, or the symptoms dangerous, the patient ought immediately to
apply to a physician, and strictly to follow his advice.

TO prevent agues, people must avoid their causes. These have been already
pointed out in the beginning of this section; we shall therefore only add one
preventive medicine, which may be of use to such as are obliged to live in low
marshy countries, or who are liable to frequent attacks of this disease.

TAKE an ounce of the best Jesuits bark, half an ounce of Virginian snake-root,
and half an ounce of orange-peel, bruise them all together, and infuse for five
or six days in a bottle of brandy, Holland-gin, or any good spirit; afterward
pour off the clear liquor, and take a wine glass of it twice or thrice a day.
This indeed is recommending a dram; but the bitter in a great measure takes off
the ill effects of the spirit. Those who do not choose it in brandy may infuse
it in wine; and such as can bring themselves to chew the bark, will find that
method succeed very well. Gentian-root, or calamus aromaticus, may also be
chewed by turns for the same purpose. All bitters seem to be antidotes to
agues, especially those that are warm and astringent.

OF AN ACUTE CONTINUAL FEVER.
THIS fever is denominated acute, ardent, or inflammatory. It most commonly
attacks the young, or those about the prime or vigor of life, especially such
as live full, abound with blood, and whose fibers are strong and elastic. It
seizes people at all seasons of the year; but is most frequent in the spring
and beginning of summer.

CAUSES. -- An ardent fever may be occasioned by any thing that overheats the
body, as violent exercise, sleeping in the sun, drinking strong liquors, eating
spiceries, etc. It may likewise be occasioned by any thing that obstructs the
perspiration, as lying on the damp ground, drinking cold liquor when the body
is hot, night-watching, or such like.

SYMPTOMS. -- A rigor or chillness generally ushers in this fever, which is
soon succeeded by great heat, a frequent and full pulse, a pain of the head,
dry skin, redness of the eyes, a florid countenance, pains in the back, loins,
etc. To these succeed difficulty of breathing, sickness, with an inclination to
vomit. The patient complains of great thirst, has no appetite for solid food,
is restless, and his tongue generally appears black and rough.

A delirium, excessive restlessness, great oppression of the breast, with
laborious respiration, starting of the tendons, hiccup, cold, clammy sweats,
and an involuntary discharge of urine, are generally the forerunners of death.

AS this disease is always attended with danger, the best medical assistance
ought to be procured as soon as possible. A physician may be of use at the
beginning, but his skill is often of no avail afterward.

WE cannot here omit, once for all, taking notice* of the unaccountable conduct
of those who have it in their power, at the beginning of a fever, to procure
the best medical assistance, yet put off till things come to an extremity. When
the disease, by delay or wrong treatment, has become incurable, and has
exhausted the strength of the patient, it is in vain to hope for relief from
medicine. Physicians may indeed assist nature; but their attempts must ever
prove fruitless, when she is no longer able to cooperate with their endeavors.

REGIMEN. -- From the symptoms of this disease, it is evident, that the blood
must be thick and viscous, by which its circulation thorough the small vessels
is impeded; that the perspiration, urine, and all the other secretions, are in
too small quantity; that the vessels are too rigid, and the heat of the whole
body too great: All these clearly point out the necessity of a regimen,
calculated to dilute the blood, allay the excessive heat, remove the spasmodic
stricture of the vessels, and promote the secretions.

THESE important purposes may be greatly promoted by drinking plentifully of
diluting liquors, as thin water gruel, oat-meal tea, clear whey, barley-water,
balm-tea, apple-tea, etc. These should be sharpened with juice of orange, jelly
of currants, raspberries, and such like: Orange-whey is likewise an excellent
cooling drink. It is made by boiling a bitter orange, sliced, among milk and
water, till the curd separates. If no orange can be had, a lemon, a little
cream of tartar, or a few spoonfuls of vinegar, will have the same effect. Two
or three spoonfuls of white wine may be occasionally added to the liquor when
boiling.

IF the patient be costive, an ounce of tamarinds, with two ounces of stoned
raisins of the sun, and a couple of figs, may be boiled in three English pints
of water to a quart. This makes a very pleasant drink, and may be used at
discretion. The common pectoral decoction is likewise a very proper drink in
this disease. It is made by boiling barley, stoned raisins and figs, of each
two ounces, with half an ounce of liquorice-root sliced, in two English quarts
of water, till one half be consumed. The barley should be boiled some time
before the other ingredients are put in. This, with the addition of two or
three drams of purified nitre, or sal-prunel, will not only be a proper drink,
but prove an exceeding good medicine. A tea-cupful of it may be taken every two
hours, or oftener, if the patient's heat and thirst be very great.

THE above liquors must all be drank a little warm. They may be used in smaller
quantities at the beginning of a fever, but more freely afterward, in order to
assist in carrying off the morbid matter by the different excretions. We have
mentioned a variety of liquors, that the patient may have it in his power to
choose that which is most agreeable; and that, when tired of one, he may have
recourse to another.

THE patient's diet must be very spare and light. All sorts of meat, and even
chicken-broths, are to be avoided. He may be allowed groat-gruel, panada, or
light bread boiled in water, and afterward strained; to which may be added a
few grains of common salt, and a little sugar, which will render it more
palatable. He may eat roasted apples with sugar, toasted bread with jelly of
currants spread upon it, boiled prunes, etc.

IT will greatly relieve the patient, especially in an hot season, to have
fresh air frequently let into his chamber, This, however, must always be done
in such a manner as not to endanger his catching cold.

IT is a common practice to load the patient with bed-cloaths, under the
pretense of making him sweat, or defending him from the cold. This custom has
many ill effects. It increases the heat of the body, fatigues the patient, and
retards, instead of promoting, the perspiration.

SITTING upright in bed, if the patient be able to bear it, will often have a
good effect. It relieves the head, by retarding the motion of the blood to the
brain. But this posture ought never to be continued too long: And if the
patient be inclined to sweat, it will be more safe to let him lie still, only
raising his head with pillows, etc.

SPRINKLING the chamber with vinegar, juice of lemon, or vinegar and
rose water, with a little nitre dissolved in it, will greatly refresh the
patient. This ought to be done frequently, especially if the weather be hot.

THE patient's mouth should be often washed with warm water, mixed with honey,
and a little vinegar; or a decoction of figs in barley-water, etc. His feet and
hands ought likewise frequently to be bathed in lukewarm water; especially if
the head be effected.

THE patient should be kept as quiet and easy as possible. Company, noise, and
every thing that disturbs the mind is hurtful. Even too much light, or any
thing that affects the senses, is to be avoided. His attendants should be as
few as possible, and they ought not to be too often changed. His inclinations
ought rather to be soothed than contradicted; even the promise of what he
craves will often satisfy him as much as its reality.

MEDICINE. -- In this and all other fevers arising from too great a quantity,
and too rapid a motion of the blood, bleeding is of the greatest importance.
This operation ought always to be performed as soon as the symptoms of an
inflammatory fever appear. The quantity of blood to be let must be in
proportion to the strength of the patient, and the violence of the disease. If
after the first bleeding the fever seems to rise, and the pulse feels hard,
there will be a necessity for repeating it a second, and perhaps a third time,
which may be done at the distance of twelve, eighteen, or twenty-four hours, as
the symptoms require. If the pulse continues soft, and the patient is tolerably
easy after the first bleeding, it ought not to be repeated till necessary.

THE cooling febrifuge draught, recommended in the intermitting fever, page
105, will likewise be very proper here; only the brandy must be left out, and
half a dram of purified nitre added in its stead.

IF the above cannot be conveniently obtained, forty or fifty drops of the
dulcified or sweet spirit of vitriol may be made into a draught, with an ounce
of rose water, two ounces of common water, and half an ounce of simple syrup,
or a bit of loaf-sugar. This draught may be given to the patient every three
hours while the fever is violent; afterward, once in five or six hours will be
sufficient.

IF the patient be afflicted with reaching or an inclination to vomit, it will
be right to assist nature's attempts, by giving him weak camomile tea or
lukewarm water to drink.

IF the belly be bound, the patient ought daily to receive a clyster of milk
and water with a little salt, and a spoonful of sweet oil or fresh butter. If
this has not the desired effect, a tea-spoonful of magnesia alba, or cream of
tartar, may be frequently put into his drink. He may likewise eat tamarinds,
boiled prunes, roasted apples, and the like.

IF about the 10th, 11th, or 12th day, the pulse becomes more soft, the tongue
moister, and the urine begins to let fall a reddish sediment, there is reason
to expect a favorable issue to the disease. But if, instead of those symptoms,
the patient's spirits grow languid, his pulse sinks, and his breathing becomes
difficult; with a stupor, tremors of the nerves, starting of the tendons, etc.
there is reason to fear that the consequences will be fatal. In this case,
blistering plasters must be applied to the head, ancles, inside of the thighs,
etc. and the patient must be supported with cordials, as strong wine-whey,
negas, sago-gruel, and such like.

A proper regimen is not only necessary during the fever, but likewise after
the patient begins to recover. By neglecting that, many relapse, or fall into
other diseases, and continue valetudinary for life, Though the body be weak after
a fever, yet the food for some time ought to be rather cleansing than of too
nourishing a nature. The person should take great care not to exceed in any
thing. Too much food, drink, sleep, exercise, company, etc. are carefully to be
avoided. The mind ought likewise to be kept easy, and the person should not
attempt to pursue study, or any thing that requires intense thinking.

IF the digestion be bad, or the person b^ troubled at times with feverish
heats, an infusion of the Jesuits bark in cold water will be o^ use. It will
strengthen the stomach, and help to subdue the remains of the fever.

WHEN the patient's strength is pretty well recovered, he ought to take some
gentle laxative. An ounce of tamarinds and a dram of senna, may be boiled for a
few minutes in an English pint of water, and an ounce of manna dissolved in the
decoction; afterward, it may be strained, and a teacupful drank every hour
till it operates. This dose may be repeated twice or thrice, five or six days
intervening betwixt each dose.

THOSE who follow laborious employments ought not to return too soon to their
labor after a fever, but should keep easy till their strength and spirits be
recruited.

OF THE PLEURISY.
THE true pleurisy is an inflammation of that membrane, called the pleura,
which lines the inside of the breast. It is distinguished into the moist and
the dry. In the former, the patient spits freely; but in the latter, little or
none at all. There is likewise a species of this disease, which is called the
spurious or bastard pleurisy, in which the pain is more external, and chiefly
affects the muscles between the ribs. This disease abounds among laboring
people, especially such as work without doors, and are of a sanguine
constitution. It is most frequent in the spring-season.

CAUSES. -- The pleurisy is occasioned by whatever obstructs the perspiration;
as cold northerly winds, drinking cold liquors when the body is hot, sleeping
without doors on the damp ground, wet clothes, plunging the body into cold
water, or exposing it to the cold air when covered with sweat, etc. It may
likewise be occasioned by drinking strong liquors; by the stoppage of usual
evacuations, as old ulcers, issues, sweating of the feet or hands, etc. the
sudden striking in of any eruption, as the itch, the measles, or the smallpox.
Those who have been accustomed to bleed at a certain season of the year, are
apt, if they neglect it, to be seized with a pleurisy. Keeping the body too
warm by means of fire, clothes, etc. renders it more liable to this disease. A
pleurisy may likewise be occasioned by violent exercise, as running, wrestling,
leaping, or by supporting great weights, especially on the breast. The very
make of the body sometimes predisposes persons to this disease, as a narrow
chest, a straitness of the arteries of the pleura, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- This, like most other fevers, begins with chillness and
shivering, which are followed by heat, thirst, and restlessness. To these
succeed a violent pricking pain in one of the sides amongst the ribs. Sometimes
the pain extends toward the backbone, sometimes toward the forepart of the
breast, and at other times toward the shoulder-blades. The pain is generally
most violent when the patient draws in his breath.

THE pulse in this disease is generally hard, the urine high colored; and if
blood be let, it is covered with a tough crust, or buffy coat. The patient's
spittle is at first thin, but afterward it becomes grosser, and is often
streaked with blood

REGIMEN. -- Nature endeavors to carry off this disease either by a critical
discharge of blood from the nose, etc. or by expectoration, sweat, loose
stools, thick urine, etc. When the violence of the fever is not broken by
these, or other evacuations, it often ends in an abscess o^ suppuration; to
which ensues an ulcer, mortification, and death.

THE violence of this disease may generally be checked by lessening the force
of the circulation, relaxing the vessels, diluting the humors, and promoting
expectoration, etc.

FOR these purposes, the diet, as in the former disease, must be cool, slender,
and diluting. The patient must avoid food that is viscid, hard of digestion, or
that affords much nourishment, as flesh, butter, cheese, eggs, milk, and also
every thing that is of a heating nature. His drink must be sweet whey, or
decoctions and infusions of the pectoral and balsamic vegetables.

TAKE a table spoonful of linseed, a quarter of an ounce of liquorice-root
sliced, and half an ounce of the leaves of coltsfoot. Put these ingredients in
a close vessel, pour on them a quart of boiling water, and let them stand near
a fire for eight or ten hours; afterward strain off the liquor; of which the
patient may take a cupful frequently for his ordinary drink.

BARLEY-WATER sweetened with honey, or sharpened with the jelly of currants, is
likewise a very proper drink in this disease. It is made by boiling an ounce of
pearl-barley in three English pints of water to two, which must afterward be
strained. The decoction of figs, raisins, and barley, etc. recommended in the
continual fever, p. 110. is here likewise very proper. These, and other
diluting liquors, are not to be drank in large quantities at a time; but the
patient ought, in a manner, keep continually sipping them, so as to render his
mouth and throat always moist. All his food and drink must be taken a little
warm.

THE patient should be kept quiet, cool, and every way easy, as directed under
the foregoing disease. His feet and hands ought daily to be bathed in warm
water; and he may sometimes ^it up in bed for a short space, in order to
relieve his head.

MEDICINE. -- Almost every person knows when a fever is attended with a violent
pain of the side, and a quick, hard pulse, that bleeding is necessary. When
these symptoms appear, the sooner this operation is performed the better; and
the quantity at first must be pretty large, provided the patient be able to
bear it. A large quantity of blood let at once, in the beginning of a pleurisy,
has a much greater effect than several repeated small bleedings. An adult
person may lose ten or twelve ounces of blood as soon as it is certainly known
that he is seized with a pleurisy. For a younger person, or one of a delicate
constitution, the quantity must be less.

IF after the first bleeding, the stitch, with the other violent symptoms,
should continue, it will be necessary, at the distance of twelve or eighteen
hours, to let eight or nine ounces more. If the symptoms do not then abate, and
the blood shows a strong buffy coat, a third or even a fourth bleeding may be
requisite. If the pain of the side abates, the pulse becomes softer, or the
patient begins to spit freely of a brown or reddish color, bleeding ought not
to be repeated. This operation is seldom necessary after the third or fourth
day of the fever, and ought not then to be performed without the advice of a
physician, unless in the most urgent circumstances.

THE blood may be many ways attenuated without letting it off. There are
likewise many things that may be done to ease the pain of the side besides
bleeding. Thus, after the first or second bleeding, emollient fomentations may
be applied to the part affected. These may be made by boiling a handful of the
flowers of elder, camomile, and common mallows, or any other soft vegetables,
in a proper quantity of water. The herbs may be either put into a bag, and
applied warm to the side, or flannels may be dipped in the decoction,
afterward wrung out, and applied to the part affected, with as much warmth as
the patient can easily bear. As the cloths grow cool, they must be changed, and
great care taken that the patient do not catch cold: An ox's bladder may be
half filled with warm milk and water, and applied to to the side, if the above
method of fomenting be found inconvenient. Fomentations not only ease the pain,
but by relaxing the vessels, prevent the stagnation of the blood and other
humors.

THE side may likewise be frequently rubbed with a little of the following
liniment. Take two table spoonfuls of the oil of sweet almonds, olives, or any
other sweet oil, and two tea spoonfuls of spirit of hartshorn: Shake them well
together, and rub about a tea spoonful upon the side, with a warm hand, three
or four times a day.

SOME recommend dry applications to the affected side, as burnt oats, toasted
bread, etc. But these, though they may be useful, are not so proper as moist
ones. Could it be properly conducted, we would recommend putting the patient
into a bath of warm milk and water, in which emollient vegetables had been
boiled; but as this cannot always be obtained, we shall recommend what is in
every person's power, viz. to apply soft poultices, or cataplasms to the part
affected. These may be made of wheat bread and milk, softened with oil or fresh
butter.

LEAVES of various plants might likewise be applied to the patient's side with
advantage. We have often seen, and even felt, the benefit of young cabbage
leaves applied warm to the side in a pleurisy. These not only relax, but
likewise draw off a little moisture, and may prevent the necessity of
blistering plasters; which, however, when other things fail, must be applied.

IF the stitch continues after repeated bleedings, fomentations, etc. a
blistering plaster must be laid upon the part affected, and suffered to remain
for two days. This not only procures a discharge from the side, but actually
thins the blood, and by that means assists in removing the cause of the disease.

TO prevent a stranguary when the blistering plaster is on, the patient may
drink freely of the following emulsion: take an ounce of sweet almonds
blanched, and beat them well in a mortar, with an equal quantity of fine sugar;
then dissolve half an ounce of gum arabic in an English quart of barley water
warm. Let it stand till cool, and afterward pour it by little and little upon
the almonds and sugar, continually rubbing them till the liquor becomes
uniformly white or milky. Afterward strain it, and let the patient use it for
ordinary drink. A quart bottle, at least, may be drank daily.

IF the patient be costive, a clyster of warm water, or of barley water, in
which a handful of mallows, or any other emollient vegetable, has been boiled,
may be daily administered. This will not only empty the bowels, but have the
effect of a warm fomentation applied to the inferior viscera, which will help
to make a derivation from the breast.

THE expectoration, or spitting, may be promoted by sharp, oily, and
mucilaginous medicines. For this purpose, an ounce of the oxymel or vinegar of
squills may be added to six ounces of the pectoral decoction, and two table
spoonfuls of it taken every two hours.

SHOULD the squill disagree with the stomach, two ounces of the oil of sweet
almonds, or oil of olives, and two ounces of the syrup of violets, may be mixed
with as much sugar candy powdered as will make an electuary of the consistence
of honey. The patient may take a little of this frequently, when the cough is
troublesome.

SHOULD oily medicines happen to prove nauseous, which is sometimes the case,
two drams of gum ammoniac may be dissolved in half an English pint of barley
water, in the following manner: The gum must be well rubbed in a mortar, and
the water gradually poured upon it till it be quite dissolved. Three or four
ounces of simple pennyroyal water may be added to the above quantity, and two
table spoonfuls of it taken three or four times a day.

IF the patient does not perspire, but has a burning heat upon his skin; and
passes very little water, some small doses of purified nitre and camphire will
be of use. Two drams of the former may be rubbed with five or six grains of the
latter in a mortar, and the whole divided into six doses, one of which may be
taken every five or six hours, in a little of the patient's ordinary drink.

BUT the best medicine, which some indeed reckon almost a specific in the
pleurisy, is the decoction of the Seneca rattlesnake root. Two ounces of the
root, grossly powdered, must be boiled in two English pints and an half of
water, till one half the water be consumed. It must not be boiled quickly, but
gradually simmered over a slow fire. After bleeding, and other evacuations have
been premised, the patient may take two, three, or four table spoonfuls of this
decoction, according as his stomach will bear it, three or four times a day. If
it should occasion vomiting, two or three ounces of simple cinnamon water, may
be mixed with the quantity of decoction above mentioned, or it may be taken in
smaller doses. As this medicine at once promotes perspiration, urine, and keeps
the belly easy, it bids the fairest of any thing yet known to answer all the
intentions of cure in a pleurisy, or any other inflammation of the breast.

NO one will imagine, that these medicines are all to be used at the same time.
We have mentioned different things, on purpose that people may have it in their
power to choose; and, likewise, that when one thing cannot be obtained, they
may make use of another. Different medicines are no doubt necessary in the
different periods of a disorder; and where one fails of success, or disagrees
with the patient, it will be proper to try another.

WHAT is called the crisis, or height of the fever, is sometimes attended with
very alarming symptoms; as difficulty of breathing, an irregular pulse,
convulsive motions, etc. These are apt to f^ight the attendants, and induce
them to do improper things, as bleeding the patient, giving him strong
stimulating medicines, or the like. But they are only the struggles of nature
to overcome the disease, in which she ought to be assisted by plenty of
diluting drink, which is then peculiarly necessary, as the febrile matter is
now ready to be discharged. If the patient's strength, however, be much
exhausted by the disease, it may be necessary, at this time, to support him
with frequent small draughts of wine whey, or the like.

WHEN the pain and fever are gone, it will be proper, after the patient has
gathered sufficient strength, to give him some gentle purges, as those directed
under the acute, continual fever, page 112. He ought likewise to use a light
diet, of easy digestion; and, his drink should be butter-milk, whey, and other
things of a cleansing nature.

THAT species of pleurisy, which is called the bastard, or spurious, generally
goes off by keeping warm for a few days, drinking plenty of diluting liquors,
and observing a proper regimen.

IT is known by a dry cough, a quick pulse, and a difficulty of lying on the
affected side, which last does not always happen in the true pleurisy.
Sometimes, indeed, this disease proves obstinate, and requires bleeding, with
cupping, and scarifications of the affected side. These, together with the use
of nitrous, and other cooling medicines, seldom fail to effect a cure.

THE paraphrenitis, or inflammation of the diaphragm, is so nearly connected
with the pleurisy, and resembles it so much in the manner of treatment, that it
is scarce necessary to consider it as a separate disease.

IT is attended with a very acute fever, and an extreme pain of the part
affected, which is generally augmented by coughing, sneezing, drawing in the
breath, taking food, going to stool, making water, etc. Hence the patient
breathes quick, and draws in his bowels to prevent the motion of the diaphragm,
is restless, anxious, has a dry cough, a hiccup, and often a delirium. A
convulsive laugh, or rather a kind of involuntary grin, is no uncommon symptom
of this disease.

EVERY method must be taken to prevent a suppuration, as it is impossible to
save the patient's life when that happens. The regimen and medicine are in all
respects the same as in the pleurisy. We shall only add, that in this disease
emollient clysters are peculiarly useful, as they relax the bowels, and by that
means draw the humors from the part affected.

OF A PERIPNEUMONY, OR INFLAMMATION OF THE LUNGS.
AS this disease affects an organ which is absolutely necessary to life, it
must always be attended with danger. Those who abound with thick blood, whose
fibers are tense and rigid, who seed upon gross aliment, and drink strong
viscid liquors, are most liable to this disease. It is generally fatal to
persons of a ^lat breast, or narrow chest, and to such as are afflicted with an
asthma, especially in the decline of life. Sometimes the inflammation reaches
to one lobe of the lungs only, at other times the whole of that organ is
affected; in which case the disease can hardly fail to prove fatal.

WHEN the disease proceeds from a viscid pituitous matter, obstructing the
vessels of the lungs, it is called a spurious or bastard peripneumony. When it
arises from a thin acrid de^^uction on the lungs, it is denominated a catarrhal
peripneumony, etc.

CAUSES. -- An inflammation of the lungs is sometimes a primary disease, and
sometimes it succeeds to other diseases, as a quinsy, a pleurisy, etc. It
arises from the same causes as pleurisy, viz. an obstructed perspiration from
cold, wet clothes, etc. or from an increased circulation of the blood by
violent exercise, the use of spiceries, ardent spirits, and such like. The
pleurisy and peripneumony are often complicated; in which case the disease is
called a pleuro-peripneumony.

SYMPTOMS. -- Most of the symptoms of a pleurisy, likewise attend an
inflammation of the lungs; only in the latter, the pulse is more soft, and the
pain less acute; but the difficulty of breathing, and oppression of the breast,
are generally greater.

REGIMEN. -- As the regimen and medicine are in all respects the same in the
true peripneumony as in the pleurisy, we shall not here repeat them, but refer
the reader to the treatment of that disease. It may not, however, be improper
to add, that the aliment ought to be more slender and thin in this than in any
other inflammatory disease. The learned Dr. Arbuthnot asserts, that even common
whey is sufficient to support the patient, and that decoctions of barley, and
infusions of fennel-roots in warm water with milk, are the most proper both for
drink and nourishment. He likewise recommends the steam of warm water taken in
by the breath, which serves as a kind of internal fomentation, and helps to
attenuate the impacted humors. If the patient has loose stools, but is not
weakened by them, they are not to be stopped, but rather promoted by the use of
emollient clysters.

IT has already been observed, that the spurious or bastard peripneumony is
occasioned by a viscid pituitous matter obstructing the vessels of the lungs.
It commonly attacks the old, infirm, and phlegmatic, in winter or wet seasons.

THE patient, at the beginning, is cold and hot by turns, has a small quick
pulse, feels a sense of weight upon his breast, breathes with difficulty, and
sometimes complains of a pain and giddiness of his head. His urine is commonly
pale, and his color very little changed.

THE diet in this, as well as in the true peripneumony, must be very slender,
as weak broths sharpened with the juice of orange or lemon, etc. His drink may
be thin water gruel sweetened with honey, or a decoction of fennel-root,
liquorice, and roots of quick grass. An ounce of each of those may be boiled in
three English pints of water to a quart, and sharpened with a little
cu^rant-jelly, or the like.

BLEEDING and purging are generally proper at the beginning of this disease;
but if the patient's spittle be pretty thick, or well concocted, neither of
them are necessary. It will be sufficient to assist the expectoration by some
of the soft balsamic medicines, recommended for that purpose in the pleurisy.
Blistering plasters have generally a good effect, and ought to be applied
pretty early. They may either be applied to the neck or ancles, or both, if
necessary.

IF the patient does not spit, he must be bled, if his strength will permit,
and have a gentle purge administered. Afterward his belly may be kept open by
clysters, and the expectoration promoted, by taking every four hours two table
spoonfuls of the solution of gum ammoniac, recommended in the pleurisy, page
117.

WHEN an inflammation of the breast does not yield to bleeding, blistering, and
the other means mentioned above, it commonly ends in a suppuration, which is
more or less dangerous, according to the part where it is situate. When this
happens in the pleura, it sometimes breaks outwardly, and the matter is
discharged by the wound.

SOMETIMES the suppuration happens within the substance or body of the lungs;
in which case the matter may be discharged by expectoration; but if the matter
floats in the cavity of the breast, between the pleura and the lungs, it can
only be discharged by an incision made betwixt the (...).

IF the patient's strength does not return after the inflammation is to all
appearance removed; if his pulse continues quick, though soft, his breathing
difficult and oppressed; if he has cold shiverings at times, his cheek*
flushed, his lips dry; and if he complains of thirst, and want of appetite;
there is reason to fear that a suppuration is going on, and that a phthisis or
consumption of the lungs will ensue. We shall therefore proceed to consider the
proper treatment of that disease.

OF CONSUMPTIONS.
A consumption is a wasting or decay of the whole body, from an ulcer,
tubercles, or concretion of the lungs; from an empyema, a nervous atrophy, etc.

DR. Arbuthnot observes, that in his time consumptions made up above one tenth
part of the bills of mortality about London. There is reason to believe, they
have rather increased since that time; and we know for certain, that they are
not less fatal in several other towns in England than in London.

YOUNG persons betwixt the age of fifteen and thirty, of a slender make, long
neck, high shoulders, and flat breasts, are most liable to this disease.

CONSUMPTIONS prevail more in England than in any other part of the world,
owing, perhaps, to the great use of animal food, and strong liquors, the
general application to sedentary employments, and the great quantity of
pit-coal which is there burnt; to which we may add, the perpetual changes in
the atmosphere, or variableness of the weather.

CAUSES. -- It has already been observed, that inflammations of the breast
often end in an imposthume: Consequently, whatever predisposes to those
diseases, must likewise be considered as a cause of consumptions.

MANY other diseases, by vitiating the humors, may likewise occasion
consumptions; as the scurvy, the scrophula or king's evil, the venereal
disease, the asthma, smallpox, measles, etc.

As this disease is seldom cured, it will be necessary to point out its causes
more particularly, in order that people may be the better enabled to avoid it.
These are:

-- WANT of exercise. Hence it comes to pass, that this disease is so common
amongst the inhabitants of great towns, who follow sedentary employments, and
likewise amongst the rich, who are not under the necessity of laboring for
their bread.

-- CONFINED or unwholesome air. Air which stagnates, or is Impregnated with
the fumes of metals or minerals, is extremely hurtful to the lungs, and often
corrodes the tender vessels of that necessary organ.

-- VIOLENT passions or affections of the mind; as grief, disappointment,
anxiety, or close application to the study of abstruse arts or sciences, etc.

-- EXCESSIVE evacuations; as sweating, diarrhoeas, diabetes, excessive venery,
the flour albus, an over-discharge of the menstrual flux, giving suck too long,
etc.

-- THE sudden stoppage of customary evacuations; (...) the bleeding piles,
sweating of the feet, bleeding of the nose, the menses, issues, ulcers, or
eruptions of any kind.

-- CHANGING suddenly from a hot to a very cold climate, or whatever greatly
lessens the perspiration.

-- FREQUENT and excessive debaucheries. Late watching, and drinking of strong
liquors, which generally go together, can hardly fail to destroy the lungs.
Hence the bon companion generally falls a sacrifice to this disease.

-- INFECTION. Consumptions are often caught by sleeping with the diseased; for
which reason this should be carefully avoided. It cannot be of great benefit to
the sick, and must hurt ^^ose in health.

-- OCCUPATIONS in life. Those artificers who sit much, and are constantly
leaning forward, or pressing upon their stomachs and breasts, as cutlers,
tailors, shoemakers, etc. often die of consumptions.

-- COLD. More consumptive patients date their disorders from wet feet, damp
beds, night air, wet clothes, and such like, than from all other causes.

SHARP, saline, and aromatic aliments, which heat and inflame the blood, are
likewise frequently the cause of consumptions.

WE shall only add, that this disease is often owing to an hereditary taint; in
which case, it is generally incurable.

SYMPTOMS. -- This disease generally begins with a dry cough, which often
continues for some months. If a disposition to vomit after eating be excited by
it, there is great reason to fear an approaching consumption. The patient
complains of a more than usual degree of heat, a pain and oppression of the
breast, especially after motion; his spittle is of a saltish taste, and
sometimes mixed with blood. He is apt to be sad; his appetite is bad, and his
thirst great. There is generally a sense of weight on the breast, with a quick,
soft, small pulse; though sometimes the pulse is pretty full, and rather hard.
These are the common symptoms of a beginning consumption.

AFTERWARD the patient begins to spit a greenish, white, or bloody matter. His
body is extenuated by the hectic fever and colliquative sweats, which mutually
succeed one another, viz. the one toward the night, and the other in the
morning. A looseness, and excessive discharge of urine, are often troublesome
symptoms at this time, and greatly weaken the patient. There is a burning heat
in the palms of the hands, and the face generally flushes after eating; the
fingers become remarkably small, the nails are bent inwards, and the hairs fall
off.

AT last, the swelling of the feet and legs, the total loss of strength, the
sinking of the eyes, the difficulty of swallowing, and the coldness of the
extremities, show the immediate approach of death, which, however, the patient
seldom believes to be so near. Such is the usual progress of this fatal
disease, which, if not early checked, commonly sets all medicine at defiance.

REGIMEN. -- On the first appearance of this disease, if the patient lives in a
large town, or any place where the air is confined, he ought immediately to
quit it, and to make choice of a situation in the country, where the air is
pure, dry and free. Here he must not remain inactive, but take every day as
much exercise as he can bear.

THE best method of taking exercise is to ride on horseback, as this gives the
body a great deal of motion without much fatigue. Such as cannot bear this kind
of exercise, must make use of a machine. A long journey, as it amuses the mind
by a continual change of objects, is greatly preferable to riding the same
ground over and over. Care, however, must be taken to avoid catching cold from
wet clothes, damp beds, or such like. At any rate, the patient must ride; his
life depends upon it; and it is almost an infallible remedy, if begun in time,
and duly persisted in.

IT is pity those who attend the sick seldom recommend riding in this disease,
till the patient is either unable to bear it, or the malady is become
incurable. Patients are always apt to trifle with every thing that is in their
own power. They cannot see how one of the common actions of life should prove a
remedy in an obstinate disease, and therefore they reject it, while they
greedily hunt after relief from medicine, merely because it is unknown.

THOSE who have strength and courage to undertake a pretty long voyage, may
expect great advantage from it. This has frequently cured a consumption after
the patient was thought to be in the last stage of that disease, and where
medicine had proved ineffectual. It is reasonable from hence to conclude, that
if a voyage were undertaken in due time, it would seldom ^^il to perform a cure.

SUCH as try this method of cure, ought to carry as much fresh provisions along
with them as will serve for the whole time they are at sea. As milk is not to
be obtained in this situation, they ought to live upon fruits and the broth of
chickens, or other young animals which can be kept alive on board. It is scarce
necessary to add, that such voyages should be undertaken, if possible, in the
mildest season, and that they ought to be toward a warmer climate.

THOSE who have not courage for a long voyage may travel into a more southern
climate, as the south of France, Spain, or Portugal; and if they find the air
of these countries agree with them, they should continue there, at least till
their health be confirmed.

NEXT to proper air and exercise, we would recommend a due attention to the
diet. The patient must eat nothing that is either heating or hard of digestion,
and his drink must be of a soft and cooling nature. All the diet must be
calculated to lessen the acrimony of the humors, and abate the rapid motion of
the blood. For this purpose the patient must keep strictly to the use of
vegetables and milk. Milk, alone, is of more value in this disease, than the
whole materia medica.

ASSES milk is generally reckoned preferable to any other; but it cannot always
be obtained; besides, it is generally taken as a medicine, whereas, to produce
any considerable effects, it ought, in a manner, to make the principal part of
the patient's food. It is hardly to be expected, that a gill or two of asses
milk, drank in the space of twenty-four hours, should be able to produce any
considerable change in the humors in a short time; but when people do not
perceive its effects soon, they lose hope, and so leave it off. Hence it comes
to pass, that this medicine, however valuable, very seldom performs a cure. The
reason is obvious; it is commonly used too late, is taken in too small
quantities, and is not duly persisted in.

I have known very extraordinary effects from asses milk in obstinate coughs,
which threatened a consumption of the lungs; and do verily believe, if used at
this period, that it would seldom fail; but if it be delayed till an ulcer is
formed, which is generally the case, how can it be expected to succeed?

ASSES milk ought to be drank, if possible, in its natural warmth, and in the
quantity of half an English pint at a time. Instead of taking this quantity
night and morning only, the patient ought to take it four times, or, at least,
thrice a day, and to eat a little light bread along with it, so as to make it a
kind of meal.

IF asses milk should happen to purge the patient, it may be mixed with old
conserve of roses, which is itself a valuable medicine in this disease. If that
cannot be obtained, the powder of crabs claws may be used in its stead. Asses
milk is usually ordered to be drank warm in bed; but as it generally throws the
patient into a sweat, when taken in this way, it would be proper to give it
after he rises.

SOME extraordinary cures in consumptive cases have been performed by breast
milk. Could this be obtained in sufficient quantity, we would recommend it
preferable to any other. It is better if the patient can suck it from the
breast than to drink it afterward. I knew a man who was reduced to such a
degree of weakness in a consumption, as not to be able to turn himself in bed.
His wife was that time giving suck, and the child happening to die, he sucked
her breasts, not with a view to reap any advantage from the milk, but to make
her easy. Finding himself however greatly benefited by it, he continued to suck
her till perfectly recovered, and is at present a strong and healthy man.

SOME prefer butter-milk to any other, and it certainly is a very valuable
medicine, if the stomach be able to bear it. It does not agree with every
person at first; and is therefore often laid aside without a sufficient trial.
It should at first be taken sparingly, and the quantity gradually increased,
until it comes to be almost the sole food. I never knew it succeed, unless
where the patient almost entirely lived upon it.

COWS milk is most readily obtained of any; and though it be not so easily
digested as that of asses or mares, it may be rendered lighter, by adding to it
an equal quantity of barley water, or allowing it to stand for some hours, and
afterward taking off the cream. If it should, notwithstanding, lie heavy on
the stomach, a table spoonful of rum or brandy, and a bit of loaf-sugar, may be
put into half an English pint.

IT is not to be wondered, that milk should, for some time, disagree with a
stomach that has not been accustomed to digest any thing but flesh and strong
liquors, which is the case of most of those who fall into consumptions. We do
not, however, advise those who have been accustomed to animal food and strong
liquors, to leave them off all at once. This might be dangerous. It will be
necessary for such to eat a little once a day of the flesh of some young
animal, or rather to use the broth made of chickens, veal, lamb, or such like.
They ought likewise to drink a little wine made into negas, or diluted with
twice or thrice its quantity of water, and to make it gradually weaker till
they can leave it off altogether.

THESE must be used only as preparatives to a diet consisting solely of milk
and vegetables, which the sooner the patient can be brought to bear, the
better. Rice and milk, or barley and milk boiled, with a little sugar, is very
proper food. Ripe fruits, roasted, baked, or boiled, are likewise proper; as
goose or currant-berry tarts, apples roasted, or boiled in milk, etc. The
jellies, conserves, and preserves. etc. of ripe subacid fruits, ought to be eat
plentifully, as the jelly of currants, conserve of roses, preserved plumbs,
cherries, etc.

WHOLESOME air, proper exercise, and a diet consisting solely of these and
other vegetables, with milk, is the only course that can be depended on in the
beginning of a consumption. If the patient has strength and sufficient
resolution to persist in this course, he will seldom be disappointed of a cure.

IN a populous town in England, where consumptions are very common, I have
frequently seen consumptive patients, who had been sent to the country with
orders to ride, and live upon milk and vegetables, return in a few months quite
plump, and free of any complaint. This, indeed, was not always the case,
especially when the disease was hereditary, or far advanced; but it was the
only method in which success was to be expected; where it failed, I never knew
medicine succeed.

IF the patient's strength and spirits flag, he must be supported by rich
broths, jellies, etc. Some recommend shellfish in this disorder, and we are
inclined to think with reason; they are very nourishing, at the same time that
they cool the blood, and blunt the acrimony of the humors. All the food and
drink ought to be taken in small quantities, lest an overcharge of fresh chyle
should oppress the lungs, and too much accelerate the circulation of the blood.

THE patient's mind ought to be kept as easy and cheerful as possible.
Consumptions are often occasioned by a melancholy cast of mind; for which
reason, music, cheerful company, and every thing that inspires mirth, are
highly beneficial. The patient ought seldom to be left alone, as brooding over
his calamities is sure to render them worse.

MEDICINE. -- Though we know no medicine that will cure a confirmed
consumption; yet the following things may be of service, in abating some of the
more violent symptoms.

IN the first stage of a consumption, the cough may sometimes be appeased by
bleeding; and expectoration promoted by the following medicines. Take fresh
squills, gum ammoniac, and powdered cardamum seeds, of each a quarter of an
ounce; beat them together in a mortar, and if the mass proves too hard for
pills, a little of any kind of syrup may be added to it. This may be formed
into pills of a moderate size, and four or five of them taken twice or thrice
a day, according as the patient's stomach will bear them.

THE lac ammoniacum, or milk of gum ammoniac, as it is called, is likewise a
proper medicine in this stage of the disease. It may be prepared and used, as
directed page 117.

A syrup made of equal parts of lemon juice, fine honey, and sugar candy, may
likewise be used. Four ounces of each of these may be simmered together in a
sauce-pan, over a slow fire, and a table spoonful of it taken at any time when
the cough is troublesome.

IT is common, in this stage of the disease, to load the patient's stomach with
balsamic medicines, and at the same time, to drench him with decoctions,
infusions, etc. of the pectoral vegetables. The former of these, instead of
removing the cause of the disease, tend rather to increase it, by heating the
blood, while the latter pall the appetite, relax the solids, and prove every
way hurtful to the patient. Whatever is used for removing the cough, besides,
riding, and other proper regimen, ought to be medicines of a sharp and
cleansing nature.

FOR the patient's drink, we would recommend infusions of the bitter plants, as
ground ivy, the lesser centaury, camomile flowers, or water trefoil. These
infusions may be drank at pleasure. They strengthen the stomach, promote
digestion, rectify the blood, and at the same time answer all the purposes of
dilution, and quench thirst much better than things that are luscious or sweet.

BUT if the patient spits blood, he ought to use the following decoction for
his ordinary drink. Take an ounce of comfrey root, of liquorice and
marsh-mallow roots, each half an ounce. Boil them in two English quarts of
water to one. If a tea spoonful of the acid elixir of vitriol be added to this
decoction, when cold, it will be a very proper medicine. A tea cupful of it may
be taken at pleasure.

THERE are many other mucilaginous plants and seeds, of a healing and
agglutinating nature, from which decoctions or infusions may be prepared with
the same intention; as the orches, the quince seed, coltsfoot, linseed,
sarsaparilla, etc. It is not necessary to mention the different forms in which
these may be used. Simple infusion, or boiling, is all that is necessary, and
the dose may be at discretion.

THE conserve of roses is here peculiarly proper. It may either be put into the
decoction above prescribed, or eat by itself. No benefit is to be expected from
trifling doses of this medicine. I never knew it of any service, unless where
three or four ounces at least were used daily. In this way I have seen it
produce very extraordinary effects, and would recommend it wherever there is a
discharge of blood from the lungs.

WHEN the spitting up of gross matter, oppression of the breast, and the hectic
symptoms show that an imposthume is formed in the lungs, we would recommend the
Jesuits bark, that being the only drug which has any chance to counteract the
tendency which the humors then have to putrefaction.

AN ounce of the bark, in powder, may be divided into eighteen or twenty doses,
of which one may be taken every three hours through the day, in a little syrup,
or a cup of the patient's ordinary drink.

IF the bark should happen to purge, it may be made into an electuary, with the
conserve of roses: thus; take old conserve of roses, a quarter of a pound;
Jesuits bark, in powder, an ounce; syrup of orange, or lemon, as much as will
make it of the consistence of honey. This quantity will serve the patient four
or five days, and may be repeated as there is occasion.

SUCH as cannot take the bark in substance, may infuse it in cold water. This
seems to be the best medium for extracting the virtues of that drug. Half an
ounce of bark, in powder, may be infused for twenty-four hours in half an
English pint of water. Afterward let it be passed through a fine strainer, and
an ordinary tea cupful of it taken three or four times a day.

WE would not recommend the bark while there are any symptoms of an
inflammation of the breast; but when it is certainly known, that matter is
collecting there, it is the only medicine upon which any stress can be laid.
Few patients have resolution enough to give the bark a fair trial, at this
period of the disease; otherwise, we have reason to believe, that great benefit
might be reaped from it.

WHEN it is evident, that there is an imposthume in the breast, and the matter
can neither be spit up, nor carried off by absorption, the patient must
endeavor to make it break inwardly, by drawing in the steams of warm water or
vinegar with his breath, coughing, laughing, or bawling aloud, etc. When it
happens to burst within the lungs, the matter may be discharged by the mouth.
Sometimes, indeed, the bursting of the vomica, occasions immediate death, by
suffocating the patient. When the quantity of matter is great, and the
patient's strength exhausted, this is apt to happen. At any rate, the patient
is ready to fall into a swoon, and should have volatile spirits, or salts, held
to the nose.

IF the matter discharged be thick, and the cough, and breathing, become
easier, there may be some hopes of a cure. The diet, at this time, ought to be
light, but restorative; as, small chicken broths, sago gruel, rice-milk, etc.
The drink, butter-milk, or whey, sweetened with honey. This is likewise a
proper time for using the Jesuits bark, which may be taken as before directed.

IF the vomica, or imposthume, should discharge itself into the cavity of the
breast, betwixt the pleura and the lungs, there is no way of getting the matter
out, but by an incision, as has already been observed. As this operation must
always be performed by a surgeon, it is not necessary for us to describe it. We
shall only observe, that it is not so dreadful as people are apt to imagine,
and that it is the only chance the patient has for his life. It is, indeed, a
pity that this operation, like most others, is generally delayed till too late.
When the whole mass of humors is tainted, the body wasted, and the strength
decayed, it is in vain to attempt to save the patient's life by an operation.

A NERVOUS CONSUMPTION, is a wasting, or decay of the whole body, without any
considerable degree of a fever, cough, or difficulty of breathing. It is
attended with indigestion, weakness, and want of appetite etc.

THOSE who are of a fretful temper, who indulge in spirituous liquors, or who
breathe an unwholesome air, are most liable to this disease.

WE would chiefly recommend, for the cure of a nervous consumption, a light and
nourishing diet; enough of exercise, in a free open air; and the use of such
bitters, as brace and strengthen the stomach; as, the Jesuits bark, gentian
root, camomile, etc. These may be infused in wine, and a glass of it drank
frequently.

IT will greatly assist the digestion, and promote the cure of this disease, to
take, twice a day, twenty or thirty drops of the elixir of vitriol in a glass
of wine or water.

THE chalybeate wine is likewise an excellent medicine in this case. It
strengthens the solids, and powerfully assists nature in the preparation of
good blood. It is made by putting three ounces of the filings of steel, or
iron, into a bottle of Rhenish wine, and allowing it to digest for three weeks,
frequently shaking the bottle. Afterward the wine must be filtered for use. A
table spoonful of it may be taken twice or thrice a day.

AGREEABLE amusements, cheerful company, and riding about, are, however,
preferable to all medicines in this disease. For this reason, when the patient
can afford it, we would recommend a long journey of pleasure, as the most
likely means to restore his health.

WHAT is called a symptomatic consumption cannot be cured without first
removing the disease by which it is occasioned. Thus, when a consumption
proceeds from the scrophula, or king's evil, from the scurvy, the asthma, the
venereal disease, etc. a due attention must be paid to the malady from whence
it arises, and the regimen and medicine directed accordingly.

WHEN excessive evacuations, of any kind, occasion a consumption, they must not
only be restrained; but the patient's strength must be restored by gentle
exercise, nourishing diet, and generous cordials, etc. Young and delicate
mothers, often fall into consumptions, by giving suck too long. As soon as they
perceive their strength and appetite begin to fail, they ought immediately to
wean the child, or give it to another nurse, otherwise they cannot expect a
cure.

BEFORE quitting this subject, we would earnestly recommend it to all who wish
to avoid consumptions, to take as much exercise without doors as they can; to
avoid unwholesome air, and to study sobriety. Consumptions owe their present
increase not a little to the fashionable mode of spending every evening over a
punch-bowl, or a bottle of wine. These liquors not only spoil the appetite, and
hurt the digestion, but heat and inflame the blood, and set the whole
constitution on fire.

THE SLOW OR NERVOUS FEVER.
NERVOUS fevers have increased greatly of late years in this island, owing,
doubtless, to the increase of luxury and sedentary employments; as this disease
commonly attacks persons of a weak relaxed habit, who neglect exercise, eat
little solid food, study hard, or indulge in spirituous liquors.

CAUSES. -- Nervous fevers are occasioned by whatever depresses the spirits, or
impoverishes the blood; as grief, fear and anxiety, want of sleep, intense
thought; living on poor watery diet, as unripe fruits, cucumbers, melons,
mushrooms, etc. They are likewise occasioned by damp, confined, or unwholesome
air. Hence they are very common in rainy seasons, and prove most fatal to those
who live in dirty, low houses, crowded streets, hospitals, jails, or such like
places.

PERSONS whose constitutions have been broken by excessive venery, frequent
salivations, too free an use of purgative medicines, or the like, are very
liable to this disease.

KEEPING on wet clothes, sleeping in the sun, lying on the damp ground,
excessive fatigue, and whatever obstructs the perspiration, or causes a
spasmodic stricture of the solids, may likewise occasion nervous fevers. We
shall only add, frequent and great irregularities in eating and drinking. Too
great abstinence, as well as excess, is hurtful. Nothing tends so much to
preserve the humors in a sound state as a regular diet; nor can any thing
contribute more to occasion fevers of the worst kind than its contrary.

SYMPTOMS. -- Low spirits, want of appetite, weakness, weariness after motion,
watchfulness, deep sighing, and dejection of mind, are generally the
forerunners of this disease. These are succeeded by a quick low pulse, a dry
tongue, without any considerable thirst, chillness and flushing in turns, etc.

AFTER some time, the patient complains of a giddiness and pain of his head,
has a nausea, with reachings and vomiting; his pulse is quick, and sometimes
intermitting; his urine pale, resembling dead small bear, and his breathing is
difficult, with oppression of the breast, and slight alienations of mind.

IF toward the ninth, tenth, or twelfth day, the tongue becomes more moist,
with a plentiful spitting, a gentle diarrhoea, or a moisture upon the skin; or
if a suppuration happens in one or both ears, or large pustules break out about
the lips and nose, there is reason to hope for a favorable crisis.

BUT, if there be an excessive looseness, or wasting sweats, with frequent
fainting fits; if the tongue, when put out, trembles excessively, and the
extremities feel cold, with a fluttering or slow creeping pulse; if there be a
starting of the tendons, an almost total loss of sight and hearing, and an
involuntary discharge by stool and urine, there is great reason to fear that
death is approaching.

REGIMEN. -- It is highly necessary in this disease to keep the patient easy
and quiet. The least motion will fatigue him, and will be apt to occasion
weariness, and even faintings. His mind likewise ought not only to be kept
easy, but soothed and comforted with the hopes of a speedy recovery. Nothing is
more hurtful in low fevers of this kind, than presenting to the patient's mind
gloomy or frightful ideas. These often occasion nervous fevers, and it is not
to be doubted but they will likewise increase the danger.

THE patient must not be kept too low. His strength and spirits ought to be
supported by nourishing diet and generous cordials. For this purpose, his
gruels, panadas, or whatever food he takes, must be strengthened with wine,
according as the symptoms may require. Pretty strong wine-whey, or small negas
sharpened with the juice of orange or lemon, will be proper for his drink.

WINE, in this disease, if it could be obtained genuine, would be almost the
only medicine that we should need. Good wine possesses all the virtues of the
cordial medicines, while it is free from many of their bad qualities. I say,
good wine; for, however common that article of luxury is now become, it is
rarely to be obtained genuine, especially by the poor, or such as purchase it
in small quantities.

I have seen a patient in a low nervous fever, whose pulse could hardly be
felt, with a constant delirium, coldness of the extremities, and almost every
other mortal symptom, recover by using, in whey, gruel, and negas, a bottle of
strong wine every day. Good wine is not only the most proper cordial, but seems
also to be an excellent antispasmodic medicine; and consequently it must be
highly proper in all diseases arising from a poor vapid state of the blood, and
too great a stricture of the solids.

MUSTARD whey is a very proper drink in this fever. It is made by tying in a
linen rag a table spoonful of common mustard bruised, and boiling it a little
in half an English pint of water, with an equal quantity of milk. Two or three
spoonfuls of wine may be added to it when boiling, to make the curd separate
more perfectly, and to render the whey more cordial. A tea cupful of this may
be given frequently for the patient's ordinary drink.

IN a word, the great aim in this disease is to support the patient's spirits,
by giving him frequently small quantities of the above, or other drinks of a
warm and cordial nature. He is not, however, to be overheated either with
liquor or clothes; and his food ought to be light, and given in small
quantities.

MEDICINE. -- Where a nausea, load, and sickness at stomach prevail at the
beginning of the fever, it will be necessary to give the patient a gentle
vomit. Fifteen or twenty grains of ipecacuanha will generally answer this
purpose very well. This may be repeated any time before the third or fourth
day, if the above symptoms continue. Vomits not only clean the stomach, but, by
the general shock which they give, promote the perspiration, and have many
other excellent effects in slow fevers, where there are no signs of
inflammation, and nature wants rousing.

SUCH as dare not venture upon a vomit, may clean the bowels by a small dose of
Turkey rhubarb, or an infusion of senna and manna.

IN all fevers, the great point is to regulate the symptoms, so as to prevent
their going to either extreme. Thus, in fevers of the inflammatory kind, where
the force of the circulation is too great, or the blood dense, and the fibers
too rigid, bleeding and other evacuations are necessary. But where nature
flags, where the blood is vapid and poor, and and the solids weak and relaxed,
there the lancet is to be avoided. Hence, bleeding is never to be permitted in
nervous fevers unless there be evident signs of an inflammation, which very
seldoms happens.

IT is the more necessary to caution people against bleeding in this disease,
as there is generally, at the beginning, an universal stricture upon the
vessels, which even to the patient himself often gives the idea of a plethora,
or too great a quantity of blood. I have known some of the profession deceived
by their own feelings in this respect, so far as to insist upon being bled,
when it was evident that the operation was improper.

I remember to have attended an apothecary in a nervous fever, who, at the
beginning, was so fully persuaded of the existence of a plethora, and the
necessity of bleeding, that when I objected to it, he told me he was so certain
of the necessity of that operation from his own feelings, that if it was not
performed he could not live; and that if no body else would bleed him, he was
determined to do it himself. He was accordingly bled, but was soon convinced of
his error. The blood showed no signs of inflammation, and he was so remarkably
worse after the operation, that he narrowly escaped with his life. His pulse
and spirits sunk exceedingly, so that he could hardly be supported by a bottle
of strong wine in the day, besides other cordial medicines.

THOUGH bleeding be improper in this disease, yet blistering is highly necessary.
Blistering plasters may be applied at all times of the fever with great
advantage; we would, however, advise people not to make too free with them at
the beginning, le^t there should be more occasion for them afterward. If the
patient be delirious, he ought to be blistered on the neck, and it will be the
safest course, while the fever continues; as soon as the discharge occasioned
by one plaster abates, to apply another some where else, and by that means keep
up a continual succession of them till the patient be out of danger.

I have been more sensible of the advantage of blistering in this disease, than
of any other medicine. It not only promotes the circulation by stimulating the
solids, but likewise occasions a continual discharge, which may, in some
measure, supply the want of critical evacuations, which seldom happen in this
kind of fever.

IF the patient be costive through the course of the disease, it will be
necessary to procure a stool, by giving him every other day a clyster of milk
and water, with a little sugar, to which may be added a spoonful of common
salt, if it be necessary.

SHOULD a violent looseness come on, it may be checked, by giving the patient
frequently a small quantity of Venice treacle, or any thing that will promote
the perspiration.

THOUGH blistering and cordial liquors are the only medicines to be depended on
in this kind of fever, yet, for those who may choose to use them, we shall
mention one or two of the forms of medicine which are commonly prescribed in it.

THUS, when the patient is low, ten grains of Virginian snakeroot, and the same
quantity of contrayerva root, with five grains of Russian castor, all in fine
powder, may be made into a bolus, with a little of the cordial confection or
syrup of saffron. One of these may be taken every four or five hours.

THE following powder may be used for the same intention. Take wild Valerian
root, in powder, one scruple; saffron and castor, each four grains. Mix these
by rubbing them together in a mortar, and give it in a cup of wine whey three
or four times a day.

IN desperate cases, where the hiccup and starting of the tendons have already
come on, we have sometimes seen extraordinary effects from large doses of musk
frequently exhibited. This is doubtless a great antispasmodic, and may be given
to the quantity of a scruple three or four times a day. Sometimes, it may be
proper to add to the musk a few grains of camphire, and salt of hartshorn, as
these tend to promote perspiration and urine. Thus, fifteen grains of musk,
with three grains of camphire, and six grains of salt of hartshorn, may be made
into a dose and given as above.

IF the fever should happen to intermit, which it frequently does toward the
decline, or if the patient's strength should be wasted with colliquative
sweats, it will be necessary to give him an infusion of the Jesuits bark, with
snakeroot, in wine or brandy.

HALF an ounce of the bark, with a dram of Virginian snakeroot, half a dram of
saffron, and half an ounce of orange-peel, all grossly powdered, may be infused
in half an English pint of brandy for three or four days. Afterward strain it,
and give the patient two tea spoonfuls in a glass of water, or small wine,
three or four times a day.

SUCH as don't choose spirits, may infuse the above ingredients in a bottle of
Lisbon wine, and take a glass of it frequently; this will restore the strength,
prevent a relapse, and help to carry off the remains of the fever.

IT will likewise be proper, at this time, to interpose now and then a gentle
dose of rhubarb, or some other mild opening medicine, taking care, at the same
time, to support the patient's strength with chicken-broth, jellies, and such
like.

OF THE MALIGNANT, PUTRID, OR SPOTTED FEVER.
THIS may be called the pestilential fever of Europe, as in many of its
symptoms it-bears a great resemblance to that dreadful disease.

PERSONS of a lax habit, a melancholy disposition, and those whose vigor has
been wasted by long fasting, watching, hard labor, excessive venery, or
frequent salivations, etc. are most liable to this disease.

CAUSES. -- This fever is occasioned by an unwholesome, putrid, or stagnating
air. Hence it prevails in jails, hospitals and infirmaries, especially where
such places are greatly crowded, and cleanliness is neglected.

A close constitution of the air, with long rainy or foggy weather, likewise
occasions putrid fevers. Hence they often succeed great inundations in low and
marshy countries, especially when these are preceded or followed by a hot and
sultry season.

LIVING too much upon animal food, without a proper mixture of vegetables, or
eating fish or flesh that has been kept too long, are likewise apt to occasion
this kind of fever. Hence, sailors on long voyages, and the inhabitants of
besieged cities, are very often visited with putrid fevers.

CORN that has been greatly damaged by rainy seasons, or long keeping, and
water that has become putrid by stagnation, will likewise occasion putrid
fevers. The excessive use of alkaline salts will also have this effect.

DEAD carcases tainting the air, especially in hot seasons, are very apt to
occasion putrid fevers. Hence this kind of fever often prevails in camps, and
such countries as are the scenes of war and bloodshed. This shows the necessity
of removing churchyards, slaughter-houses, etc. at a proper distance from
great towns.

WANT of cleanliness is a very general cause of putrid fevers. Hence they
prevail amongst the poor inhabitants of large towns, who breathe a confined,
unwholesome air, neglect cleanliness, and are forced to live upon spoiled or
unwholesome provisions, etc. Such mechanics as carry on dirty employments, and
are constantly confined within doors, are likewise very liable to putrid fevers.

WE shall only add, that all putrid, malignant, or spotted fevers, are very
infectious; and are, therefore, often communicated in this way. For which
reason, all persons ought to keep at a distance from such as are affected with
these diseases, unless those whose attendance is absolutely necessary.

SYMPTOMS. -- The malignant fever is generally preceded by a remarkable
weakness, or loss of strength, without any apparent cause. This is sometimes so
great, that the patient can scarce walk, or even sit upright, without being in
danger of fainting away. His mind too is greatly dejected; he sighs, and is
full of dreadful apprehensions.

THERE is a nausea, and sometimes vomiting of bile; a violent pain of the head,
with a strong pulsation, or throbbing of the temporal arteries; the eyes often
appear red and inflamed, with a pain at the bottom of the orbit; there is a
noise in the ears, the breathing is laborious, and often interrupted with a
sigh; the patient complains of a pain about the region of the stomach, and in
his back and ^oins; his tongue is at first white, but afterward it appears
black and chapped; and his teeth are covered with a black crust. He sometimes
passes worms both upwards and downwards, is affected with tremors, or shaking,
and often becomes delirious.

IF blood be let, it appears dissolved, or with a very small degree of
cohesion, and soon becomes putrid; the stools smell extremely foetid, and are
sometimes of a greenish, black, or reddish cast. Spots of a pale, purple, dun,
or black color, often appear upon the skin, and sometimes violent
haemorrhages, or discharges of blood from the mouth, eyes, nose, etc. happen.

PUTRID fevers may be distinguished from the inflammatory, by the smallness of
the pulse, the dejection of mind, the dissolved state of the blood, the
petechiae, or purple spots, and the putrid smell of the excrements. They may
likewise be distinguished from the low or nervous fever, by the heat and thirst
being greater, the urine of a higher color, and the other symptoms more
violent.

IT sometimes, however, happens, that the inflammatory, nervous, and putrid
symptoms, are so blended together, as to render it very difficult to determine
to which class the fever belongs. In this case, the greatest caution and skill
are requisite. All endeavors must be used to relieve the most urgent symptoms;
and the efforts of nature are carefully to be watched, in order that we may
give her what assistance we can in expelling the cause of the disease in her
own way.

INFLAMMATORY and nervous fevers are often converted into malignant and putrid,
by too hot a regimen, or improper medicines.

THE period of putrid fevers is extremely uncertain; sometimes they terminate
betwixt the seventh and fourteenth day, and at other times, they are prolonged
for five or six weeks. Their duration depends greatly upon the constitution of
the patient, and the manner of treating the disease.

THE most favorable symptoms are, after the fourth or fifth day, a gentle
looseness, with a warm, mild sweat. These, when continued for a considerable
time, often carry off the fever, and should never be imprudently stopped. Small
miliary pustules appearing between the petechiae, or purple spots, are likewise
favorable; as also, hot scabby eruptions about the mouth and nose. It is a
good sign when the pulse rises upon the use of wine, or other cordials, and the
nervous symptoms abate; deafness coming on toward the decline of the fever, is
likewise a favorable symptom, and so are abscesses in the groin, or parotid
glands.

AMONGST the unfavourable symptoms may be reckoned an excessive looseness, with
a hard swelled belly. Large black or livid blotches breaking out upon the skin,
are a proof of the putrid dissolution of the blood, and show the danger to be
very great. Aphthae in the mouth, and cold clammy sweats* are unfavourable
signs; as also, blindness, change of the voice, a wild staring of the eyes,
difficulty of swallowing, an inability to put out the tongue, and a constant
inclination to uncover the breast. When the sweat and saliva are tinged with
blood, and the urine is black, or deposites a black, sooty sediment, the
patient is in great danger. Starting of the tendons, and foetid, ichorous,
involuntary stools, attended with coldness of the extremities, are generally
the forerunners of death.

REGIMEN. -- In the management of this disease, we are to endeavor, as far as
possible, to counteract the putrid tendency of the humors; to support the
patient's strength and spirits; and to assist nature in expelling the morbific
matter, by gently promoting perspiration and the other evacuations.

IT has been observed, that putrid fevers are often occasioned by unwholesome
air, and, of course, they must be aggravated by it. Care must, therefore, be
taken to prevent the air from stagnating in the patient's chamber, to keep it
cool, and renew it frequently, by opening the doors or windows of some adjacent
apartment. The breath and perspiration of persons in perfect health, soon
render the air of a small apartment noxious; but this will sooner happen from
the perspiration and breath of a person whose whole mass of humors are in a
putrid state. These fevers are often so heightened by the same infected air
being breathed over and over, that the patient is, in a manner, suffocated by
his own atmosphere.

BESIDES the frequent admission of fresh air, we would recommend the use of
vinegar, verjuice, juice of lemon, Sevil orange, or any kind of vegetable acid
that can be most readily obtained. These ought frequently to be sprinkled upon
the floor, the bed, and every part of the room. They may also be evaporated
with an hot iron, or by boiling, etc. The fresh skins of lemons or oranges
ought likewise to be laid in different parts of the room, and they should be
frequently help to the patient's nose. The use of acids in this manner would
not only prove very refreshing to the patient, but would tend greatly to
prevent the infection from spreading among those who attend him. Strong smelled
herbs, as rue, tansy, rosemary, wormwood, etc. may likewise be laid in
different parts of the house, and smelled by those who go near the patient.

THE patient must not only be kept cool, but likewise quiet and easy. The least
noise will affect his head, and the smallest fatigue will be apt to make him
faint away.

NOTHING is of so great importance in this disease, as the liberal use of
acids. These are to be mixed with all the patient's food, as well as drink.
Orange, lemon, or vinegar whey, are all very proper, and may be drank in turns,
according to the patient's inclination. These may be rendered cordial, by the
addition of wine, in such quantity as the patient's strength seems to require.
When he is very low, he may drink negas, with only one half water, and
sharpened with the juice of orange or lemon. In some cases, a glass of clear
wine may now and then be allowed. The most proper wine is Rhenish; but if the
belly be open, red Port, or claret, is to be preferred.

WHEN the belly is bound, a tea spoonful of the cream of tartar may be put into
a cup of the patient's drink, as there is occasion; or he may eat a few
tamrinds, which will both quench his thirst, and keep his belly easy.

IF camomile tea will sit upon the stomach, it is a very proper drink in this
disease. It may be sharpened by adding to every cup of the tea fifteen or
twenty drops of the elixir of vitriol.

THE food must be light, as panada, groat-gruel, and such like; to these a
little wine may be added, if the patient be weak and low, and they ought all to
be sharpened with the juice of orange, or the jelly of currants, raspberries,
etc. The patient ought likewise to eat freely of ripe fruits, either baked,
roasted, or raw, as roasted apples, current, or gooseberry tarts, preserved
cherries, plumbs, and such like.

THE patient must never be long without nourishment. Taking a little food or
drink frequently, not only supports the spirits, but counteracts the putrid
tendency of the humors; for which reason, he ought constantly to be sipping
small quantities of some of the acid liquors mentioned above, or any that may
be more agreeable to his palate, or more readily obtained.

IF the patient be delirious, his feet and hands ought to be frequently
fomented with strong infusions of camomile flowers. This, or an infusion of the
bark, to such as can afford it, cannot fail to have a good effect. Fomentations
of this kind not only relieve the head, by relaxing the vessels in the
extremities, but as their contents are absorbed, and taken into the blood, they
must, by their antiseptic qualities, assist in preventing the putrescency of
the humors.

IF the patient be not able to put his feet and hands into the decoction,
cloths dipped in it may be applied to them.

MEDICINE. -- If a vomit be taken at the very beginning of this fever, it will
hardly fail to have a good effect; but if the fever has gone on for some days,
and the symptoms are violent, vomits must not be taken without proper advice.

BLEEDING is seldom necessary in putrid fevers. If there be signs of an
inflammation, it may sometimes be permitted at the first onset; but the
repetition of it often proves fatal.

BLISTERING plasters are never to be used unless in the greatest extremities.
If the petechiae, or spots, should suddenly disappear, the patient's pulse sink
remarkably, and a delirium, with other bad symptoms, come on, blistering may be
permitted. In this case, the blistering plasters are to be applied to the head,
and the insides of the legs or thighs. But as they are sometimes apt to
occasion a gangrene, we would rather recommend warm poultices or cataplasms to
be applied to the feet, having recourse to blisters only in the utmost
extremities.

A very ridiculous notion has long prevailed, of expelling the poisonous matter
of malignant diseases by strong doses of cordial or alexipharmic medicines. In
consequence of this notion, the contrayerva root, the cordial confection, and
the mithridate, etc. have been extolled as infallible remedies. There is reason
to believe, that these oftener do harm than good. Where cordials are necessary,
we know none that is superior to good wine; and therefore again recommend it
both as the safest and best. Wine, with other acid and antiseptic medicines,
are the only things to be relied on in the cure of malignant fevers.

WE have already recommended acids in various forms, and shall only add one
more, viz. camphorated vinegar. This is made, by rubbing a dram of camphor,
with a small quantity of spirits of wine in a mortar, till it becomes soft,
then adding half an ounce of loaf-sugar, and rubbing the whole together till
perfectly united. Afterward, take an English pint of warm vinegar, and add it
by little and little, still continuing the trituration, till they be uniformly
mixed. Let it stand to cool, and afterward strain it. This may be taken in the
dose of a table spoonful or two, every two or three hours, according as it
agrees with the stomach. If it should heat the patient, or occasion a nausea,
it must be discontinued.

IN the most dangerous species of this disease, when it is attended with
purple, livid, or black spots, the Jesuits bark is the only medicine that can
be depended upon. I have seen it, when joined with acids, almost perform
wonders, even in cases where the petechiae had the most threatening aspect.
But, to answer this purpose, it must not only be given in large doses, but duly
persisted in.

THE best method for administering the bark is certainly in substance. An ounce
of it, in powder, may be mixed with half an English pint of water, and the same
quantity of red wine, and sharpened with the elixir of spirit of vitriol, which
will both make it sit easier on the stomach, and render it more beneficial. Two
or three ounces of the syrup of lemon may be added, and two table spoonfuls of
the mixture taken every two hours, or oftener, if the stomach will bear it.

THOSE who cannot take the bark in substance may infuse it in wine, as
recommended in page 136.

IF there be a violent looseness, the bark must be boiled in red wine, with a
little cinnamon, and sharpened with the elixir of vitriol, as above. Nothing
can be more beneficial in this kind of looseness than plenty of acids, and such
things as promote the perspiration.

IF the patient be troubled with vomiting, a dram of the salt of wormwood
dissolved in an ounce and an half of fresh lemon juice, and made into a draught
with an ounce of simple cinnamon water, or peppermint water, and a bit of
sugar, may be given to the patient, and repeated as often as it is necessary.

IF swellings of the glands appear, there suppuration is to be promoted by the
application of poultices, ripening cataplasms, etc. And as soon as there is any
appearance of matter in them, they ought to be laid open, and the poultices
continued.

I have known patients, in the decline of this fever, have large ulcerous sores
break out in various parts of the body, of a livid gangrenous appearance, and a
most putrid cadaverous smell. These gradually healed, and the patient recovered
by the plentiful use of Jesuits bark mixed in wine, and sharpened with the
spirits of vitriol.

ALL who would avoid this dreadful disease, should study universal cleanliness,
and should live regularly, avoiding the extremes of too high or too low a diet
with equal care.

INFECTION, above all things, is to be avoided. No constitution is proof
against it. I have known persons seized with a putrid fever, by only making a
single visit to a patient in it; others have caught it by going through a town
where it prevailed; and some by attending the funerals of such as died of it.

ANY one who is apprehensive of having caught the infection, ought immediately
to take a vomit, and to work it off by drinking plentifully of camomile tea.
This may be repeated in a day or two, if the apprehensions still continue, or
any unfavourable symptoms appear.

THE person ought likewise to take an infusion of the bark and camomile flowers
for his ordinary drink; and, before he goes to bed, he may drink an English
pint of pretty strong negas, or a few glasses of generous wine. I have been
frequently obliged to follow this course when malignant fevers prevailed, and
have likewise recommended it to others with constant success.

PEOPLE generally fly to bleeding and purging as antidotes against infection;
but these are so far from securing them, that they often increase the danger.

PHYSICIANS, and such as attend the sick in putrid fevers, ought always to have
a piece of sponge, or a handkerchief dipped in vinegar, or juice of lemon, to
hold at their nose. They ought likewise to wash their hands, and, if possible,
to change their clothes, before they visit any other patient.

OF THE MILIARY FEVER.
THIS fever takes its name from the small pustules or bladders which appear on
the skin, resembling, in shape and size, the seeds of millet. The pustules are
either red or white, and sometimes both are mixed together.

SOMETIMES the whole body is covered with pustules; but they are generally more
numerous where the sweat is most abundant, as on the breast, the back, etc. A
gentle sweat, or moisture on the skin, greatly promotes the eruption; but where
the skin is dry, the eruption is both more painful and dangerous.

SOMETIMES this is a primary disease; but it is much oftener only a symptom of
some other malady, as the smallpox, measles, ardent, putrid, or nervous fever,
etc. In all these cases it is generally the effect of too hot a regimen or
medicines.

THE miliary fever chiefly attacks the idle and the phlegmatic, or persons of a
relaxed habit. The young and the aged are more liable to it than those in the
vigor and prime of life. It is likewise more incident to women than men,
especially the delicate, and the indolent, who, neglecting exercise, keep
continually within doors, and live upon weak, watery diet. Such females are
extremely liable to be seized with this disease in childbed, and often lose
their lives by it.

CAUSES. -- The miliary fever is often occasioned by violent passions or
affections of the mind; as excessive grief, anxiety, thoughtfulness, etc. It
may likewise be occasioned by excessive watching, great evacuations, a weak,
watery diet, rainy seasons, eating too freely of cold, watery, unripe fruits,
as plumbs, cherries, cucumbers, melons, etc. Impure waters, or provisions which
have been spoiled by rainy seasons, long keeping, etc. may likewise cause
miliary fevers. They may also be occasioned by the stoppage of any customary
evacuation, as issues, setons, ulcers, the bleeding piles in men, or the
menstrual flux in women, etc.

THIS disease in childbed women i^ sometimes the effect of great costiveness
during pregnancy; sometimes it is occasioned by their excessive use of green,
unripe fruits, and other unwholesome things, in which pregnant women are too
apt to indulge. But its most general cause is indolence. Such women as indulge
an easy, sedentary life, during pregnancy, and, at the same time, live gross
and full, can hardly escape this disease in childbed. Hence it proves extremely
fatal to women of fashion, and likewise to those women in manufacturing towns,
who, in order to assist their husbands, sit close, within doors, for almost the
whole of their time. But, among women who are active and laborious, who live in
the country, and take enough of exercise without doors, this disease is very
little known.

SYMPTOMS. -- When this is a primary disease, it makes its attack, like most
other eruptive fevers, with a slight shivering, which is succeeded by heat,
loss of strength, faintishness, sighing, a low quick pulse, difficulty of
breathing, with great anxiety and oppression of the breast. The patient is
restless, and sometimes delirious; the tongue appears white, and the hands
shake, with often a burning heat in the palms; and, in childbed women, the milk
generally goes away, and the other discharges stop.

THE patient feels an itching or pricking pain under the skin, after which
innumerable small pustules of a red or white color* begin to appear. Upon this
the symptoms generally abate, the pulse becomes more full and soft, the skin
grows moister, and the sweat, as the disease advances, begins to have a
peculiar foetid smell; the great load on the breast, and oppression of the
spirits, generally go off, and the customary evacuations gradually return.
About the sixth or seventh day from the eruption, the pustules begin to dry and
fall off, which occasions a very disagreeable itching in the skin.

IT is impossible to ascertain the exact time when the pustules will either
appear or go off. They generally come out on the third or fourth day, when the
eruption is critical; but, when symptomatical, they may appear at any time of
the disease.

SOMETIMES the pustules appear, and vanish, by turns. When that is the case,
there is always danger; but when they strike in, all of a sudden, and do not
appear again, the danger is very great.

IN childbed women, the pustules are commonly at first filled with clear water,
afterward they grow yellowish. Sometimes they are interspersed with pustules
of a red color. When these only appear, the disease goes by the name of a rash.

REGIMEN. -- In all eruptive fevers, of whatever kind, the chief point is to
prevent the sudden striking in of the pustules. For this purpose, the patient
must be kept in such a temperature, as neither to push out the eruption too
fast, nor cause it to retreat prematurely. The diet and drink ought therefore
to be in a moderate degree, nourishing and cordial; but neither strong nor
heating. The patient's chamber ought neither to be kept too hot nor too cold;
and he should not be too much covered with clothes. Above all, the mind is to
be kept easy and cheerful. Nothing so certainly makes an eruption strike in, as
fear, or the apprehension of danger.

THE food must be weak chicken broth, with bread, water pap, with sago, and
groat gruel, etc. to a gill of which may be added a spoonful or two of wine, as
the patient's strength requires, with a few grains of salt and a little sugar.
Good apples, roasted or boiled, with other ripe fruits, of an opening, cooling
nature, may be eat.

THE drink must be suited to the state of the patient's strength and spirits.
If these be pretty high, the drink ought to be weak; as water gruel, balm tea,
or the following decoction:

TAKE two ounces of the shavings of hartshorn, and the same quantity of
sarsaparilla, boil them in two English quarts of water. To the strained
decoction add a little white sugar, and let the patient take it for his
ordinary drink.

WHEN the patient's spirits are low, and the eruption does not rise
sufficiently, his drink must be a little more generous; as wine whey, or small
negas, sharpened with the juice of orange or lemon, and made stronger or
weaker, as the circumstances may require.

SOMETIMES the miliary fever approaches toward a putrid nature; in which case
the patient's strength must be supported with generous cordials, joined with
acids; and if the degree of putrescency be great, the Jesuits bark must be
administered. If the head be much affected, the belly must be kept open by
emollient clysters.

IN the Commercium Literarium for the year 1735, we have the the history of an
epidemical miliary fever, which reged at Strasburg in the months of November,
December, and January; from which we learn the necessity of a temperate regimen
in this disease, and likewise that physicians are not always the first who
discover the proper treatment of diseases. "This fever made terrible havoc
among men of robust constitutions, and all medicine proved in vain. They were
seized in an instant with shivering, yawning, stretching, and pains in the
back, succeeded by a most intense heat; at the same time, there was a great
loss of strength and appetite. On the seventh or ninth day the miliary
eruptions appeared, or spots like flea-bites, with great anxiety, a delirium,
restlessness, and tossing in bed. Bleeding was fatal. While matters were in
this unhappy situation, a midwife, of her own accord, gave to a patient, in the
height of the disease, a clyster of rainwater and butter, without salt, and
for his ordinary drink a quart of spring water, half a pint of generous wine,
the juice of one lemon, and six ounces of the whitest sugar, gently boiled till
a scum arose, and this with great success; for the belly was soon loosened, the
grievous symptoms vanished, and the patient was restored to his senses, and
snatched from the jaws of death." This practice was imitated by others with the
like happy effects.

MEDICINE. -- If the food and drink be properly regulated, there will be little
occasion for medicine in this disease. Should the eruption, however, not rise,
or the spirits flag, it will be necessary to support the patient with cordials,
and to apply blisters. The most proper cordial, in this case, is good wine,
which may either be taken in the patient's food or drink; and if there be any
signs of putrescency, which frequently happens, the bark and acids may be mixed
with wine, as directed in the putrid fever.

SOME recommend blisters through the whole course of the disease; and where
nature flags, and the eruption comes and goes, it may be necessary to keep up a
stimulus, by a continual succession of small blisters; but we would not
recommend above one at a time. If, however, the pulse should sink remarkably,
the pustules strike in, and the head be affected, it will be necessary to apply
several blistering plasters to the most sensible parts, as the inside of the
legs and thighs, etc.

BLEEDING is seldom necessary in this disease, and sometimes it does much hurt,
as it weakens the patient, and depresses his spirits. It is, therefore, never
to be attempted unless by the advice of a physician. We mention this, because
it has been customary to treat this disease in childbed women by bleeding, and
other evacuations, as if it were highly inflammatory. But this practice is
generally very unsafe. Patients, in this situation, bear evacuations very ill.
And, indeed, the disease seems often to be more of a putrid than an
inflammatory nature.

THOUGH this fever be often occasioned in childbed women by too hot a regimen,
yet it would be dangerous to leave that off all of a sudden, and have recourse
to a very cool regimen, and large evacuations. We have reason to believe, that
supporting the patient's spirits, and promoting the natural evacuations, is
here much safer than to have recourse to artificial ones, as every thing that
tends to depress the patient's spirits constantly increases the danger.

IF this disease proves tedious, or the recovery slow, we would recommend the
Jesuits bark, which may either be taken in substance, or infused in wine or
water, as the patient inclines.

THE miliary fever, like other eruptive diseases, after it is gone, requires
purging, which should not be neglected as soon as the patient's strength will
permit.

To avoid this disease, a pure dry air, plenty of exercise and wholesome food,
are necessary. Pregnant women should guard against costiveness, and take daily
as much exercise as they can bear, avoiding all green trashy fruits, and other
unwholesome things; and when in childbed, they ought strictly to observe a cool
regimen.

OF THE SMALLPOX.
THIS disease is so general, that very few escape it at one time of life or
another. It is the most contagious malady in these parts; and has, for upwards
of a thousand years, proved the scourge of Europe.

THE smallpox generally appear toward the spring. They are very frequent in
summer, less so in autumn, and least of all in winter. Children are most liable
to this disease; and those whose food is unwholesome, who want proper exercise,
and abound with gross humors, run the greatest hazard from it.

THE disease is distinguished into the distinct and confluent kind; the latter
of which is always attended with danger. There are likewise other distinctions
of the smallpox; as the lymphatic, the crystalline, the bloody, etc.

CAUSES. -- The smallpox are commonly caught by infection. Since the disease
was brought into Europe, the infection has never been wholely extinguished; nor
have any proper methods, so far as we know, ever been taken for that purpose;
so that now it has become in a manner constitutional. Children who have
overheated themselves by running, wrestling, etc. or adults after a debauch,
are very apt to be seized with this disease.

SYMPTOMS. -- This disease is so generally known, that a minute description of
it is unnecessary. Children commonly look a little dull, seem listless and
drowsy for a few days before the more violent symptoms of the smallpox appear.
They are likewise more inclined to drink than usual, have little appetite for
solid food, complain of weariness, and, upon taking exercise, are apt to sweat.
These are succeeded by slight fits of cold and heat in turns, which, as the
time of the eruption approaches, become more violent, and are accompanied with
pains of the head and loins, vomiting, etc. The pulse is quick, with a great
heat of the skin, and restlessness. When the patient drops asleep, he wakes in
a kind of horror, with a sudden start, which is a very common symptom of the
approaching eruption; as are also convulsion fits in very young children.

ABOUT the third or fourth day from the time of sickening, the smallpox
generally begin to appear; sometimes, indeed, they appear sooner, but that is
no advantage. At first they very nearly resemble flea-bites, and are most early
discovered on the face, arms and breast.

THE most favorable symptoms are a slow eruption, and an abatement of the
fever as soon as the pustules appear. In a mild distinct kind of smallpox, the
pustules seldom appear before the fourth day from the time of sickening, and
they generally keep coming out gradually for several days after. Pustules,
which are distinct, with a florid red basis, and which fill with thick purulent
matter, first of a whitish, and afterward of a yellowish color, are the best.

A livid brown color of the pustules is an unfavourable symptom; as also, when
they are small and flat, with black specks in the middle. Pustules which
contain a thin watery ichor are very bad. A great number of pox on the face is
always a bad sign, especially if they be confluent, or run into one another.

BUT the most unfavourable symptom is the petechiae, or purple, brown and black
spots interspersed among the pustules. These are signs of a putrid dissolution
of the blood, and show the danger to be very great. Bloody stools or urine,
with a swelled belly, are bad symptoms; as is also, a continual strangury. When
the urine is very pale, and there is a violent throbbing of the arteries of the
neck, it portends a delirium or convulsion fits. When the face does not swell,
or falls before the pox come to maturity, it is a very bad sign. If the face
begins to fall about the eleventh or twelfth day, and the hands begin to swell,
and afterward the feet, the patient generally does well; but when these do not
succeed, there is reason to apprehend danger. When the tongue is covered with a
brown crust, it is an unfavourable symptom. Cold shivering fits coming on at
the height of the disease, are likewise unfavourable. Grinding of the teeth,
when it proceeds from an affection of the nervous system, is a bad sign; but,
sometimes, it is occasioned by worms, or a disordered stomach.

REGIMEN. -- When the first symptoms of the smallpox appear, people are ready
to be alarmed, and often fly to the use of medicine, to the great danger of the
patient's life. I have known children, to appease the anxiety of their parents,
bled, blistered, purged, and vomited, during the fever which preceded the
eruption of the smallpox, to such a degree, that nature was not only disturbed
in her operation, but rendered unable to support the pustules after they were
out; so that the patient, exhausted by mere evacuations, sunk under the disease.

WHEN convulsions appear, they give a dreadful alarm. Immediately some nostrum
is applied, as if this were a primary disease; whereas, it is only a symptom,
and far from being an unfavourable one, of the approaching eruption. As the
fits generally go off before the actual appearance of the smallpox, it is
attributed to the medicine, which, by this means, acquires a reputation without
any merit.

ALL that is, generally speaking, necessary during the eruptive fever, is to
keep the patient within doors, and to allow him to drink freely of some weak
diluting liquors; as balm tea, barley water, clear whey, gruels, etc. He should
neither be kept in too warm a room, nor confined to bed; but should sit up as
much as he is able, and should have his feet and legs frequently bathed in
lukewarm water. His food, if he takes any, ought to be very light; and he
should be as little disturbed with noise and company as possible.

MUCH mischief is done at this period by confining the patient too soon to his
bed, and plying him with warm cordials, or sudorific medicines. Every thing
that heats and inflames the blood, increases the fever, and pushes out the
pustules too fast. This has numberless ill effects. It not only increases the
number of pustules, but likewise tends to make them run into one another; and
when they have been pushed out with too great violence, they generally fall in
before they come to maturity.

THE good women, as soon as they see the smallpox begin to appear, commonly
ply their tender charge with cordials, saffron or marygold teas, wines, punch,
and even brandy itself. All these are given with a view to throw out the
eruption, as they pretend, from the heart. This, like most other popular
mistakes, is the abuse of a very just observation, That when there is a
moisture on the skin, the pox rise better, and the patient is easier than when
it continues dry and parched. But that is no reason for forcing the patient
into a sweat. Sweating never relieves, unless where it comes spontaneously, or
is the effect of drinking weak diluting liquors.

THE patient ought to have no more covering in bed than is necessary to prevent
his catching cold, and he should be frequently taken up, if it were only for a
few minutes; this will both keep him cool, and prevent too great a flux of
blood toward the head.

CHILDREN are often so peevish that they will not lie a-bed without a nurse
constantly by them. This, we have reason to believe, has many bad effects. Even
the natural heat of the nurse cannot fail to augment the fever of the child;
but if she too proves feverish, the danger must be increased. I have known a
nurse contract a malignant fever, by lying in bed with a child the whole time
of its being ill of a bad kind of smallpox.

LAYING several children who have the smallpox in the same bed, has many ill
consequences. They ought, if possible, never to be in the same chamber, as the
perspiration, the heat, and the smell, etc. all tend to augment the fever, and
to heighten the disease. It is common, among the poor, to see two or three
children lying in the same bed, with such a load of pustules, that their very
skins stick together. One can hardly view a scene of this kind without being
sickened by the sight and smell. How much more must these affect the poor
patients, many of whom perish by this usage?

THIS observation is likewise applicable to hospitals, workhouses, etc. where
numbers of children happen to have the smallpox at the same time. I have seen
above forty children cooped up in one apartment all the while they had this
disease, without any of them being admitted to breathe the fresh air. No one
can be at a loss to see the impropriety of such conduct, which generally
proceeds from a piece of ill-judged economy, to save the trifling expense of a
few nurses. It ought to be a rule, not only in hospitals for the smallpox, but
likewise for other diseases, that no patient should be within sight or hearing
of another. This is a matter to which too little regard is paid in most
hospitals and infirmaries, where the sick, the dying, and the dead are often to
be seen in the same apartment.

A very dirty custom prevails amongst the lower sort of people, of allowing
children in the smallpox to keep on the same linen during the whole period of
that loathsome disease. This is done lest they should catch cold, but it has
many ill consequences. The linen becomes hard, by the moisture which it
absorbs, and frets the tender skin. It likewise occasions a bad smell, which is
very pernicious both to the patient, and those about him; besides the filth and
sordes, which adhere to the linen, being absorbed, or taken up again into the
body, greatly augment the disease.

A patient should not be kept dirty in any disease, especially in the
smallpox. Cutaneous disorders are often occasioned by nastiness alone, and are
always increased by it. Were the patient's linen to be changed every day, it
would greatly refresh him. Care, indeed, is to be taken that the linen be
thoroughly dry. It ought, likewise, to be warmed, and put on when the patient
is most cool.

SO strong is the vulgar prejudice in this country, notwithstanding all that
has been said against keeping children too warm in the smallpox, that numbers
still fall a sacrifice to that error. I have seen poor women traveling in the
depth of winter, and carrying their children along with them in the smallpox;
and have frequently observed others begging by the way-side, with infants in
their arms, covered with the pustules; yet I could never learn that one of
these children died by this sort of treatment. We would not, however, propose
this as an example worthy of imitation; we only mention it to show, that the
danger of exposing children to the open air in this disease is not so great as
people are apt to imagine.

STRONG prejudices, when got over, often produce the opposite extreme. We
would, therefore, advise people, when they avoid one error, not to run into
another. Some celebrated inoculators order their patients to walk about all the
while they are under the disease, as if nothing were the matter. We should
think it advisable, however, to keep within doors, at least during the
eruption, as cold air is apt to check the perspiration, and to prevent the pox
from rising, or filling with matter. I do not remember ever to have seen large,
well-filled pustules where the patient was exposed to the external air. In
winter the air of this country is abundantly cool within doo^s, and in summer a
patient may be kept more uniformly cool in the house than he can be out of it.
For these, and other reasons, we should think it right to confine the patient
to the house while the eruption is out; but never to allow the heat of his
chamber to be greater than is agreeable to a person in perfect health.

THE food in this disease ought to be very light, and of a cooling nature, as
water pap, rice, or bread, boiled with milk, good apples, roasted, or boiled
with milk, and sweetened with a little sugar, or such like.

THE drink may be equal parts of milk and water, clear sweet whey, barley
water, or thin gruel, etc. After the pox are full, butter-milk is an excellent
drink, it being of an opening and cleansing nature.

MEDICINE. -- This disease is generally divided into four different periods,
viz. the fever which precedes the eruption, the eruption itself, the
suppuration, or maturation of the pustules, and the secondary fever.

IT has already been observed, that little more is necessary during the primary
fever, than to keep the patient cool and quiet, allowing him to drink diluting
liquors, and bathing his feet frequently in warm water. Though this be
generally the safest course that can be taken with infants, yet adults of a
strong constitution and plethoric habit sometimes require bleeding. When a
pulse, a dry skin, and other symptoms of inflammation, render this operation
necessary, it ought to be performed. But, unless these symptoms are urgent, it
is safer to trust to fomentations; and, if the belly be bound, emollient
clysters may be thrown in.

IF there be a great nausea or vomiting, weak camomile tea, or lukewarm water,
may be drank, in order to clean the stomach. At the beginning of a fever,
nature generally attempts a discharge, either upwards or downwards; which, if
promoted by gentle means, would tend greatly to abate the force or violence of
the disease.

THOUGH every method is to be taken during the primary fever, by a cool
regimen, etc. to prevent too great an eruption; yet, after the pustules have
made their appearance, our business is to promote the suppuration, by gentle
warmth, diluting drink, light food, and, if nature seems to flag, by generous
cordials; but the latter ought never to be given unless where there is an
absolute necessity. When a low, creeping pulse, faintishness, and great loss of
strength, render cordials necessary, we would recommend good wine, which may be
made into negas, with an equal quantity of water, and sharpened with the juice
of orange, the jelly of currants, or the like. Wine whey, sharpened as above,
is likewise a proper drink in this case; great care, however, must be taken not
to overheat the patient by any of these things. This would retard instead of
promoting the eruption.

SOMETIMES the rising of the smallpox is prevented by the violence of the
fever; in which case, the cool regimen is strictly to be observed. For example,
the patient's chamber must be kept cool; he ought likewise frequently to be
taken out of bed, and to be lightly covered with clothes while in it.

EXCESSIVE restlessness often prevents the rising and filling of the smallpox.
When that happens, gentle opiates are necessary. These, however, ought always
to be administered with the greatest caution. To an infant, a tea spoonful of
the syrup of poppies may be given every five or six hours, till it has the
desired effect. An adult person will require a table spoonful in order to
answer the same purpose; and to others, the dose must be proportioned to their
age, and the violence of the symptoms.

IF the patient be troubled with a strangury, or suppression of urine, which
often happens in the smallpox, he should be frequently taken out of bed, and,
if he be able, should walk across the room with his feet bare. When he cannot
do this, he may be frequently set on his knees in bed, and should endeavor to
pass his urine as often as he can. When these do not succeed, a tea spoonful of
the sweet spirits of nitre may be occasionally mixed in his drink. Nothing more
certainly relieves the patient, or is more beneficial in the smallpox, than a
plentiful discharge of urine.

IF the mouth be foul, and the tongue dry and chapped, it ought to be
frequently washed, and the throat gargled with warm water and honey, sharpened
with a little vinegar or current jelly.

DURING the rising of the smallpox, it frequently happens that the patient is
eight or ten days without a stool. This not only tends to heat and inflame the
blood, but the foeces, by lodging so long in the body, become acrid and even
putrid, from whence bad consequences must ensue. It will therefore be proper,
when the belly is bound, to throw in an emollient clyster every second or third
day, through the whole course of the disease. This will greatly cool and
relieve the patient.

WHEN petechiae, or purple, black, or livid spots appear among the smallpox,
the Jesuits bark must immediately be administered in as large doses as the
patient's stomach can ^ear. For a child, two drams of the bark in powder may be
mixed in three ounces of common water, one ounce of simple cinnamon water, and
two ounces of the syrup of orange or lemon. This may be sharpened with the
spirits of vitriol, and a table spoonful of it given every hour. If it be given
to an adult in the same form, he may take at least three or four spoonfuls
every hour. This medicine ought not to be trifled with, but must be thrown in
as fast as the stomach can bear; in which case it will often produce very happy
effects. I have frequently seen the petechiae disappear, and smallpox, which
had a very threatening aspect, rise and fill with laudable matter, by the use
of the Jesuits bark and acids.

THE patient's drink ought likewise, in this case, to be acidulated with the
spirits of vitriol, vinegar, juice of lemon, jelly of currants, or such like.
His food must consist of apples, roasted or boiled, preserved cherries, plumbs
and other sharp fruits.

CAMOMILE tea, if the patient's stomach will bear it, is likewise a very proper
drink in this case. It may be sharpened with any of the acids mentioned above,
and drank at pleasure. When the pulse and spirits are low, red wine negas, or
pretty strong wine whey, sharpened with the juice of lemon, must be given for
the patient's ordinary drink.

THE bark and acids are not only necessary when the petechiae or putrid
symptoms appear, but likewise in the lymphatic or crystalline smallpox, where
the matter is thin, and not duly prepared. The Jesuits bark seems possessed of
a singular power to assist nature in preparing laudable pus, or what is called
good matter; consequently it must be very beneficial, both in this and other
diseases whose crisis depends on a suppuration. I have often observed, where
the smallpox were flat, and the matter contained in them quite clear and
transparent, and where they had the appearance of running into one another,
that the use of a few drams of the Jesuits bark, acidulated as above, not only
promoted the suppuration, but changed the color and consistence of the matter,
and produced the most happy effects.

WHEN the eruption subsides suddenly, or, as the good women term it, when the
smallpox strike in, before they have arrived at maturity, the danger is very
great. This is often the effect of a hot regimen, or medicines which at the
beginning push out the matter before it has been properly prepared. When this
happens, blistering plasters must be immediately applied to the wrists and
ancles, and the patient's spirits supported with cordials.

SOMETIMES bleeding has a surprising effect in raising the pustules after they
have subsided; but it requires skill to know when this is proper, or to what
length the patient can bear it. Sharp cataplasms, however, may be applied to
the feet and hands, as they tend to promote the swelling of these parts, and by
that means to draw the humor toward the extremities.

THE most dangerous period of the disease is what we call the secondary ^ever.
This generally c^mes on when the smallpox begin to turn on the face; and most
of those who die of the smallpox are carried off by this fever.

NATURE generally attempts, at the turn of the smallpox to relieve the patient
by loose stools. Her endeavors this way, are by no means to be counteracted,
but promoted, and the patient at the same time supported by things of a light
but nourishing nature. Patients have often been remarkably relieved at this
time by a few loose stools, either brought on by nature or procured by art.
That should encourage us to endeavor to assist nature in this way, especially
if the symptoms be threatening, and the belly continues bound.

IF at the approach of the secondary fever, the pulse be very quick, hard, and
strong, the heat intense, and the breathing laborious, with other symptoms of
an inflammation of the breast, the patient must immediately be bled, otherwise
a fatal peripneumony will ensue. The quantity of blood to be let must be
regulated by the patient's strength, age, and the urgency of the symptoms.

BUT, in the secondary fever, if the patient be faintish, the pustules become
pale and shrink, and if there be great coldness of the extremities, blistering
plasters must be applied, and the patient must be supported with generous wine.
Wine, and even spirits have sometimes been given in such desperate cases with
amazing success.

AS the secondary fever is in great measure, if not wholely, owing to the
absorption of the matter, it would seem highly consonant to reason, that the
pustules, as soon as they come to maturity, should be opened. That is every day
practiced in other phlegmons which tend to suppuration; and there seems to be
no reason why it should be less proper here. On the contrary, we have reason to
believe, that by this means the secondary fever might always be lessened, and
often wholely prevented.

THE pustules should be opened when they begin to turn of a yellow color. Very
little art is necessary for this operation. They may either be opened with a
pair of scissors, or a needle, and the matter absorbed by a wet sponge, or a
little lint. As the pustules are generally first ripe on the face, it will be
proper to begin with opening these, and the others in course as they become
ripe. The pustules generally fill again, a second, or even a third time, etc.
for which cause the operation must be repeated, or rather continued so long as
there is any considerable appearance of matter in the pustules.

WE have reason to believe, that this operation, rational as it is, has been
neglected from a piece of mistaken tenderness in parents. They believe, that it
must be great pain to the poor child; and therefore would rather see it die
than have it thus tortured. This notion, however, is entirely without
foundation. It is only the scarf-skin that is cut, which, upon the top of the
pustules, by the time they are ripe, becomes quite insensible. I have
frequently opened the pustules when the patients did not see me, without their
being in the least sensible of it; but suppose it were attended with a little
pain, that is nothing in comparison to the advantages which arise from it.

OPENING the pustules not only prevents the absorption of the matter into the
blood, but likewise takes off tension of the skin, and by that means greatly
relieves the patient. It likewise prevents the pitting, which is a matter of no
small importance. Acrid matter, by lodging long in the pustules, cannot fail to
corrode the tender skin; by which many a handsome face becomes so deformed as
hardly to bear a resemblance to the human figure.

IT is always necessary, after the smallpox are gone off, to purge the
patient. If, however, the belly has been open through the whole course of the
disease, or, if butter-milk, and other things of an opening nature, have been
given, after the height of the smallpox, purging becomes less necessary; but
it ought never wholely to be neglected.

FOR very young children, an infusion of ^enna and prunes, with a little
rhubarb, may be sweetened with manna or coarse sugar, and given in small
quantities till it operates. Those who are farther advanced must take medicines
of a sharper nature. For example, a child of four or five years of age, may
take ten grains of fine rhubarb in powder over night, and the same quantity of
jalap in powder next morning, with two or three grains of calomel, mixed in
current jelly, or made into a bolus with a little honey. He ought to keep the
house all day, and to drink nothing that is cold. The dose may be repeated
three or four times, five or six days intervening betwixt each dose. For
children further advanced, and adults, the dose must be increased in proportion
to the age and constitution.

WHEN imposthumes happen after the smallpox, which is not seldom the case,
they are to be brought to suppuration as soon as possible, by means of ripening
poultices; and, when they have been opened, or break of their own accord, the
patient must be purged.

WHEN a cough, a difficulty of breathing, or other symtoms of a consumption,
succeed to the smallpox, the patient must be sent to a well aired place, and
put upon a course of a^^e^ milk, with such exercise as he can bear. For further
directions in this case, see the article Consumptions.

THOUGH no disease, after it is formed, baffles the powers of medicine more
than the smallpox, yet more may be done before hand to render this disease
favorable than any one w^^^now, as almost all the danger from it may be
prevented by inoculation. This salutary invention has been known in Europe
about half a century; but, like most other useful discoveries, it has met with
great opposition. It must, however, be acknowledged, to the honor of this
country, that inoculation has met with a more favorable reception here than by
any of our neighbors. It is still, however, far from being general, which we
have reason to fear will ever be the case, so long as the practice continues in
the hands of the faculty.

NO discovery can ever be of general utillity while the practice of it is kept
in the hands of a few. Had the inoculation of the smallpox been introduced as
a fashion, and not as a medical discovery, and had it been practiced by the
same kind of operators here as it is in those countries from whence we had it,
it had long ago been universal. The fears, the jealousies, the prejudices, and
the opposite interests of the faculty, are, and ever will be, the most
effectual obstacles to the progress of any salutary discovery. Hence it is,
that the practice of inoculation never became, in any measure, general, even in
England, till taken up by men not bred to physic. These have not only rendered
the practice more extensive, but likewise more safe, and, by acting under less
restraint than the regular practitioners, have taught them that the patient's
greatest danger arose, not from the want of care, but from the excess of it.

THEY know very little of the matter, who impute the success of modern
inoculators to any superior skill, either in preparing the patient or
communicating the disease. Some operators indeed, from a sordid desire of
engrossing the whole practice to themselves, pretend to have extraordinary
secrets or nostrums in preparing persons for inoculation, which never fail of
success. But this is only a pretense calculated to blind the ignorant and
inattentive. Common sense and prudence alone are sufficient both in the choice
of the subject, and management of the operation. Whoever is possessed of these
may perform this office for his children whenever he finds it convenient,
provided they be in a proper state of health; and may rest assured, that he
will succeed as well as the most celebrated inoculator.

THIS sentiment is not the result of theory, but of observation. Though few
physicians have had more opportunities of trying inoculation in all its
different forms, so little appears to me to depend on these, generally reckoned
important circumstances, of preparing the body, communicating the infection by
this or the other method, etc. that for several years past I have caused the
parents or nurses perform the whole themselves, and have found that method
followed with equal success, while it is free from many inconveniences that
attend the other.

A critical situation, too often to be met with, first put me upon trying this
method. A gentleman who had lost all his children, except one son, by the
natural smallpox, was determined to have him inoculated. He told me his
intention, and desired I would persuade the mother and grandmother, etc. of its
propriety. But that was impossible. They were not to be persuaded, and either
could not get the better of their fears, or were determined against conviction.
It was always a point with me not to perform the operation without the consent
of parties concerned. I therefore advised the father, after giving his son a
dose or two of rhubarb, to go to a patient who had the smallpox of a good
kind, to open two or three of the pustules, taking up the matter with a little
cotton, and as soon as he came home to take his son into a private room, and
give his arm a slight scratch with a pin, as if it had been by accident,
afterward to rub the place well with the cotton, and take no farther notice of
it. All this he punctually performed; and, at the usual period, the smallpox
made their appearance, which were of an exceeding good kind, and so mild as not
to confine the boy an hour to his bed. None of the other relations knew but the
disease had come in the natural way till the patient was well.

WE do not propose this as the only method in which the smallpox can be
communicated. It appears from experience, that this may be done various ways
with equal success. In Turkey, from whence we learned the practice, the women
communicate the disease to children, by opening a bit of the skin with a
needle, and putting into the wound a little matter taken from a ripe pustule.
On the coast of Barbary, they pass a thread wet with the matter through the
skin, between the thumb and forefinger; and in Europe inoculation is generally
performed by making a small incision through the cuticle of the arm or leg with
a lancet, and laying a bit of thread wet with the matter upon the wound, which
is covered with a piece of sticking plaster, and kept on for two or three days.

SOME of the people in England, who make a trade of inoculation, only open one
of the ripe pustules with a lancet, and while it is wet with the matter, make a
slight incision in the arm of the person to whom they want to communicate the
disease; afterward they close up the wound, and leave it without any other
dressing. This seems to be no real improvement. It frequently fails to
communicate the disease, and is far less certain than when a scratch with a pin
or needle is made, and a bit of thread wet with the matter kept on the wound
for some days by a sticking plaster.

INDEED, if the matter be applied long enough to the skin, there is no occasion
for any wound at all. Let a bit of thread, about half an inch long, wet with
the matter, be applied to the arm, midway between the shoulder and elbow, and
covered with a piece of the common black sticking plaster, and kept on for
eight or ten days. This will seldom fail to communicate the disease. We mention
this method, because many people are afraid of a wound; and, doubtless, the
more easily the operation can be performed, it has the greater chance to become
general. Some people imagine, that the discharge from a wound lessens the
eruption; but there is not much stress to be laid upon this notion: Besides,
deep wounds often ulcerate, and become troublesome.

WE do not find that inoculation is at all considered as a medical operation in
those countries from whence we learned it. In Turkey it is performed by the
women, and in the East Indies by the Brachmins or priests. In this country the
custom is still in its infancy; we make no doubt, however, but it will become
so familiar, that parents will think no more of inoculating their own children
than at present they do of giving them a dose of physic.

NO set of men have it so much in their power to render the practice of
inoculation general as the clergy; the greatest opposition to it still arising
from some scruples of conscience, which they alone can remove. We would
recommend it to them, not only to endeavor to remove the religious objections
which weak minds may have to this salutary practice, but to enjoin it as a
duty, and to point out the danger of neglecting to make use of a mean which
Providence has put in our power for saving the lives of our offspring. Surely
such parents as wilfully neglect the means of saving their children alive, are
as guilty as those who put them to death. We wish this matter were duly
weighed. No one is more ready to make allowance for human weakness and
religious prejudices, yet I cannot help recommending it, in the warmest manner,
to parents to consider how great an injury they do their children, by
neglecting to give them this disease in the early period of life.

THE numerous advantages attending inoculation of the smallpox, have been
pretty fully pointed out by the learned Dr. McKenzie in his History of Health:
"Many and great, says this humane author, are the dangers attending the natural
infection, from all which the inoculation is quite secure. The natural
infection may invade weak or distempered bodies, by no means disposed for its
kindly reception. It may attack them at a season of the year either violently
hot, or intensely cold. It may be communicated from a sort of smallpox
impregnated with the utmost virulence. It may lay hold upon people
unexpectedly, when a dangerous sort is imprudently imported into a maritime
place. It may surprise us soon after excesses committed in luxury,
intemperance, or lewdness. It may likewise seize on the innocent, after
indispensible watchings, hard labor, or necessary journies. And is it a
trivial advantage, that all these unhappy circumstances can be prevented by
inoculation? By inoculation numbers are saved from deformity as well as from
death. In the natural smallpox, how often are the finest features, and the
most beautiful complexions, miserably disfigured? Whereas inoculation rarely
leaves any ugly marks or ^ears, even where the number of pustules on the face
have been very considerable, and the symptoms by no means favorable. And many
other grievous complaints, that are frequently subsequent to the natural sort,
seldom follow the artificial. Does not inoculation also prevent those
inexpressible terrors that perpetually harrass persons who never had this
disease, insomuch, that when the smallpox is epidemical, entire villages are
depopulated, markets ruined, and the face of distress spread over the whole
country? From this terror it arises, that justice is frequently postponed, or
discouraged, at sessions or assizes, where the smallpox rages. Witnesses and
juries dare not appear; and, by reason of the necessary absence of some
gentlemen, our honorable and useful judges are not attended with that
reverence and splendour due to their office and merit. Does not inoculation, in
like manner, prevent our brave sailors from being seized with this distemper on
shipboard, where they must quickly spread the infection among such of the crew
who never had it before, and where they have scarce any chance to escape, being
half-stifled with the closeness of their cabbins, and but very indifferently
nursed? Lastly, with regard to the soldiery, the miseries attending these poor
creatures, when attacked by the smallpox on a march, is inconceivable, without
attendance, without lodgings, without an^ accommodations; so that one of three
commonly perishes."

WE shall only add, that such as have not had the smallpox in the early period
of life, are not only rendered unhappy, but likewise, in a great measure, unfit
for sustaining many of the most useful and important offices. Few people would
choose even to hire a servant who have not had the smallpox, far less to
purchase a slave who had the chance of dying with this disease. How could a
physician, or a surgeon, who had never had the smallpox himself, attend others
under that malady? Thus, besides, the continual fears and anxiety which haunt
those persons who have not had the smallpox, we might show numberless
inconveniences which arise from it. For example,

HOW deplorable is the situation of females, who arrive at mature age without
having had the smallpox! A woman with child seldom survives this disease: And,
if an infant happens to be seized with the smallpox upon the mother's breast,
who has not had the disease herself, the scene must be distressing! If she
continues to suckle the child, it is at the peril of her own life; and, if she
weans it, in all probability, it will perish. How often is the affectionate
mother forced to leave her house, and abandon her children, at the very time
when her care is most necessary? But should parental affection get the better
of her fears, the consequences will often prove fatal. I have known the tender
mother and her insant child laid in the same grave, both untimely victims to
this dreadful malady. But these are scenes too shocking even to mention. Let
parents who run away with their children to avoid the smallpox, or who refuse
to inoculate them in their infancy, consider to what deplorable situations they
may be reduced by this mistaken tenderness.

AS the smallpox has now become a constitutional disease in most parts of the
known world, no other choice remains, but to render the malady as mild as
possible; that is the only manner of extirpation now left in our power; and,
though it may seem paradoxical, this artificial method of planting the disease,
could it be rendered universal, would amount to nearly the same thing as
rooting it out. It is a matter of small consequence, whether a disease be
entirely extirpated, or rendered so mild, as neither to destroy life, nor hurt
the constitution; but that this may be done by inoculation, does not now admit
of a doubt. The numbers who die under inoculation, hardly deserve to ^e named.
In the natural way, one in four or five generally die; but by inoculation, not
one of a thousand. Na^, some can boast of having inoculated ten thousand
without the loss of a single patient.

I have often wished to see some plan established for rendering this salutary
practice universal; but am afraid I shall never be so happy. The difficulties
indeed are many; yet the thing is by no means impracticable. The aim is great;
no less than saving the lives of one fourth of mankind. What ought not to be
attempted in order to accomplish such an end?

THE first step toward rendering the practice universal, must be to remove the
religious prejudices against it. This, as already observed, can only be done by
the clergy. They must not only recommend it as a duty to others, but likewise
practice it on their own children. Example will ever have more influence than
precept.

THE next thing requisite is to put it in the power of all. For this purpose we
would recommend it to the Faculty to inoculate the children of the poor gratis.
It is hard that those who are certainly the most useful part of mankind,
should, by their poverty, be excluded from such a benefit.

SHOULD this fail, it is surely in the power of any state to render the
practice general, at least, as far as their dominion extends. We do not mean,
that it ought to be enforced by a law: That, there is reason to believe, would
rather tend to obstruct its progress. The way to promote it, would be to employ
a sufficient number of operators at the public expense to inoculate the
children of the poor. This would only be necessary, till the practice became
general; afterward custom, the strongest of all laws, would oblige every one
to inoculate their children, to prevent reflections.

IT may be objected to this scheme, that the poor would refuse to employ the
inoculators: That is easily removed. A small premium to enable mothers to
attend their children while under the disease, would be a sufficient
inducement; besides, the success attending the operation, would soon banish all
objections to it. Even considerations of profit, would induce the poor to
embrace this plan. They often bring up their children to the age of ten or
twelve, and when they come to be useful, they are snatched away by this malady,
to the great loss of their parents, and detriment of the public.

THE British legislature has, of late years, shown great attention to the
preservation of infant lives, by supporting the foundling hospital, etc. But we
will venture to say, if one tenth part of the sums laid out in supporting that
institution, had been bestowed toward promoting the practice of inoculation of
the smallpox among the poor, that not only more useful lives had been saved,
but the practice, before now, rendered quite universal in this island. It is
not to be imagined, what effect example, and a little money, will have upon the
poor; yet, if left to themselves, they will go on for ever in the old way,
without thinking of any improvement. We only mean this as a hint to the humane
and public spirited. Should such a scheme be ever put in practice, a proper
plan might easily be laid down for the execution of it.

AS all public plans are very difficult to bring about, and, often, by the
selfish views, or misconduct, of those entrusted with the execution of them,
fail of answering the noble purposes for which they were designed: We shall,
therefore, point out some other methods by which the benefits of inoculation
may be extended to the poor.

THERE is no doubt but inoculators will be daily more numerous. We would,
therefore, have every parish in Britain, to allow one of them a small annual
salary for inoculating all the children of the parish at a proper age. Though
some refractory persons might for a while object to this method, they would
soon be obliged to comply with it, or run the hazard of being reckoned the
murderers of their own children.

TWO things chiefly operate to prevent the progress of inoculation. The one is
a wish to put the evil day as far off as possible. This is a principle in our
nature; and as inoculation seems rather to be anticipating a future evil, it is
no wonder mankind are so averse from it. But this objection is sufficiently
answered by the success. Who, in his senses, would not prefer a lesser evil
today, to a greater tomorrow, provided it were equally certain?

THE other obstacle is the fear of reflections. This has very great weight with
the bulk of mankind. Should the child die, they think the world would look down
upon them. This they cannot bear. Here lies the difficulty which pinches, and
till that be removed, inoculation will make but small progress. Nothing can
remove it but custom. Make the practice fashionable, and all the objections at
once vanish. It is fashion alone that has led the multitude since the beginning
of the world, and will lead them to the end. We must, therefore, call upon the
more enlightened part of mankind, to set a pattern to the rest. Their example,
though it may, for some time, meet with opposition, must, at length, infallibly
prevail.

I am aware of an objection to this practice, from the expense with which it
may be attended; this is easily obviated. We do not mean that every parish
ought to employ a Sutton, or a Dimsdale, as inoculators. These have, by their
success, already recommended themselves to crowned heads, and are beyond the
vulgar reach; but have not others an equal chance to succeed? They certainly
have. Let them make the same trial, and the difficulties will soon vanish.
There is not a parish, and hardly a village in Britain, destitute of some
person who can bleed. But this is a far more difficult operation, and requires
both more skill and time than inoculation.

THE persons to whom we would chiefly recommend the performance of this
operation are the clergy. Most of them know something of medicine. Almost all
of them bleed, and can order a purge; which are all the qualifications
necessary for the practice of inoculation. The priests among the less
enlightened Indians perform this office; and why should a Christian teacher
think himself above it? Surely the bodies of men, as well as their souls, merit
a part of the pastor's care; at least, the greatest Teacher who ever appeared
among men seems to have thought so.

SHOULD all other methods fail, we would recommend it to parents to perform the
operation themselves. Let them take any method of communicating the disease
they please, provided the subject be healthy, and of a proper age; and we may
venture to warrant their success. I have known many instances of parents
performing the operation, and never so much as heard of one bad consequence. A
planter in one of the West India islands is said to have inoculated, with his
own hand, in one year, three hundred of his slaves, who, notwithstanding the
warmth of the climate, and other unfavourable circumstances, all did well.
Common mechanics have often, to my knowledge, performed the operation with as
good success as physicians. We do not, however, mean to discourage those, who
have it in their power, from employing people of skill to inoculate their
children, and attend them while under the disease, but only to show, that where
such cannot be had, the operation ought not, upon that account, to be neglected.

INSTEAD of multiplying arguments to this effect, I shall just beg leave to
mention the method I took with my own child, an only son. After giving him two
gentle purges, I ordered the nurse to take a bit of thread, which had been
previously wet with fresh matter from a pock, and to lay it upon his arm,
covering it with a piece of sticking plaster. This staid on six or seven days,
till it was rubbed off by accident. At the usual time, the smallpox made their
appearance, and were exceedingly favorable. Sure this, which is all that is
necessary, may be done without any skill in medicine.

THE best season of the year for inoculation, is toward the end of the spring,
and in the beginning of summer. It may, however, be done at any time of the
year, if circumstances render it necessary.

THE most proper age for inoculation is betwixt two and five. Many disagreeable
circumstances attend inoculating children upon the breast, which we have not
time to enumerate. Neither should the operation be too long delayed. When the
^ibres begin to grow rigid, and children make use of grosser food, the
smallpox become more dangerous.

CHILDREN, who have constitutional diseases, must, nevertheless, be inoculated.
It will often mend the habit of body; but ought to be performed at a time when
they are most healthy. Accidental diseases should always be removed before
inoculation.

THE most healthy state is always to be chosen, as that must be the best
preparation. The next step is to regulate the diet for sometime before the
disease is communicated. In children great alteration in diet is seldom
necessary, their food being commonly of the the most simple and wholesome kind;
as milk, water pap, small broths, bread, light pudding, mild roots, and white
meats.

CHILDREN, however, who have been accustomed to a hotter diet, who are of a
gross habit, or abound with bad humors, ought to be put upon a spare diet,
before they be inoculated. Their food should be of a light cooling nature; and,
their drink, whey, butter-milk, and such like.

WE would recommend no other medicinal preparation, but two or three mild
purges, which ought to be suited to the age and strength of the patient. It is,
no doubt, possible, by purgative and mercurial medicines, to lessen the
eruption; but it very seldom happens, that the eruption, in this way, proves
too great, and, we have always observed, that those children who had a pretty
free eruption, and where the pox filled well, enjoyed the best health
afterward.

THE regimen, during the disease, must be the same as under the natural
smallpox. The patient must be kept cool, his diet must be light, and his drink
weak and diluting, etc. Should any bad symptoms appear, which seldom happens,
they must be treated in the same way as directed in the natural smallpox.
Purging is not less necessary, after the smallpox by inoculation, than in the
natural way, and ought, by no means, to be neglected.

OF THE MEASLES.
THE measles appeared about the same time with the smallpox, and are nearly
related to that disease. They both came from the East, are both infectious, and
seldom attack people more than once. The measles are most common in the spring
season, and generally disappear in the summer. The disease itself, when
properly managed, is seldom dangerous; but its consequences are often fatal.

CAUSE. -- This disease, like the smallpox, proceeds from infection, and is
more or less dangerous, according to the constitution of the patient, the
season of the year, the climate, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- The measles, like other fevers, are preceded by alternate fits of
heat and cold, sickness, and loss of appetite. The tongue is white, but
generally moist. There is a short cough, a heaviness of the head and eyes,
drowsiness, and running of the nose. Sometimes, indeed, the cough does not come
before the eruption. The eyelids frequently swell so as to occasion blindness.
The patient generally complains of his throat; and vomiting or looseness often
precedes the eruption. The stools in children are commonly greenish; they
complain of an itching of the skin, and are remarkably peevish. Bleeding at the
nose is common, both before and in the progress of the disease.

ABOUT the fourth day, small spots, resembling fleabites, appear, first upon
the face, then upon the breast, and, afterward, on the extremities: These may
be distinguished from the smallpox, by their scarcely rising above the skin.
The fever, cough, and difficulty of breathing, instead of being removed by the
eruption, as in the smallpox, are rather increased; but the vomiting generally
ceases.

ABOUT the sixth day, the measles begin to grow dry on the face, and,
afterward, upon the body; so that by the ninth day they entirely disappear.
The fever, however, and difficulty of breathing, often continue, especially if
the patient has been kept upon too hot a regimen. Petechiae, or purple spots,
may likewise be occasioned by this error.

A violent looseness sometimes succeeds the measles, in which case the
patient's life is in imminent danger.

SUCH as die of the measles generally expire about the ninth day, and are
evidently carried off by a peripneumony, or inflammation of the lungs.

THE most favorable symptoms are, a moderate looseness, gentle sweats, and a
plentiful discharge of urine.

WHEN the eruption suddenly falls in, and the patient is seized with a
delirium, he is in the greatest danger. If the measles turn of a pale color,
it is an unfavourable symptom, as are also, great weakness, vomiting,
restlessness, and difficulty of swallowing. Purple, or black spots, appearing
among the measles, are very unfavourable. When a continual cough, with
hoarseness, succeeds the disease, there is reason to suspect an approaching
consumption of the lungs.

OUR business in this disease is to assist nature, if her efforts be too
languid, in throwing out the morbid matter, by proper cordials; but when they
are too violent, they must be restrained by evacuations, and cool diluting
liquors, etc. We ought, likewise, to endeavor to appease the most urgent
symptoms, as the cough, restlessness, and difficulty of breathing.

REGIMEN. -- The regimen in this disease should be of the same kind with that
recommended in the smallpox, viz. cooling and diluting. Acids, however, do not
answer so well here as in the smallpox, as they tend to exasperate the cough.
Small beer, likewise, though a good drink in the smallpox, is here improper.
The most suitable liquors are decoctions of liquorice, with marsh-mallow roots,
and sarsaparilla; infusions of linseed, or of the flowers of elder with milk,
clarified whey, barley water, and such like. These, if the belly be bound, may
be sweetened with honey; or, if that should disagree with the stomach, a little
manna may occasionally be added to them.

MEDICINE. -- The measles being an inflammatory disease, without any critical
discharge of matter, as in the smallpox, bleeding is commonly necessary,
especially when the fever runs high, with difficulty of breathing, and great
oppression of the breast. But if the disease be of a mild kind, bleeding may be
omitted.

BATHING the feet and legs in lukewarm water, both tends to abate the violence
of the fever, and to promote the eruption.

THE patient is often greatly relieved by vomiting. When there is a tendency
this way, it ought not to be stopped, but encouraged, by drinking lukewarm
water, or weak camomile tea.

WHEN the cough is very troublesome, with dryness of the throat, and difficulty
of breathing, it will greatly relieve the patient, if he holds his head over
the steam of warm water, and draws the steam into his lungs.

HE may likewise lick a little spermaceti and sugar candy pounded together; or
take now and then a spoonful of the oil of sweet-almonds, with sugar candy
dissolved in it. These will soften the throat, and relieve the tickling cough.

IN case the measles should suddenly disappear, it will be necessary to pursue
the same method which we have recommended when the smallpox fall in. The
patient must be supported with wine and cordials. Blistering plasters must be
applied to the extremities, and the body rubbed all over with warm flannels.
Warm poultices may, likewise, be applied to the feet, and palms of the hands.

WHEN purple, or black spots appear, the patient's drink should be sharpened
with spirits of vitriol; and, if the putrid symptoms run high, the Jesuits bark
must be administered in the same manner as directed in the smallpox.

OPIATES are sometimes necessary, but should never be given except in case of
extreme restlessness, a violent looseness, or when the cough is very
troublesome. For children, the syrup of poppies is sufficient. A tea spoonful
or two may be occasionally given, according to the patient's age, or the
violence of the symptoms.

AFTER the measles are gone off, purging is absolutely necessary. This may be
conducted in the same manner as directed in the smallpox.

IF a violent looseness succeeds the measles, it may be checked by taking, for
some days, a gentle dose of rhubarb in the morning, and an opiate over night;
but, if these do not remove it, bleeding will seldom fail to have that effect.

PATIENTS recovering after the measles, should be very careful what they eat or
drink. Their food, for some time, should be light, and in small quantities, and
their drink diluting, and rather of an opening nature; as buttermilk, whey, and
such like. They ought, also, to beware of exposing themselves to the cold air,
lest a suffocating catarrh, an asthma, or a consumption of the lungs should
ensue.

SHOULD a cough, with difficulty of breathing, and other symptoms of a
consumption, remain after the measles, we would recommend small quantities of
blood to be frequently let at proper intervals, as the patient's strength and
constitution will bear. He ought, likewise, to drink asses milk, to remove to a
free air, if necessary, and to ride daily on horseback. He must keep close to a
diet, consisting of milk and vegetables; and, lastly, if these do not succeed,
let him remove to a warmer climate.

OF THE SCARLET FEVER.
THE scarlet fever is so called from the color of the patient's skin, which
appears as if it were tinged with red wine. It happens at any season of the
year, but is most common in the latter end of summer; at which time it often
seizes whole families, especially children.

IT begins with coldness and shivering, as in other fevers, without any violent
sickness. Afterward the skin is covered with red spots, which are broader,
more florid, and less uniform than the measles. They continue two or three
days, and then disappear; after which the cuticle, or scarf-skin, falls off.

THERE is seldom any occasion for medicine in this disease. The patient ought,
however, to keep within doors, to abstain from flesh, strong liquors, and
cordials, and to take plenty of cool diluting drink. If the fever be high, the
belly must be kept gently open by emollient clysters, or small doses of nitre
and rhubarb. A scruple of the former, with five grains of the latter, may be
taken thrice a day, or oftener, if necessary.

CHILDREN, and young persons, are sometimes seized, at the beginning of this
disease, with a kind of stupor, and epileptic ^its. In this case, the feet and
legs should be bathed with warm water, a large blistering plaster applied to
the neck, and a dose of the syrup of poppies given every night till the patient
recovers.

AFTER the fever is gone off, the patient ought to be purged once or twice.

OF THE ERYSIPELAS, OR ST. ANTHONY's FIRE.
THIS disease, which in many parts of Britain is called the rose, attack
persons at all periods of life, but is most common between the age of thirty
and forty. Persons of a sanguine or plethoric habit, are most liable to it. It
often attacks young people, and pregnant women; and such as have once been
afflicted with it, are very liable to have it again. Sometimes it is a primary
disease, and, at other times only a symptom of some other malady. Every part of
the body is liable to be attacked by an erysipelas, but it most frequently
seizes the legs or face, especially the latter. It prevails most in autumn, or
when hot weather is succeeded by cold and wet.

CAUSES. -- The erisipelas is frequently occasioned by violent passions or
affections of the mind; as, fear, anger, etc. It is likewise occasioned by
cold. When the body has been heated to a great degree, and is immediately
exposed to the cold air, so that the perspiration is suddenly checked, an
erysipelas will often ensue. It may also be occasioned by excess of strong
liquor, by continuing too long in a warm bath, or by any thing that overheats
the blood. If any of the natural evacuations be obstructed, or in too small a
quantity, it may cause an erysipelas. The same effect will follow from a
stoppage of artificial evacuations; as, issues, setons or the like.

SYMPTOMS. -- The erysipelas attacks with a violent shaking, heat, thirst, loss
of strength, pain in the head and back, restlessness, and a quick pulse; to
which may be added, vomiting, and sometimes a delirium. On the second, third,
or fourth day, the part swells, becomes red, and small pustules appear; at
which time the fever generally abates.

WHEN the erysipelas seizes the foot, the parts contiguous swell, the skin
shines; and, if the pain be violent, it will ascend to the leg, and will not
bear to be touched.

WHEN it attacks the face, it swells, appears red, and the skin is covered with
small pustules, filled with clear water. One or both eyes are generally closed
with the swelling; and there is a difficulty of breathing. If the mouth or
nostrils be very dry, and the patient drowsy, there is reason to expect an
inflammation of the brain.

IF the erysipelas effects the breast, it swells, and becomes exceedingly hard,
with great pain, and is apt to suppurate.

THERE is a violent pain in the armpit on the side affected, where an abscess
is often formed.

THERE is a kind of erysipelas, which in some parts of Britain goes by the name
of the ring worm. It frequently attacks children about the region of the navel,
where it surrounds the body like a girdle, and is not without danger.

THE event of this disease depends greatly upon the constitution of the
patient. It is seldom dangerous; yet I have known it prove fatal to people in
the decline of life, who were of a scorbutic habit, or whose humors were
vitiated by irregular living, or unwholesome diet.

IF, in a day or two, the swelling subsides, the heat and pain cease, the rosy
color turns yellow, and the cuticle breaks and falls off in scales, the danger
is over.

WHEN the erysipel as is large, deep, and affects a very sensible part of the
body, the danger is great. If the red color changes into black or blue, it
will end in a mortification. Sometimes the inflammation cannot be discussed,
but comes to suppuration; in which case, sistulas, a gangrene, or
mortification, generally ensue. Where the constitution was bad, I have
frequently seen the leg swell to a prodigious size, and the cure prove
extremely difficult.

SUCH as die of this disease, are mostly carried off by the ^ever, which is
attended with difficulty of breathing, sometimes with a delirium, and great
drowsiness. They generally die about the seventh or eighth day.

REGIMEN. -- In this disease the patient must neither be kept too hot nor cold,
as either of these extremes will tend to make the disease retreat, which is
always to be guarded against. When the disease is mild, it will be sufficient
to keep the patient within doors, without confining him to his bed, and to
promote the perspiration by diluting liquors, etc.

THE diet ought to be very spare, and of a moderately cooling and moistening
quality; as groat gruel, panada, small chicken or barley broth, with cooling
herbs and fruits, etc. avoiding flesh, fish, strong drink, spices, pickles, and
all other things that may heat and inflame the blood; the drink may be barley
water, an infusion of elder flowers, common whey, and such like.

BUT if the pulse be low, and the spirits sunk, the patient must be supported
with small negas and other things of a cordial nature. His food may be sago
gruel with a little wine, and nourishing broths, taken in small quantities, and
often repeated. Great care, however, must be had not to overheat him.

MEDICINE. -- In this disease much mischief is often done by medicine,
especially external applications. People, when they see an inflammation,
immediately think of some external applications. These, indeed, are necessary
in large phlegmons; but, in an erysipelas, the safer course is to apply
nothing. Almost all ointments, salves and plasters, are of a greasy nature, and
tend rather to obstruct and repel, than promote any discharge from the part. At
the beginning of this disease, it is neither safe to promote a suppuration, nor
to repel the matter too quickly. The erysipelas, in many respects, resembles
the gout, and is to be treated with the greatest caution. Fine wool, or very
soft flannel, are the safest applications to the part. These not only defend it
from the external air, but likewise promote the perspiration, which has a great
tendency to carry off the disease.

IT is a common thing to bleed in the erysipelas; but this likewise requires
caution. If, however, the fever be high, the pulse hard and strong, and the
patient vigorous, it will be proper to bleed; but the quantity must be
regulated by these circumstances, and the operation repeated or not, as the
symptoms may require. If the patient has been accustomed to strong liquors, and
the disease attacks his head, bleeding is absolutely necessary.

BATHING the feet and legs frequently in lukewarm water, when the disease
attacks the face or brain, has an excellent effect. It tends to draw the
humors of the head toward the inferior extremities, and seldom fails to
relieve the patient. When bathing proves ineffectual, poultices, or sharp
sinapisms, may be applied to the soles of the feet for the same purpose.

IN cases where bleeding is requisite, it is likewise necessary to keep the
belly gently open. This may be effected by emollient clysters, or small doses
of nitre and rhubarb, such as are prescribed in the foregoing disease. Some,
indeed, recommend very large doses of nitre in this case; but nitre seldom sits
easy on the stomach when taken in large quantities. It is, however, one of the
best medicines in this case; and, when the fever and inflammation run high,
half a dram of it may be taken in the patient's ordinary drink, three or four
times a day.

THE saline julep, as it is called, is likewise a very proper medicine in the
erysipelatous fever. It may be made by dissolving two drams of salt of
wormwood, or salt of tartar, in three ounces of fresh lemon juice, to which may
be added, two ounces of common water, and an ounce or two of peppermint water,
with as much white sugar as will render it agreeable. Of this two table
spoonfuls may be taken every two or three hours.

WHEN the erysipelas leaves the extremities, and seizes the head, so as to
occasion a delirium, or stupor, it is absolutely necessary to open the belly.
If clysters and mild purgatives ^ail to have that effect, stronger ones must be
given. Blistering plasters must, likewise, be applied to the neck, or behind
the ears, and sharp cataplasms laid to the soles of the feet.

WHEN the erysipelas cannot be discussed, and the pain lies deep, and seems to
reach to the membrane which covers the bones, and the part has a tendency to
ulcerate, it will then be proper to promote suppuration, which may be done by
the application of ripening poultices, with saffron, warm fomentations, and
such like.

WHEN the black, livid, or blue color of the part, shows a tendency to
mortification, the Jesuits bark must be administered. It may be taken along
with acids, as recommended in the smallpox, or in any other form more
agreeable to the patient. It must not, however, be trifled with, as the
patient's life is at stake. Half a dram may be taken every two hours, or
oftener, if the symptoms be threatening, and cloths dipped in warm camphorated
spirits of wine, or the tincture of myrrh and aloes, may be applied to the
part, and frequently renewed.

IN what is commonly the scorbutic erysipelas, which continues for a
considerable time, it will only be necessary to give gentle laxatives, and such
things as purify the blood. Medicines which promote the perspiration are
likewise proper. Thus, after the inflammation has been checked by opening
medicines, a decoction of the sudorific woods, as sassafras and guaiacum, with
liquorice root, may be drank, and afterward a course of bitters, which will
both strengthen the stomach, and purify the blood.

SUCH as are liable to frequent attacks of the erysipelas, ought carefully to
guard against all violent passions; to abstain from strong liquors, and all
fat, viscid, and highly nourishing food. They should take abundance of
exercise, carefully avoiding the extremes of heat or cold. Their food should
consist chiefly of milk, and such fruits, herbs, and roots, as are of a cooling
quality; and their drink ought to be small beer, when, butter-milk, and such
like. They should never suffer themselves to be too long costive. If that
cannot be prevented by diet alone, it will be proper to take frequently a
gentle dose of rhubarb and cream of tartar, the lenitive electuary, or some
other mild purgative.

OF THE INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN.
THIS is sometimes a primary disease, but oftener only a symptom of some other
malady; as the inflammatory, eruptive, or spotted fever, etc. It is very
common, however, as a primary disease in warm climates, and is most incident to
persons about the prime and vigor of life. The passionate, the studious, and
th^se whose nervous system is weak, are very liable to it.

CAUSES. -- This disease is often occasioned by night-watching, especially when
joined with hard study: It, likewise, proceeds from hard drinking, from anger,
grief, or anxiety. It may, also, be occasioned by a sedentary life, or the
stoppage of usual evacuations; as the bleeding piles in men, the customary
discharges of women, etc. Such as imprudently expose themselves to the heat of
the sun, especially by sleeping without doors, in a hot season, with their
heads uncovered, are often suddenly seized with an inflammation of the brain,
so as to awake quite delirious. When repellents are imprudently used in an
erysipelas, an inflammation of the brain is often the consequence. It may,
likewise, be occasioned by external injuries, as blows, or bruises upon the
head, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- The symptoms which precede a true inflammation of the brain are,
pain of the head, redness of the eyes, a violent flushing of the face,
disturbed sleep, or a total want of it, great dryness of the skin, costiveness,
a retention of urine, a small dropping of blood from the nose, singing of the
ears, and extreme sensibility of the nervous system.

WHEN the inflammation is formed, the symptoms, in general are similar to those
of the inflammatory fever. The pulse, indeed, is often weak, irregular, and
trembling; but, sometimes, it is hard and contracted. When the brain itself is
inflamed, the pulse is always soft and low; but when the inflammation only
affects the integuments of the brain, it is hard. A remarkable quickness of
hearing, is a common symptom of this disease; but that seldom continues long.
Another usual symptom is, a great throbbing or pulsation in the arteries of the
neck and temples. The tongue is often black and dry; yet the patient seldom
complains of thirst, and even refuses drink. The mind chiefly runs after such
objects as have before made a deep impression upon it; and, sometimes, from a
sullen silence, the patient becomes all of a sudden quite outrageous.

A constant trembling and starting of the tendons, is an unfavourable symptom,
as also, a suppression of the urine; a total want of sleep; a constant
spitting; a grinding of the teeth, which must be considered as a kind of
convulsion. When this disease succeeds an inflammation of the lungs, of the
intestines, or of the throat, etc. it is owing to a translation of the morbific
matter from these parts to the brain, and generally proves fatal. Hence we
learn the necessity of proper evacuations, and the danger of repellents in all
inflammatory diseases.

THE favorable symptoms are, a free perspiration or sweating, a copious
discharge of blood from the nose, the bleeding piles, a plentiful discharge of
urine, which lets fall a copious sediment. Sometimes the disease is carried off
by a looseness, and in women by an excessive flow of the menses.

AS this disease often proves fatal in a few days, it requires the most speedy
applications. When it is prolonged, or improperly treated, it sometimes ends in
madness, or a kind of stupidity, which continues for life.

IN the cure, two things are chiefly to be attended to, viz. to lessen the
quantity of blood in the brain, and to retard the circulation toward the head.

REGIMEN. -- The patient ought to be kept very quiet. Company, noise, and every
thing that affects the senses, or disturbs the imagination, increases the
disease. Even too much light is hurtful; for which reason, the patient's
chamber ought to be a little darkened, and he should neither be kept too hot
nor cold. It is not, however, necessary to exclude the company of an agreeable
friend, as this has a tendency to sooth and quiet the mind. Neither should the
patient be kept too much in the dark, lest it should occasion a gloomy
melancholy, which is too often the consequence of this disease.

THE patient must, as far as possible, be soothed and humoured in every thing.
Contradiction will ruffle his mind, and increase his malady. Even when he calls
for things which are not to be obtained, or which might prove hurtful, he is
not to be positively denied them, but rather put off with the promise of having
them as soon as they can be obtained, or by some other excuse. A little of any
thing that the mind is set upon, though not quite proper, will hurt the patient
less than a positive refusal. In a word, whatever the patient is fond of, or
used to be delighted with when in health, may here be tried, as pleasing
stories, soft music, or whatever has a tendency to sooth the passions, and
compose the mind. Boerhaave proposes several mechanical experiments for this
purpose; as the soft noise of water distilling by drops into a basin, and the
patient trying to reckon them, etc. Any uniform sound, if low and continued,
has a tendency to procure sleep, and, consequently, may be of service.

THE aliment ought to be light, of farinaceous substances; as panado, and water
gruel, sharpened with jelly of currants or juice of lemons, ripe fruits roasted
or boiled, jellies, preserves, etc. The drink small, diluting, and cooling, as
whey, barley water, or decoctions of barley and tamarinds; which latter, not
only renders the liquor more palatable, but likewise more beneficial, as they
are of an opening cooling nature.

MEDICINES. -- In an inflammation of the brain, nothing more certainly relieves
the patient than a free discharge of blood from the nose. When this comes of
its own accord, it is by no means to be stopped, but promoted, by applying
cloths dipped in warm water to the part. When bleeding at the nose does not
happen spontaneously, it may be provoked by putting a straw, or any other sharp
body up the nostril.

BLEEDING in the temporal arteries greatly relieves the head; but as this
operation cannot be generally performed, we would recommend in its stead
bleeding in the jugular veins. When the patient's pulse and spirits are so low,
that he cannot bear bleeding with the lancet, leeches may be applied to the
temples. These not only draw off the blood more gradually, but by being applied
nearer to the part affected, generally give more immediate relief.

A discharge of blood from the haemorrhoidal veins is likewise of great
service, and (...), by all means, to be promoted. If the patient has been
subject to the bleeding piles, and that discharge has been stopped, every
method must be tried to restore it; as the application of leeches to the parts,
sitting over the steams of warm water, sharp clysters, or suppositories made of
honey, aloes, and rock salt.

IF the inflammation of the brain be occasioned by the stoppage of any
evacuation, either natural or artificial, as the menses, issues, setons, or
such like, all means must be used to restore it as soon as possible, or to
substitute some other in its stead.

IF the patient be costive, his belly must be kept open by emollient clysters,
or gentle purgatives; as manna, rhubarb, cream of tartar, or such like. These
may either be given separately or together in small doses, and repeated as
there may be occasion.

SMALL quantities of nitre ought frequently to be mixed with the patient's
drink. Two drams, or more, if the case be dangerous, may be used every
twenty-four hours.

THE head should be shaven, and frequently rubbed with vinegar and rose water a
little warm. Cloths dipped in it may likewise be applied to the temples.

IF the disease proves obstinate, and does not yield to these medicines, it
will be necessary to apply a blistering plaster to the whole head.

OF THE INFLAMMATION OF THE EYES.
THIS disease may be occasioned by external injuries; as strokes, dust thrown
into the eyes, etc. It is often caused by the stoppage of customary
evacuations; as the healing of old sores, drying up of issues, or the like.
Nothing more certainly brings on an inflammation of the eyes, than the
suppression of gentle morning sweats, or the sweating of the feet. Long
exposure to the night air, especially in cold northerly winds, or whatever
suddenly checks the perspiration, especially after the body has been much
heated, is very apt to cause an inflammation of the eyes. Viewing snow or other
white bodies for a long time, or looking steadfastly at the sun, a clear fire,
or any bright object, will likewise occasion this malady. A sudden transition
from darkness to very bright light, will often have the same effect.

NOTHING more certainly occasions an inflammation of the eyes than night
watching especially reading or writing by candle light. Drinking ^^^^itous
liquors, and excess of venery, are very hurtful to the eyes. The acrid fumes of
metals, and of several kinds of fuel, are likewise very pernicious. Sometimes
an inflammation of the eyes proceeds from a venereal taint, and often from a
scrophulous or gouty habit. It may likewise be occasioned by hairs in the
eyelids turning inwards, and hurting the eyes. Sometimes the disease is
epidemic, especially after wet seasons; and I have frequently known it prove
infectious, particularly to those who lived in the same house with the patient.
It may be occasioned by moist air, or living in low, damp houses, especially
where people are not accustomed to such situations. In children, it often
proceeds from imprudently drying up of scabbed heads, a running behind the
ears, or any other discharge of the same nature^ Inflammations of the eyes
often succeed the smallpox, or measles, especially in children of a
scrophulous habit.

SYMPTOMS. -- An inflammation of the eyes is attended with acute pain, heat,
redness, and swelling. The patient is not able to bear the light, and sometimes
he feels a pricking pain, as if his eyes were pierced with a thorn. Sometimes
he imagines his eyes are full of motes, or thinks he sees flies dancing before
him, the eyes are filled with a scalding rheum, which rushes forth in great
quantities, whenever the patient attempts to look up. The pulse is generally
quick and hard, with some degree of fever. When the disease is violent, the
neighboring parts swell, and there is a throbbing or pulsation in the temporal
arteries, etc.

A slight inflammation of the eyes, especially from an external cause, is
easily cured; but when the disease is violent, and continues long, it leaves
specks upon the eyes, or dimness of sight, and sometimes total blindness.

IF the patient be seized with a looseness, it has a good effect; and when the
inflammation passes from one eye to another, as it were by infection, it is no
unfavourable symptom. When the disease is accompanied with a violent pain of
the head, and continues long, the patient is in great danger of losing his
sight.

REGIMEN. -- The diet, unless in scrophulous cases, can hardly be too spare,
especially at the beginning. The patient must abstain from every thing of a
heating nature. His food must consist chiefly of mild vegetables, weak broths,
and gruels. His drink may be barley water, balm tea, common whey, and such like.

THE patient's chamber must be darkened, or his eyes shaded by a green cover,
so as to exclude the light, but not to press upon the eyes. He should not look
at a candle, the fire, or any luminous object; and ought to avoid all smoke, as
the fumes of tobacco, or any thing that may cause coughing, sneezing, or
vomiting. He should be kept quiet, avoiding all violent efforts, either of body
or mind, and encouraging sleep, as much as possible.

MEDICINE. -- This is one of those diseases wherein great hurt is done by
external applications. Almost every person pretends to be possessed of a remedy
for the cure of ^ore eyes. These remedies generally consist of eye-waters and
ointments, with other external applications. All which do mischief twenty times
for once they do good. People ought, therefore, to be very cautious how they
use such things, as the very pressure upon the eyes often increases the malady.

BLEEDING, in a violent inflammation of the eyes, is always necessary. This
should be performed as near the part affected as possible. An adult may lose
ten or twelve ounces of blood from the jugular vein, and the operation may be
repeated according to the urgency of the symptoms. If it be not, however,
convenient to bleed in the neck, the same quantity may be let from the arm, or
any other part of the body.

LEECHES are often applied to the temples, or under the eyes with good effect.
The wounds must be suffered to bleed for some hours, and if the bleeding stop
soon, it may be promoted by the application of cloths dipped in warm water. In
obstinate cases, it will be necessary to repeat this operation several times.

OPENING and diluting medicines are by no means to be neglected. The patient
may take a small dose of Glauber's salts and cream of tartar, every second or
third day, or a decoction of tamarinds with senna. If these be not agreeable,
gentle doses of rhubarb and nitre, a little of the lenitive electuary, or any
other mild purgative, will answer the same end. The patient, at the same time,
must drink freely of water gruel, tea, or any other weak diluting liquor. He
ought likewise to take, at bedtime, a large draught of very weak wine when, in
order to promote perspiration. His feet and legs must frequently be bathed in
lukewarm water, and his head shaved twice or thrice a-week, and afterward
washed in cold water. This has a remarkable good effect.

AFTER these evacuations have been continued for some time, if the inflammation
does not yield to them, blistering plasters must be applied behind the ears, to
the temples, or upon the neck, and kept open for some time by the mild
blistering ointment. I never knew these, if long enough kept open, fail to
remove the most obstinate inflammation of the eyes; but, for this purpose it is
often necessary to continue the discharge for several weeks.

WHEN the disease has been of long standing, I have seen very extraordinary
effects from a seton in the neck, or betwixt the shoulders, especially the
latter. It should be put upwards and downwards, or in the direction of the
spine, and in the middle between the shoulder-blades. It may be dressed twice
a day with yellow basilicon. I have known patients, who had been blind for
several months, recover sight by means of a seton betwixt the shoulders. When
the seton is put across the neck, it soon wears out, and is both more painful
and troublesome than between the shoulders; besides, it leaves a disagreeable
mark, and does not discharge so freely.

WHEN the heat and pain of the eyes is very great, a soft poultice of bread and
milk, with plenty of sweet oil or fresh butter, may be applied to them, at
least all night; and they may be bathed with lukewarm milk and water every
morning.

IF the patient cannot sleep, which is sometimes the case, he must take ten or
twelve drops or laudanum, or two spoonfuls of the syrup of poppies, over night,
more or less according to his age, or the violence of the symptoms.

AFTER the inflammation is gone off, if the eyes still remain weak and tender,
they may be bathed every night and morning with cold water and a little brandy,
six parts of the former to one of the latter. A method should be contrived by
which the eyes can be quite immersed in the brandy and water, where they should
be kept for some minutes. I have generally sound this as good a strengthener of
the eyes as any of the most celebrated collyriums.

WHEN an inflammation of the eyes proceeds from a scrophulous habit, it
generally proves very obstinate. In this case the patient's diet must not be
too low, and he may be allowed to drink small negas, or now and then a glass of
wine. The most proper medicine is the Jesuits bark, which may either be given
in substance, or prepared in the following manner:

TAKE an ounce of Jesuits bark in powder, with two drams of Winter's bark, and
boil them in an English quart of water to a pint; when it has boiled nearly
long enough, add half an ounce of liquorice root sliced. Let the liquor be
strained. Two, three, or four table spoonfuls, according to the age of the
patient, may be taken three or four times a day. It is impossible to say how
long this medicine should be continued, as the cure is sooner performed in some
than others; but, in general, it requires a considerable time to produce any
lasting effects.

DR. Cheyne says, "That aethiops mineral never fails in inflammations of the
eyes, even scrophulous ones, if given in a sufficient dose, and persisted in
for a sufficient time." Both this and other mercurial preparations, are no
doubt proper when the disease proves obstinate; more especially, when there is
reason to suspect that it may proceed from a venereal taint; but as these
medicines can never be safely administered unless under the direction of a
physician, we shall omit specifying their particular doses, etc.

IT will be proper frequently to look into the eyes, to see if any hairs be
turned inwards, or pressing upon them, in order that they may be cut off
without delay.

SUCH as are liable to frequent returns of this disease, ought constantly to
have an issue in one or both arms. Bleeding or purging in the spring and
autumn, will be very beneficial to such persons. They ought likewise to live
regularly, avoiding strong liquor, and every thing of a heating quality. Above
all, let them avoid the night air and late studies.

OF THE QUINSEY, OR INFLAMMATION OF THE THROAT.
THIS disease is very common in Britain, and is frequently attended with great
danger. It prevails in the winter and spring, and is most fatal to young people
of a sanguine or plethoric habit.

CAUSES. -- In general, it proceeds from the same causes as other inflammatory
fevers, viz. an obstructed perspiration, or whatever heats or inflames the
blood. An inflammation of the throat is often occasioned by omitting some part
of the covering usually worn about the neck, by drinking cold liquor when the
body is warm, by riding or walking against a cold northerly wind, or any thing
that greatly cools the throat, and parts adjacent. It may likewise proceed from
the neglect of bleeding, purging, or any customary evacuation.

SINGING, speaking loud and long, or whatever strains the throat, may likewise
cause an inflammation of that organ. I have often known the quinsey prove fatal
to jovial companions, after sitting long in a warm room, drinking hot liquors
and singing with vehemence; especially, when they were so imprudent as
afterward to go abroad in the cold night air. Sitting with wet feet, or
keeping on wet clothes, are very apt to occasion this malady. It is likewise
frequently occasioned by continuing long in a moist place, sleeping in a damp
bed, sitting in a room that has been newly plastered, etc. I know people who
never fail to complain of their throat after sitting but a very short while in
a room that has been lately washed.

ACRID or irritating food may likewise inflame the throat, and occasion a
quinsey. It may also proceed from bones, pins, or other sharp substances
sticking in the throat, or from the caustic fumes of metals or minerals, as
arsenic, antimony, etc. taken in by the breath. This disease is sometimes
epidemic and infectious.

SYMPTOMS. -- The inflammation of the throat is evident from inspection, the
parts appearing red and swelled; besides, the patient complains of pain in
swallowing any thing. His pulse is quick and hard, with other symptoms of a
fever. If blood be let, it is generally covered with a tough coat of a whitish
color, and the patient spits a tough phlegm. As the swelling and inflammation
increase, the breathing and swallowing become the more difficult, the pain
affects the ears; the eyes generally appear red, and the face swells. The
patient is often obliged to keep himself in an erect posture, being in danger
of suffocation; there is a constant nausea, or inclination to vomit, and the
drink, instead of passing into the stomach, is often returned by the nose. The
patient is frequently starved at last, merely from an inability of swallowing
any kind of nourishment. When the breathing is performed with a hissing noise,
and the pulse begins to intermit, death is at hand.

AS several of the organs necessary for life are affected by this disease, it
can never be without danger; no time therefore should be lost in attempting to
remove it, as a little delay often renders it incurable.

WHEN the breathing is laborious, with straitness of the breast and anxiety,
the danger is great. Though the pain of swallowing be very great, yet while the
patient breathes easy, there is not so much danger. An external swelling is no
unfavourable symptom; but if it suddenly falls, and the morbific matter is
thrown upon the breast, the danger is very great. When a quinsey is the
consequence of some other disease, which has already weakened the patient, his
situation is dangerous. A frothing at the mouth, with a swelled tongue, a pale
ghastly countenance, and coldness of the extremities, are fatal symptoms.

REGIMEN. -- The regimen in this disease is in all respects the same as in the
pleurisy or peripneumony. The food must be light, and in small quantity, and
the drink plentiful, weak, and diluting, mixed with acids.

IT is highly necessary, in this disease, that the patient be kept easy and
quiet. Violent passions of the mind, or great efforts of the body, may prove
fatal. He should not even attempt to speak but in a low voice. Such a degree of
warmth as to promote a constant gentle sweat is proper. When the patient is in
bed, his head ought to be raised a little higher than usual.

IT is peculiarly necessary that the throat be kept warm; for which purpose
several folds of soft flannel may be wrapped round the neck: That alone will
often remove a slight complaint of the throat, especially if applied in due
time. We cannot here omit observing the propriety of a custom which prevails
amongst the peasants of this country; when they feel any uneasiness of the
throat, they wrap a stocking about it all night. So effectual is this remedy,
that, in many places, it passes for a charm, and the stocking is applied with
particular ceremonies: The custom, however, is undoubtedly a good one, and
should never be neglected. When the throat has been thus wrapped up all night, it
must not be exposed to the cold air through the day, but a handkerchief, or a
piece of flannel, kept about it, till the inflammation be gone.

THE jelly of black currants is a medicine very much in esteem for complaints
of the throat; and indeed the whole materia medica cannot afford a better. It
should be almost constantly kept in the mouth, and swallowed down leisurely. It
may likewise be mixed in the patient's drink, or taken any other way. When it
cannot be obtained, the red current jelly, or the mulberry, may be used in its
stead.

GARGIES for the throat are likewise very beneficial. They may be made by
adding to half an English pint of the pectoral decoction mentioned in page 110,
two or three spoonfuls of honey, and the same quantity of current jelly. This
may be used three or four times a day; and, if the patient be troubled with
tough viscid phlegm, the gargle may be made more sharp and cleansing, by adding
to it a tea spoonful of the spirits of sal ammoniac. Some recommend gargles
made of a decoction of the leaves or bark of the blackberry bush; but where the
jelly can be had, these are unnecessary.

THERE is no disease wherein the benefits of bathing the feet and (...) in
lukewarm water are more apparent. That practice (...), therefore, never to be
neglected. If people were careful to keep warm, to wrap up their throats with
flannel, to ^^^he their feet and legs in warm water, and to use a spare diet,
with diluting liquors, at the beginning of this disease, it would seldom
proceed to any great height, (...) be attended with any danger; but when these
precautions are neglected, and the disease becomes violent, more powerful
medicines are necessary.

MEDICINE. -- An inflammation of the throat being one of the most acute and
dangerous distempers, which sometimes takes off the patient in a few hours, the
most early remedies are, with the greatest care and diligence to be
administered. In the very first attack, therefore, when it is violent, it will
be proper to bleed in the arm, or rather in the jugular vein, and to repeat the
operation if the symptoms require.

THE belly should likewise be gently opened. This may either be done by giving
the patient for his ordinary drink a decoction of figs and tamarinds, or small
doses of rhubarb and nitre, as recommended in page 172. These may be increased
according to the age of the patient, and repeated till they have the desired
effect.

I have often known very good effects from a bit of sal prunel, or purified
nitre, held in the mouth, and swllowed down as it melted. This promotes the
discharge of saliva, by which means it answers the end of a gargle, while, at
the same time, it cools the blood, by promoting the discharge of urine, etc.

THE throat ought, likewise, to be rubbed twice or thrice a day with a little
of the volatile liniment. This may be made by taking an ounce of oil of sweet
almonds, and half an ounce of spirit of hartshorn, and shaking them together in
a vial till they be united. I do not remember ever to have seen this fail to
produce some good effects. The throat should be carefully covered with wool or
flannel, to prevent the cold from penetrating the skin, as this application
renders it very tender. Many other external applications are recommended in
this disease, as a swallow's nest, poultices made of the funges called
Jews-ears, etc. But as we do not look upon any of these to be preferable to a
common poultice of bread and milk, we shall take no farther notice of them.

BLISTERING upon the neck, or behind the ears, in violent inflammations of the
throat, is very beneficial. After the plasters are taken off, the part ought to
be kept running by the application of sharp ointment, till the inflammation is
gone; otherwise, upon their drying up, the patient will be in danger of a
relapse.

WHEN the patient has been treated as above, a suppuration seldom happens.
This, however, is sometimes the case, in spite of all our endeavors to prevent
it. When the inflammation and swelling continue, and it is evident that a
suppuration will ensue, it ought to be promoted by drawing the steam of warm
water into the throat through a tunnel, or the like. Soft poultices ought,
likewise, to be applied outwardly, and the patient may keep a roasted fig
constantly in his mouth.

IT sometimes happens, before the tumor breaks, that the swelling is so great,
as entirely to prevent any thing from getting down into the stomach. In this
case, the patient must inevitably perish, unless he can be supported in some
other way. This can only be done by nourishing clysters of broth, or gruel with
milk, etc. Patients have often been supported by these for several days, till
the tumor has broke; and afterward they have recovered.

NOT only the passage of the food, but the breathing is often prevented by the
tumor. In this case, nothing can save the patient's life, but opening the
trachea or windpipe, That has been so often done with success, that no person,
in such desperate circumstances, ought to hesitate a moment about the
operation; but as it can only be performed by a surgeon, it is not necessary
here to give any directions about it.

WHEN a difficulty of swallowing is not attended with an acute pain or
inflammation, it is generally owing to an obstruction of the glands about the
throat, and only requires that the part be kept warm, and the throat frequently
gargled with somewhat that may gently stimulate the glands, as a decoction of
figs with vinegar and honey; to which may be added a little mustard, or a small
quantity of spirits.

BUT this kind of gargle is never to be used where there are signs of an
inflammation. This species of angina has various names among the common people,
as the pap of the throat, the falling down of the almonds of the ears, etc.
Accordingly, to remove it, they pull the patient up by the hair of the head,
and thrust their fingers under his jaws, etc. all which practices are, at best,
useless, and often hurtful.

THOSE who are subject to inflammations of the throat, in order to prevent too
great a fullness of blood and humors, ought to live temperately. Such as do not
choose to observe this rule, must have frequent recourse to purging and other
evacuations, to discharge the superfluous humors. They ought likewise to
beware of catching cold, and should abstain from aliment and medicines of an
astringent or stimulating nature.

VIOLENT exercise, by increasing the motion and force of the blood, is apt to
occasion an inflammation of the throat, especially if cold liquor be drank
immediately after it, or the body suffered suddenly to cool. Those who would
avoid this disease, ought, therefore, after speaking aloud, singing, running,
drinking warm liquor, or doing any thing that may strain the throat, or
increase the circulation of the blood toward it, to take care to cool
gradually, and to wrap plenty of coverings about their necks, etc.

I have often known persons who had been subject to sore throats, kept entirely
free from that complaint by only wearing a ribband, or a bit of flannel,
constantly about their necks, or by wearing a pair of thicker shoes, etc. These
may seem trifling, but they have great effect. There is danger indeed in
leaving them off, after persons have been accustomed to them; but surely the
inconveniency of using such things for life, is not to be compared with the
danger which may attend the neglect of them.

OF THE MALIGNANT QUINSEY, OR PUTRID, ULCEROUS SORE THROAT.
THIS kind of quinsey is but little known in the northern parts of Britain,
though, for some time past, it has been very fatal in the more southern
counties. Children are more subject to it than adults, females than males, and
the delicate than those who are hardy and robust. It prevails most in autumn,
or after a long course of damp, or fultry weather.

CAUSE. -- This is evidently a contageous distemper, and is generally
communicated by infection. Whole families, and even entire villages often
receive the infection from one person. This ought to put people upon their
guard against going near such patients as labor under the disorder; as by that
means they endanger not only their own lives, but likewise those of their
friends and connections.

SYMPTOMS. -- It begins with alternate fits of shivering and heat. The pulse is
quick, but low and unequal, and generally continues so through the whole course
of the disease. The patient complains greatly of weakness and oppression of the
breast; his spirits are low, and he is apt to faint away when set upright; he
is troubled with a nausea, and often with a vomiting or purging. The two latter
are most common in children. The eyes appear red and watery, and the face
swells. The urine is at first pale and crude; but, as the disease advances, it
turns more of a yellowish color. The tongue is white, and generally moist,
which distinguishes this from an inflammatory disease. Upon looking into the
throat it appears swelled, and of a florid red color. Pale, or ash-colored
spots, however, are here and there interspersed, and sometimes one broad patch
or spot, of an irregular figure, and pale white color, surrounded with florid
red only appears. These whitish spots, or sloughs, cover so many ulcers
underneath.

AN efflorescence, or eruption upon the neck, arms, breast, and fingers, about
the second or third day, is a common symptom of this disease. When it appears,
the purging and vomiting generally cease.

THERE is often a slight degree of delirium, and the face frequently appears
blotted, and the inside of the nostrils red and inflamed. The patient complains
of a disagreeable, putrid smell, and his breath is very offensive.

THE putrid, ulcerous sore throat, may be distinguished from the inflammatory,
by the vomiting and looseness, with which it is generally ushered in; by the
foul ulcers in the throat, covered with a white or livid coat; and, by the
excessive weakness of the patient; with other symptoms of a putrid fever.

UNFAVOURABLE symptoms are, an obstinate purging, extreme weakness, dimness of
the sight, a livid or black color of the spots, and frequent shiverings, with
a weak, fluttering pulse. If the eruption upon the skin suddenly disappears, or
becomes of a livid color, with a discharge of blood from the nose or mouth,
the danger is very great.

IF a gentle sweat breaks out about the third or fourth day, and continues with
a slow, firm, and equal pulse; if the sloughs cast off in a kindly manner, and
appear clean and florid at the bottom; and if the breathing be soft and free,
with a lively color of the eyes, there is reason to hope for a salutary crisis.

REGIMEN. -- The patient must be kept quiet, and, for the most part, in bed, as
he will be apt to faint when taken out of it. His food must be nourishing and
restorative; as sago gruel with red wine, jellies, broths, etc. His drink ought
to be generous, and of an antiseptic quality; as red wine negas, white wine
whey, and such like.

MEDICINE. -- The medicine in this kind of quinsey is entirely different from
that which is proper in the inflammatory. All evacuations, as bleeding,
purging, etc. which weaken the patient, must be avoided. Cooling medicines, as
nitre, and cream of tartar, are, likewise, hurtful. Strengthening cordials
alone can be used with safety; and these ought never to be neglected.

IF, at the beginning, there be a great nausea, or inclination to vomit, the
patient must drink an infusion of green tea, camomile flowers, or carduus
benedictus, in order to clean the stomach. If these be not sufficient, he may
take a few grains of the powder of ipecacuanha, or any other gentle vomit.

IF the disease be mild, the throat may be gargled with an infusion of sage and
rose leaves, to a gill of which may be added a spoonful or two of honey, and as
much vinegar as will make it agreeably sharp; but, when the symptoms are
urgent, the sloughs large and thick, and the breath very offensive, the
following gargle may be used.

TO six or seven ounces of the pectoral decoction, when boiling, add half an
ounce of contrayerva root; let it boil for some time, and afterward strain the
liquor; to which add two ounces of white wine vinegar, an ounce of fine honey,
and an ounce of the tincture of myrrh. This ought not only to be used as a
gargle, but a little of it should frequently be injected with a syringe to
clean the mouth, before the patient takes any meat or drink. This method is
peculiarly necessary for children, who cannot use a gargle.

IT will be of great benefit if the patient frequently receives into his mouth,
through an inverted funnel, the steams of warm vinegar, myrrh, and honey.

WHEN the putrid symptoms run high, and the disease is attended with danger,
the only medicine that can be depended upon is the Jesuits bark. It may be
taken in substance, if the patient's stomach will bear it. If not, an ounce of
bark grossly powdered, with two drams of Virginian snakeroot, may be boiled in
an English pint and an half of water, to half a pint; to which a tea spoonful
of the elixir of vitriol may be added, and an ordinary tea cupful of it taken
every three or four hours. Blistering plasters are very beneficial in this
disease, especially when the patient's pulse and spirits are low. They may be
applied to the throat, behind the ears, or upon the back-part of the neck.

SHOULD the vomiting prove troublesome, it will be proper to give the patient
two table spoonfuls of the saline julep, recommended in page 175, every two
hours, or oftener, if necessary. Tea made of mint and a little cinnamon, will
likewise be a proper drink, especially if an equal quantity of red wine be
mixed with it.

IN case of a violent looseness, the size of a nutmeg of diascordium, or the
Japonic confection, may be taken two or three times a day, or oftener, if
necessary; and the patient's drink must be red wine negas.

IF a discharge of blood from the nose happens, the steams of warm vinegar may
be received up the nostrils frequently; and the drink may be sharpened with
spirits of vitriol, or tincture of roses.

IN case of a strangury, the belly must be fomented with warm water, and
emollient clysters given three or four times a day.

AFTER the violence of the disease is over, the belly should be opened with
mild purgatives; as manna, senna, rhubarb, or the like.

IF great weakness and dejection of spirits, or night sweats, with other
symptoms of a consumption, should remain after this disease, we would recommend
it to the patient to continue the use of the Jesuits bark, with the elixir of
vitriol, and to take frequently a glass of generous wine. These, together with
a milk diet, and riding on horseback, are the most likely means for recovering
his strength.

OF COLDS.
IT has already been observed, that colds are the effect of an obstructed
perspiration; the common causes of which we have likewise endeavored to point
out, and shall not here repeat them. Neither shall we spend time in enumerating
all the various symptoms of colds, as they are pretty generally known. It may
not, however, be amiss to observe, that almost every cold is a kind of fever,
and only differs in degree from some of those which have already been treated
of.

No age, sex, nor constitution, are exempted from this disease; neither is it
in the power of (...) to prevent it. The inhabitants of every climate are
^^able to catch cold, nor can even the greatest circumspection defend them
against its attacks. Indeed, if the human body could be kept constantly in an
uniform degree of warmth, such a thing as catching cold would be impossible:
But as that cannot be effected by any means, the perspiration must be liable to
many changes. Such changes, however, when small, do not affect the health; but,
when excessive, they must prove hurtful. Hence the great secret of preventing
colds, lies in avoiding, as far as possible, all extremes either of heat or
cold.

WHEN oppression of the breast, a stuffing of the nose, unusual weariness, or a
pain of the head, etc. give ground to believe that the perspiration is
obstructed, or, in other words, that the person has caught cold, he ought
immediately to lessen his diet, at least, the usual quantity of his solid food,
and to abstain from all strong liquors. Instead of flesh, fish, eggs, milk, and
other nourishing diet, he may eat light bread pudding, veal, or chicken broth,
paps, or gruels, and such like. His drink may be water gruel, sweetened with a
little honey; an infusion of balm, or linseed, sharpened with the juice of
orange or lemon; a decoction of barley and liquorice, with tamarinds, or any
other cool, diluting acid liquor.

ABOVE all, his supper should be light; as small posset, or water gruel,
sweetened with honey, and a little toasted bread in it. If honey should
disagree with the stomach, the gruel may be sweetened with treacle, or coarse
sugar, and sharpened with the jelly of currants. Those who have been accustomed
to generous liquors, may take white wine whey instead of gruel, which may be
sweetened as above.

THE patient ought to lie longer than usual in bed, and to encourage a gentle
sweat, which is easily brought on toward morning, by drinking tea, or any kind
of warm diluting liquor. I have often known this practice, in a day or two,
carry off a cold, which, in all probability, had it been neglected, would have
cost the patient his life, or have confined him for some months to his bed.
Would people sacrifice a little time to ease and warmth, and practice a
moderate degree of abstinence when the first symptoms of a cold appear, we have
reason to believe, that most of the bad effects which flow from an obstructed
perspiration, might be prevented. But, after the disease has gathered strength
by delay, all attempts to remove it, often prove in vain. A pleurisy, a
peripneumony, or a fatal consumption of the lungs, are the common effects of
colds that have either been totally neglected, or treated improperly.

MANY attempt to cure a cold, by getting drunk. But this, to say no worse of
it, is a very hazardous and foolhardy experiment. No doubt it may sometimes
succeed, by suddenly restoring the perspiration; but when there is any degree
of inflammation, which is frequently the case, strong liquors, instead of
removing the malady, will increase it. By this means a common cold is often
converted into an inflammatory fever.

WHEN those who labor for their daily bread have the misfortune to catch cold,
they grudge to lose a day or two, in order to keep themselves warm, and take a
little medicine, by which means the disorder is often so aggravated, as to
confine them for a long while, or even to render them ever after unable to
sustain hard labor. Such of the laboring poor as can afford to take care of
themselves, are often too hardy to do it; they affect to despise colds, and as
long as they can crawl about, scorn to be confined by what they call a common
cold. Hence it comes to pass, that colds destroy such numbers of mankind. Like
an enemy despised, they gather strength from delay, till, at length, they
become invincible. We often see this verified in travelers, who, rather than
lose a day in the prosecution of their business, throw away their lives, by
pursuing their journey with this disease upon them, even in the coldest season.

BUT colds may be too much as well as too little indulged. When a person, for a
slight cold, shuts himself up in a warm room, and drinks great quantities of
warm liquor, it may bring on such a general relaxation of the solids as will
not be easily removed. It will, therefore, be proper, when the disease will
permit, and the weather is mild, to join to the regimen mentioned above, gentle
exercise; as walking, riding on horseback, or in a machine, etc. An obstinate
cold, which no medicine can remove, will yield to a proper course of exercise
when duly persisted in.

BATHING the feet and legs every night in warm water, has a great tendency to
restore the perspiration. But care must be taken that the water be not too
warm, otherwise it will do hurt. It should never be warmer ^^n new milk, and
the (...) should go immediately to bed after using it. Bathing (...) feet in
warm water, lying in bed, and drinking warm water gruel, or other weak liquors,
will sooner take off a spasm, and restore the perspiration, than all the hot
sudori^ic medicines in the world. This is all that is necessary for removing a
common cold; and if this course be taken at the beginning, and pursued for a
few days, it will seldom fail.

BUT when the symptoms do not yield to abstinence, warmth, and diluting
liquors, there is reason to fear the approach of some other disease, as an
inflammation of the breast, an ardent fever, etc. If the pulse, therefore, be
hard and frequent, the skin hot and dry, and the patient complains of his head
and breast, etc. it will be necessary to bleed, and to give the cooling opening
powders mentioned in page 172, every three or four hours, till they give a
stool.

IT will likewise be proper to put a blistering plaster on the back, to give
two table spoonfuls of the saline mixture ordered in page 175, every three
hours, and, in short, to treat the patient, in all respects, as for a slight
fever. I have often seen this course, when observed at the beginning, remove
the complaint in two or three days, when the patient had all the symptoms of an
approaching ardent fever, or an inflammation of the breast.

OF COUGHS.
A cough is generally the effect of a cold, which has either been improperly
treated, or entirely neglected. When it proves obstinate, there is always
reason to fear the consequences, as this shows a weak state of the lungs, and
is often the forerunner of a consumption.

IF the cough be violent, and the patient young and strong, with a hard quick
pulse, bleeding will be necessary, to lessen the quantity of the humors, and
prevent a rupture of the blood vessels of the lungs, etc. but in weak and
relaxed habits, bleeding rather prolongs the disease. When the patient spits
freely, bleeding is unnecessary, and sometimes hurtful, as it tends to lessen
that discharge.

WHEN the cough is not attended with a fever, and the spittle is viscid and
tough, sharp pectoral medicines are to be administered; as gum ammoniac,
squills, etc. The solution of gum ammoniac may be prepared as directed in page
117, and two table spoonfuls of it taken three or four (...) a day, more or
less, according to the age and constitution of the patient. Squills may be
given various ways; two ounces of the vinegar, the oxymel, or the syrup, may be
mixed with the same quantity of spirituous cinnamon water, to which may be
added, an ounce of common water, and an ounce of balsamic syrup. Two table
spoonfuls of this mixture may be taken three or four times a day.

A syrup made of equal parts of lemon juice, honey and sugar candy, is likewise
very proper in this kind of cough* A table spoonful of it may be taken at
pleasure.

WHEN the defluxion is sharp and thin, these medicines rather do hurt. In this
case, gentle opiates, oils, and mucilages are proper. A cup of the infusion of
wild poppy leaves, with marsh mallow roots, or the flowers of coltsfoot, may be
taken frequently; or a tea spoonful of the paregoric elixir may be put into the
patient's drink twice a day. He may likewise take an emulsion made of an ounce
and an half of olive oil, six ounces of water, one ounce of pectoral syrup, and
a tea spoonful of spirits of hartshorn. These must be well shaken together, and
two table spoonfuls of the mixture taken every three or four hours. Fuller's
Spanish infusion is also a very proper medicine in this case, and may be taken,
if the above should disagree with the patient's stomach. It is made by infusing
in an English quart of boiling water, two drams of salt of tartar, half a dram
of saffron cut into small pieces, and an ounce of Spanish juice likewise cut
small. These must stand in a close vessel for twenty-four hours, in a gentle
degree of warmth. Afterward, let the infusion be strained, and a tea cupful of
it taken three or four times a day.

WHEN a cough is occasioned by acrid humors tickling the throat and fauces,
the patient should keep some soft pectoral lozenges almost constantly in his
mouth; as the Pontefract liquorice cakes, barley sugar, the Spanish juice, etc.
These blunt the acrimony of the humors, and by taking off their stimulating
quality, help to appease the cough.

IN obstinate coughs, proceeding from a flux of humors upon the lungs, it will
often be necessary, besides expectorating medicines, to have recourse to
issues, setons, or some other drain. In this case, I have always observed the
most happy effects from a Burgundy pitch plaster applied between the shoulders.
I have ordered this simple remedy in the most obstinate coughs, in a great
number of cases, and in many different constitutions, without ever knowing it
fail, unless where there were evident signs of an ulcer in the lungs. About the
bulk of a nutmeg of Burgundy pitch may be spread thin upon a piece of soft
leather, about the size of the hand, and laid between the shoulder-blades. It
may be taken off and wiped every three or four days, and ought to be renewed
once a fortnight or three weeks. This is indeed a cheap and simple medicine,
and consequently apt to be despised; but we will venture to affirm, that the
whole materia medica does not afford an application more efficacious in almost
every kind of cough. It has not, indeed, an immediate effect; but, if continued
long enough, it will succeed where most other medicines fail.

THE only inconveniency attending this plaster is the itching, which it
occasions in the part to which it is applied; but surely this may be dispensed
with, considering the advantage which the patient may expect to reap from the
application; besides, when the itching becomes very uneasy, the plaster may be
taken off, and the part rubbed with a dry cloth, or washed with a little warm
milk and water. Some caution, indeed, is necessary in discontinuing the use of
such a plaster; this, however, may be safely done by making it smaller by
degrees, and at length quitting it altogether in a warm season.

BUT coughs proceed from many other causes besides defluxions upon the lungs.
In these cases the cure is not to be attempted by pectoral medicines. Thus, in
a cough proceeding from a foulness and debility of the stomach, syrups, oils,
mucilages, and all kind of balsamic medicines, do hurt. This cough may be known
from one that is owing to a fault in the lungs by this mark, that in the latter
the patient coughs whenever he inspires, or draws in his breath fully; but in
the former that does not happen.

THE cure of this cough depends chiefly upon cleansing and strengthening the
stomach; for which purpose gentle vomits and bitter purgatives are most proper.
Thus, after a vomit or two, the sacred tincture, as it is called, may be taken
for a considerable time, in the dose of a table spoonful or two twice a day, or
as often as it is found necessary to keep the belly gently open. People may
make this tincture themselves, by infusing an ounce of hiera picra in an
English pint of white wine, letting it stand a few days, and then straining it
off for use.

IN coughs, which proceed from a debility of the stomach, the Jesuits ^ark is,
likewise, of considerable use. It may either be chewed, taken in powder, or
made into a tincture along with other stomachic bitters.

A nervous cough can only be removed by change of air, and proper exercise; to
which may be added the use of gentle opiates. A tea spoonful of the paregoric
elixir, or two of the saponaceous pills may be taken twice a day. If these
prove too weak, ten, fifteen, or twenty drops of liquid laudanum, more or less,
as circumstances require, may be taken at bedtime, or when the cough is most
troublesome. Putting the feet and hands in warm water, will often appease the
violence of a nervous cough.

WHEN a cough is only the symptom of some other malady, it is in vain to
attempt to remove it without first curing the disease from which it proceeds.
Thus, when a cough is occasioned by the cutting of teeth; keeping the belly
open, scarifying the gums, or whatever facilitates the teething, likewise
appeases the cough. In like manner, when worms occasion a cough, such medicines
as remove these, will generally cure the cough; as bitter purgatives, oily
clysters, and such like.

WOMEN, during the last months of pregnancy, are often greatly afflicted with a
cough, which is generally relieved by bleeding, and keeping the belly open.
They ought to avoid all flatulent food, and to wear a loose easy dress.

A cough is not only a symptom, but is often, likewise, the forerunner of
diseases. Thus, the gout is frequently ushered in by a very troublesome cough,
which affects the patient for some days before the coming on of the fit. A
paroxysm of the gout generally removes this cough, which should, therefore, be
promoted, by keeping the extremities warm, drinking warm liquors, and bathing
the feet and legs frequently in lukewarm water.

OF THE CHIN-COUGH.
THIS cough seldom affect adults, but is often epidemical among children. Such
children as live upon thin watery diet, who breathe unwholesome air, and have
too little exercise, are most liable to this disease, and generally suffer most
from it.

THE chin-cough is so well known, even to nurses, that no description of it is
necessary. Whatever hurts the digestion, obstructs the perspiration, or relaxes
the solids, predisposes to this disease; consequently its cure must depend upon
cleaning and strengthening the stomach, bracing the solids, and, at the same
time, promoting perspiration, and the different secretions.

THE diet in this disease must be light, and of easy digestion; for children,
good bread made into pap or pudding, chicken broth, with other light spoon
meats, are proper; but those who are farther advanced, may be allowed sago
gruel, and, if the fever be not high, a little boiled chicken, or other white
meats. The drink may be pennyroyal tea, sweetened with honey or sugar candy,
small wine whey; or, if the patient be weak, he may sometimes be allowed a
little negas.

THE most effectual remedy in this disease is change of air. This often removes
the malady, even when the change seems to be from a purer to a less wholesome
air. This may, in some measure, depend on the patient's being removed from the
place where the infection prevails. Most of the diseases of children are
infectious; nor is it at all uncommon to find the chin-cough prevailing in one
town or village, when another, at a very small distance, is quite free from it.
But, whatever be the cause, we are sure of the fact. No time ought, therefore,
to be lost in removing the patient at some distance from the place where he
caught the disease, and, if possible, into a more pure and dry air.

WHEN the disease proves violent, and the patient is in danger of being
suffocated by the cough, he ought to be bled, especially if there be a fever
with a hard full pulse. But, as the chief intention of bleeding is to prevent a
rupture of the blood vessels of the lungs, and to render it more safe to give
vomits, it will seldom be necessary to repeat the operation; yet, if there be
symptoms of an inflammation of the lungs, a second, or even a third bleeding
may be requisite.

IT is a favorable symptom when the patient vomits after the fit. This cleans
the stomach, and greatly relieves the cough. It will, therefore, be proper to
promote the discharge, either by camomile tea, or lukewarm water; and, when
these are not sufficient, small doses of ipecacuanha may be given. A child of
three or four years of age may take five or six grains; and to others, less or
more must be given, according to their age and strength.

IT is very difficult to make children drink after a vomit. I have often seen
them happily deceived, by infusing a scruple or half a dram, of the powder of
ipecacuanha in a tea-pot, with half an English pint of boiling water. If this
be disguised with a few drops of milk, and a little sugar, they will imagine it
tea, and drink it very greedily. A small tea cupful of this may be given every
quarter of an hour, or rather every ten minutes, till it operates. When they
begin to puke, there will be no occasion for drinking any more, as the water
already on their stomach will be sufficient.

VOMITS not only clean the stomach, which, in this disease is generally loaded
with viscid phlegm, but they likewise promote the perspiration and other
secretions; and ought, therefore, to be repeated, according to the obstinacy of
the disease. They should not, however, be too strong; gentle vomits, frequently
repeated, are both less dangerous, and more beneficial than strong ones.

AS the patient is generally costive, it will be proper to keep his belly
gently open. The best medicines for this purpose are rhubarb and its
preparations, or the sacred tincture, if the patient can be brought to take it.
Of this a tea spoonful or two may be given to a young child twice or thrice
a day, as there is occasion. To such as are farther advanced, the dose must be
proportionally increased, and repeated till it has the desired effect. Those
who cannot be brought to take the bitter tincture, may have an infusion of
senna and prunes, sweetened with manna, coarse sugar, or honey; or a few grains
of rhubarb, mixed with a spoonful or two of syrup, or current jelly, so as to
disguise the taste. Most children are fond of syrups and jellies, and seldom
refuse even a bitter medicine when mixed with them.

MANY people believe that oily, pectoral, and balsamic medicines, possess
wonderful virtues for the cure of the chin-cough, and accordingly exhibit them
plentifully to patients of every age and constitution, without considering that
every thing of this nature must load the stomach, hurt the digestion, and, of
course, aggravate the disorder.

THE millepedes, or woodlice, are greatly recommended for the cure of a
chin-cough. Those who choose to make use of these insects, may infuse two
ounces of them bruised in an English pint of small white wine for one night.
Afterward the liquor may be strained through a cloth, and a table spoonful of
it given to the patient three or four times a day.

OPIATES are sometimes necessary to allay the violence of the cough. For this
purpose, a little of the syrup of poppies, or ten, fifteen, or twenty drops,
according to the age of the patient, of the paregoric elixir, may be taken in a
cup of hyssop, or pennyroyal tea, three or four times a day. An adult may take
a table spoonful of the syrup, or a tea spoonful of the elixir.

THE garlic ointment is a well known remedy in North-Britain for the
chin-cough. It is made by beating in a mortar garlic with an equal quantity of
hogs lard, butter, or oil. With this the soles of the feet may be rubbed twice
or thrice a day, or it may be spread thin upon a rag, and applied as a plaster.
It should be renewed every night and morning at least, as the garlic soon loses
its virtue. This is an exceeding good medicine, both in the chin-cough, and in
most other coughs of an obstinate nature. It ought not, however, to be used
when the patient is very hot, or feverish, le^t it increase these symptoms.

THE feet should be bathed once every two or three days in warm water; and the
Burgundy pitch plaster, mentioned in page 196, may be applied betwixt the
shoulders. But when the disease proves very violent, it will be necessary,
instead of it, to apply a blistering plaster, and to keep the part open for
some time with issue ointment.

WHEN the disease is prolonged, and the patient is free of a fever, the Jesuits
bark, and other bitters, are the most proper medicines. The bark may either be
taken in substance, or in a decoction or infusion, as is most agreeable to the
patient. For a child, ten, fifteen, or twenty grains may be given for a dose,
according to the age of the patient. For an adult, half a dram, or two
scruples, will be proper. Some give the extract of the bark with cantharides;
but to manage this, requires some skill and attention. It is more safe to give
a few grains of castor along with the bark. A child of six or seven years of
age may take seven or eight grains of castor, with fifteen grains of powdered
bark, for a dose. This may be made into a mixture, with two or three ounces of
any simple distilled water, and a little syrup, and taken three or four times
a day.

INFLAMMATION OF THE STOMACH.
THIS is a dangerous disease, and requires the most speedy assistance, as it
frequently ends in a suppuration; and sometimes in a mortification, which is
certain death.

CAUSES. -- It may proceed from any of the causes which produce an inflammatory
fever; as cold liquor drank while the body is warm, an obstructed perspiration,
the sudden striking in of any eruption, etc. It may likewise proceed from the
acrimony of the bile, or from acrid and stimulating substances taken into the
stomach; as strong vomits or purges, corrosive poisons, and such like. When the
gout has been repelled from the extremities, either by cold or improper
applications, it often occasions an inflammation of the stomach. Hard or
indigestable substances taken into the stomach, as bones, the shells of nuts,
etc. have likewise that effect.

SYMPTOMS. -- It is attended with a fixed pain and burning heat in the stomach;
great restlessness and anxiety; a small, quick, hard pulse; vomiting, or, at
least, a nausea and sickness; excessive thirst; coldness of the extremities;
difficulty of breathing; cold clammy sweats; and sometimes convulsions and
fainting fits. The stomach is swelled, and often feels hard to the touch. One
of the most certain signs of this disease is the sense of pain, which the
patient feels upon taking any kind of food or drink, especially if too hot or
cold, into his stomach.

WHEN the patient vomits every thing he eats or drinks, is extremely restless,
has a hiccup, with an intermitting pulse, and frequent fainting fits, the
danger is very great.

REGIMEN. -- The patient must, with the greatest care, avoid all acrimonious,
heating, and irritating food and drink. His weakness may deceive the
bystanders, and induce them to give him wines, spirits, or other cordials; but
all these increase the disease, and often occasion sudden death. The
inclination to vomit, may likewise impose on the attendants, and make them
think a vomit necessary; but that too is almost certain death.

THE food must be light, thin, cool, and easy of digestion. It must be given in
small quantities, and should neither be quite cold nor too hot. Thin gruel made
of barley or oatmeal, light toasted bread, dissolved in boiling water, or very
weak chicken broth, are the most proper. The drink should be clear whey, barley
water, or decoctions of emollient vegetables; or liquorice and marsh mallow
roots, etc.

MEDICINE. -- Bleeding in this disease is absolutely necessary, and is almost
the only medicine that can be depended on. When the disease proves obstinate,
it will often be necessary to repeat this operation several times, nor must the
low state of the pulse deter us from doing so. The pulse in this disease
generally rises upon bleeding, and so long as that is the case, the operation
is safe.

FREQUENT fomentations with warm water, or a decoction of emollient vegetables,
are likewise beneficial. Flannel cloths dipped in th^se, must be applied to the
region of the stomach, and removed as they turn cool. They must neither be
applied too warm, nor suffered to continue till they become quite cold, as
either of these extremes would aggravate the disease.

THE feet and legs ought, likewise, to be frequently bathed in lukewarm water,
and warm bricks, or poultices, may be applied to the soles of the feet.

THE only internal medicines which we shall venture to recommend in this
disease, are mild clysters. These may be made of warm water, or thin water
gruel, and, if the patient be costive, a little sweet oil, honey or manna, may
be added. Clysters answer the purpose of an internal fomentation, while they
keep the belly open, and, at the same time, nourish the patient, who is often,
in this disease, unable to retain any thing upon his stomach. For these reasons
they must not be neglected, as the patient's life may depend on the application
of them.

OF THE ILIAC PASSION.
THIS is one of the most painful and dangerous diseases that mankind are liable
to. It proceeds from the same causes as the inflammation of the stomach; to
which may be added costiveness, worms, eating unripe fruits, or great
quantities of nuts, drinking hard windy malt liquors, as stale beer, bottled
ale, or sour wine, cider, etc. It may, likewise, be occasioned by a rupture,
scirrhous tumors of the intestines, or by their opposite sides growing
together.

THE symptoms here are nearly the same as in the foregoing disease; only the
pain, if possible, is more acute, and is situate lower down about the region of
the navel. The vomiting is likewise more violent, and sometimes even the
excrements, together with the clysters and suppositaries, are discharged by the
mouth. The patient is continually belching up wind, and has often an
obstruction of his urine.

WHILE the pain shifts, and the vomiting only returns at certain intervals, and
while the clysters pass downwards, there is ground to hope; but when the
clysters and foeces are vomited, and the patient is exceeding weak, with a low
fluttering pulse, a pale countenance, and a disagreeable, or stinking breath,
there is great reason to fear, that the consequences will prove fatal. Clammy
sweats, black foetid stools, with a small intermitting pulse, and a total
cessation of pain, are the signs of a gangrene, and approaching death.

REGIMEN. -- The regimen in this disease is in general the same as in an
inflammation of the stomach. The patient must be kept quiet, avoiding cold, and
all violent passions of the mind. His food must be thin, weak, and given in
small quantities; his drink weak and diluting; as clear whey, barley water, and
such like.

MEDICINE. -- Bleeding in this, as well as in the inflammation of the stomach,
is the remedy most to be depended on. It should be performed as soon as the
symptoms appear, and must be repeated according to the strength of the patient,
and the violence of the symptoms.

A blistering plaster applied immediately over the part where the most violent
pain is, has often a very good effect. Even clysters, which before had no
effect, will operate when the blister begins to rise.

FOMENTATIONS and laxative clysters are by no means to be omitted. The
patient's feet and legs should frequently be bathed in warm water; and cloths
dipped in it applied to his belly. Bladders, filled with warm water, may
likewise be applied to the region of the navel, and warm bricks, or bottles
filled with warm water, to the soles of the feet. The clysters may be made of
barley water or thin gruel, and softened with plenty of sweet oil, or fresh
butter. These may be administered every two or three hours, or oftener, if the
patient continues costive.

IF common clysters have not the desired effect, we would recommend the smoke
of tobacco. It may be blown into the bowels through an inverted pipe. This may
be repeated after some time, unless the effect of the first renders it
unnecessary.

IF the disease does not yield to clysters and fomentations, recourse must be
had to pretty strong purgatives; but as these, by irritating the bowels, often
increase their contraction, and, by that means, frustrate their own intention,
it will be necessary to join them with opiates; these, by allaying the pain,
and relaxing the spasmodic contractions of the guts, greatly assist the
operation of purgatives in this case.

WHAT often answers the purpose of purging very well, is a solution of the
bitter purging salts. Two ounces of these may be dissolved in an English pint
of warm water, or thin gruel, and two or three table spoonfuls given every half
hour till it operates. At the same time, fifteen, twenty, or twenty-five drops
of laudanum may be given in a glass of pepper mint, or simple cinnamon water,
to appease the irritation, and prevent the vomiting, etc.

ACIDS have often a very happy effect in staying the vomiting, and appeasing
the other violent symptoms of this disease. It will, therefore, be of use to
sharpen the patient's drink with cream of tartar, juice of lemon; or, when
these cannot be obtained, a little vinegar may be added to it.

BUT it often happens, that no liquid whatever will stay on the stomach. In
this case the patient must take purgative pills. I have generally found the
following answer very well. Take jalep in powder, and vitriolated tartar, each
half a dram, opium, one grain, Castile soap, as much as will make the mass fit
for pills. These must be taken at one dose, and if they do not operate in six
or seven hours, the dose may be repeated.

IF a stool cannot be procured by any of the above means, it will be necessary
to immerse the patient in warm water up to the breast. I have often seen this
succeed, when other means proved in vain. The patient must continue in the
water as long as he can easily bear it without ^ainting, and, if one emersion
does not succeed, it may be repeated after some time, when the patient's
strength and spirits are recruited. It is more safe for him to go frequently
into the bath, than continue too long at a time; and, it is often necessary, to
repeat it several times before it has the desired effect.

IT has sometimes happened, after all other means of procuring a stool had been
tried in vain, that this was brought about by immersing the patient's lower
extremities in cold water, making him walk upon a wet pavement, and dashing his
legs and thighs with the cold water, etc. This method, when others fail, at
least merits a trial. It is, indeed, attended with some danger; but a doubtful
remedy is better than none.

IN desperate cases it is common to give quicksilver. This may be taken to the
quantity of several ounces, or even a pound, but should not exceed that. When
there are evident marks of an inflammation, or any reason to suspect a
mortification of the guts, this medicine ought not to be tried. In that case,
it will only hasten the patient's death. But when the obstruction is occasioned
by any cause that can be removed by force, quicksilver is not only a proper
medicine, but the best that can be applied, as it is the fittest body we know
for making its way through the intestinal canal.

IF the disease proceeds from a rupture, the patient must be laid with his head
very low, and the intestines returned by gentle pressure with the hand. If
this, with fomentations and clysters, should not succeed, recourse must be had
to a surgical operation, which may give the patient relief.

SUCH as would avoid this excruciating and dangerous disease, must take care
never to be too long without a stool. Some who have died of it, have had
several pounds of hard, dry foeces taken out of their guts. They should,
likewise, beware of eating too freely of sour or unripe fruits, or drinking
stale windy liquors, pricked wines, or the like. I have often known it brought
on by living too much on baked fruits, which are seldom good. It likewise
proceeds frequently from cold caught by wet clothes, etc. but especially from
wet feet.

OF THE COLIC.
THE colic has great affinity, both in its symptoms and method of cure, with
the two preceding diseases. It is generally attended with costiveness and acute
pain of the bowels; and requires diluting diet, evacuations, fomentations, etc.

COLICS are variously denominated according to their causes, as the flatulent,
the bilious, the hysteric, the nervous, etc. As each of these requires a
particular treatment, we shall point out their most general symptoms, and the
means to be used for their relief.

THE flatulent, or wind colic, is generally occasioned by an indiscreet use of
unripe fruits, meats of hard digestion, windy vegetables, fermented liquors,
and such like. It may likewise proceed from an obstructed perspiration, or
catching cold. Delicate people, whose digestive powers are weak and
debilitated, are most liable to this kind of colic.

THE flatulent colic may either affect the stomach or intestines. It is
attended with a painful stretching of the stomach, or that part of the bowels
where it is lodged. The patient feels a rumbling in his guts, and is generally
relieved by a discharge of wind either upwards or downwards. The pain is seldom
confined to any particular part, as the vapor wanders from one division of the
bowels to an other, till such time as it finds a vent.

WHEN the disease proceeds from windy liquor, eating green fruit, sour herbs,
or the like, the best medicine is to take immediately a dram of brandy, gin, or
any good spirits, and to apply warm cloths to the stomach and bowels. The
patient should likewise sit with his feet upon a warm hearth stone, or apply
warm bricks to them; and he may drink camomile tea, or water gruel, with as
much pepper in it as to render it moderately warm.

THIS is the only colic wherein ardent spirits, spiceries, or any thing of a
hot nature, may be ventured upon. Nor, indeed, are they to be used here, unless
at the beginning, before there be any symptoms of inflammation. We have reason
to believe, that a colic occasioned by wind or flatulent food, might always be
cured by spirits and warm liquors, if they were taken immediately upon
perceiving the first uneasiness; but when the pain has continued for a
considerable time, and there is reason to fear an inflammation of the bowels is
already begun, all hot things are to be avoided, and the patient is to be
treated in the same manner as for the iliac passion.

SEVERAL kinds of food, as honey, eggs, etc. occasion colics in some particular
constitutions. I have generally found the best cure for th^se colics was to
drink plentifully of small diluting liquors, as water gruel, small posset,
toast and water, etc.

COLICS which proceed from excess and indigestions, generally cure themselves,
by occasioning vomiting or purging. These discharges are by no means to be
stopped, but promoted, by drinking plenty of warm water, or weak posset. When
their violence is over, the patient may take a dose of rhubarb, or any other
gentle purge, to carry off the dregs of his debauch.

COLICS which are occasioned by wet feet, or catching cold, may generally be
removed at the beginning, by bathing the feet and legs in warm water, and
drinking such warm diluting liquors as will promote the perspiration, as weak
wine whey, or water gruel, with a small quantity of spirits in it.

THESE flatulent colics, which prevail so much in the country, might generally
be prevented, if people were careful to change their clothes when they get wet.
They ought, likewise, to take a dram, or to drink some warm liquor after eating
any kind of green trash. We do not mean to recommend the practice of dram
drinking, but, in this case, ardent liquors prove a real medicine, and, indeed,
the best that can be applied.

THE bilious colic is attended with very acute pain about the region of the
navel. The patient complains of great thirst, and is generally costive. He
vomits a hot, bitter, yellow colored bile, which being discharged, seems to
afford some relief, but is quickly followed by the same violent pain as before.
As the distemper advances, the propensity to vomit increases, in so much, that
sometimes it becomes almost continual, and the proper motion of the intestines
is so far perverted, that there are all the symptoms of an impending iliac
passion.

IF the patient be young and strong, and the pulse full and frequent, it will
be proper to bleed, after which clysters may be administered. Clear whey, or
gruel, sharpened with the juice of lemon, or cream of tartar, must be drank
freely. Small chicken broth, with a little manna dissolved in it, or a slight
decoction of tamarinds, are, likewise, very proper, or any other thin, acid,
opening liquor.

BESIDES bleeding, and plentiful dilution, it will be necessary to foment the
belly with cloths dipped in warm water, and if this should not succeed, the
patient must be set in a warm bath up to the middle.

MILD purgatives are here likewise necessary, as the lenitive electuary, manna,
cream of tartar, or, what will answer very well, the bitter purging salts.
These may be dissolved in water, and given in the same manner as directed in
page 205. If these medicines will not stay on the stomach, it will be necessary
to join an opiate with them.

SUCH as are liable to frequent returns of the bilious colic should use flesh
sparingly, and live chiefly upon a light vegetable diet. They should, likewise,
take frequently a dose of cream of tartar with tamarinds, or any other cool,
acid purge.

THE hysteric colic bears a great resemblance to the bilious. It is attended
with acute pains about the region of the stomach, vomiting, etc. But what the
patient vomits in this case is commonly of a greenish color. There is a great
sinking of the spirits, with dejection of mind, and difficulty of breathing,
which are the characteristic symptoms of this disorder. Sometimes it is
accompanied with the jaundice, but this generally goes off of its own accord in
a few days.

IN this colic all evacuations, as bleeding, purging, vomiting, etc. do hurt.
Every thing that weakens the patient, or sinks the spirits, is to be avoided.
If, however, the vomiting should prove violent, weak camomile tea, or small
posset, may be drank to cleanse the stomach. Afterward the patient may take
fifteen, twenty, or twenty-five drops of liquid laudanum in a glass of cinnamon
water. This may be repeated every ten or twelve hours till the symptoms abate.

THE patient may likewise take four or five of the foetid pills, three times
a day, and drink a cup of pennyroyal tea after them. If asafoetida should
disagree with the stomach, which is sometimes the case, a tea spoonful of the
tincture of castor in a cup of pennyroyal tea, or thirty or forty drops of the
balsam of Peru dropped upon a bit of loaf sugar, may be taken in its stead. The
anti-hysteric plaster may also be applied to the region of the navel, which has
often a good effect.

THE nervous colic prevails most among miners, smelters of lead, plumbers, the
makers of white lead, etc. It is very difficult to cure, and often ends in a
palsy.

No disease of the bowels is attended with more excruciating pain than this.
Nor is it soon at an end. I have known it continue eight or ten days with very
little intermission, the belly all the while continuing bound in spite of
medicine, yet at length yield, and the patient recover.

THE general treatment of this disease is so nearly the same with that of the
iliac passion, or inflammation of the guts, that we shall not insist upon it.
The belly is to be opened by mild purgatives, given in small doses, and
frequently repeated, and their operation must be assisted by soft oily
clysters, fomentations, etc.

THE Barbados tar is said to be a proper medicine in this disease. It may be
taken to the quantity of two drams threetimes a day, or oftener if the stomach
will bear it. This tar, mixed with an equal quantity of strong rum, is likewise
proper for rubbing the spine, in case any tingling, or other symptoms of a
palsy are felt. When this tar cannot be obtained, the back may be rubbed with
strong spirits, or a little of the oil of nutmegs or rosemary.

IF the patient remains weak and languid after this disease, he must take
exercise on horseback, and use an infusion of the Jesuits bark in wine. When
the disease ends in a palsy, the Bath waters are found to be extremely proper.

To avoid this colic, people must shun all sour fruits, acid and austere
liquors, etc. Those who work in lead ought never to go to their business
fasting, and their food should be oily or fat. They may take a glass of sallad
oil, with a little brandy or rum every morning, but should never take spirits
alone. Liquid aliment is best for them; as fa^ broths, etc. but low living is
bad. They should now and then go a little out of the tainted air; and should,
at least, take physic every spring and fall.

SUNDRY other kinds of this disease might be mentioned, but too many
distinctions would ^end only to perplex and bewilder the reader. These already
mentioned are the most material, and should indeed be attended to, as their
treatment is very different. But even those who are not in a condition to
distinguish very accurately in these matters, may nevertheless be of great
service to patients in colics, by only observing the following general rules:
First, To bathe the patient's feet and legs in warm water; and next, To apply
bladders filled with warm water, or cloths dipped in it, to his stomach and
bowels. Afterward, To make him drink freely of weak, diluting, warm liquors.
And, lastly, To give him an emollient clyster every two or three hours.

INFLAMMATION OF THE KIDNEYS.
CAUSES. -- This disease may proceed from any of those causes which produce an
inflammatory fever. It is likewise occasioned by wounds, or bruises of the
kidneys, and by small stones or gravel lodging within them. It may also proceed
from strong diuretic medicines; as spirits of turpentine, tincture of
cantharides, etc. Violent motion, as hard riding or walking, especially in hot
weather, or whatever drives the blood forcibly into the kidneys, may occasion
this malady. It may likewise proceed from lying too soft, or too much on the
back, or from involuntary contractions, or spasms in the urinary vessels, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- There is a sharp pain about the region of the kidneys, with some
degree of fever, and a stupor, or dull pain in the thigh of the affected side.
The urine is at first clear, and afterward of a redish color; but in the
worst kind of the disease it generally continues pale, is passed with
difficulty, and commonly small quantities at a time. The patient feels great
uneasiness when he endeavors to walk or sit upright. He lies with more ease on
the affected side than on the sound; and has generally a nausea or vomiting,
resembling that which happens in the colic.

THIS disease, however, may be distinguished from the colic by the pain being
seated farther back, and by the difficulty of passing urine, which is a
constant symptom of this disease, but does nor always happen in the other.

REGIMEN. -- Every thing of a heating or stimulating nature is to be avoided.
The food must be thin and light; as water pap, small broths, with mild
vegetables, and the like. Emollient and soft liquors must be plentifully drank;
as clear whey, or balm tea sweetened with honey, decoctions of marsh mallow
roots, with barley and liquorice, etc. The patient, notwithstanding the
vomiting, must constantly keep sipping small quantities of these or other
diluting liquors. Nothing so safely and certainly abates the inflammation, and
expels the obstructing cause, as copious dilution. The patient must be kept
easy, quiet, and free from cold, so long as any symptoms of inflammation appear.

MEDICINE. -- Bleeding is here very necessary, especially at the beginning. Ten
or twelve ounces may be let from the arm or foot with a lancet, and if the pain
and inflammation continue, the operation may be repeated in twenty-four hours,
especially if the patient be of a full habit. Leeches may likewise be applied
to the haemorrhoidal veins, as a discharge from these will greatly relieve
(...) patient.

CLOTHS dipped in warm water, or bladders (...) it, must be applied to the part
affected, and (...) grow cool. If the bladders be filled with a (...) mallows
and camomile flowers, to which a little saffron is added, and mixed with about
a third part of new milk, it will be still more beneficial.

EMOLLIENT clysters are likewise frequently to be administered; and if these do
not open the belly, a little honey or manna may be added to them.

THE same course is to be followed where gravel or a stone is lodged in the
kidney; but when the gravel or stone is separated from the kidney, and lodges
in any of the urinary passages, it will be proper, besides the fomentations, to
rub the part with a little sweet oil, and to give gentle diuretics; as juniper
water sweetened with the syrup of marsh mallows, or a tea spoonful of the sweet
spirits of nitre, now and then in a cup of the patient's drink. He ought
likewise to take exercise on horseback, or in a coach, etc.

WHEN the disease is protracted beyond the seventh or eighth day, and the
patient complains of a stupor and heaviness of the part, has frequent returns
of chillness, shivering, etc. there is reason to suspect, that matter is
forming in the kidney, and that an abscess or ulcer will ensue.

WHEN matter in the urine shows, that an ulcer is already formed in the kidney,
the patient must be careful to abstain from all acrid, sour, and salted
provisions; and must live chiefly upon m^^d mucilaginous herbs and fruits,
together with the broth of young animals, made with barley and common pot
herbs, etc. His drink may be whey, and butter milk that is not sour. The latter
is reckoned a specific remedy in ulcers of the kidneys. To answer this
character, however, it must be drank for a considerable time. Chalybeat waters
have likewise been found beneficial in this disease. This medicine is easily
obtained, as it is found in every part of Great Britain. It must likewise be
used for a considerable time, in order to produce any salutary effects.

THOSE who are liable to frequent returns of inflammation, or obstruction of
the kidneys, must abstain from wines, especially such as abound with tartar;
and their food must be light, and of easy digestion. They should use moderate
exercise, and should not lie too hot, nor too much on their back.

INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER.
THE inflammation of the bladder proceeds, in a great measure, from the same
causes as that of the kidneys. It is known by an acute pain toward the bottom
of the belly, and difficulty of passing urine, with some degree of fever, a
constant inclination to go to stool, and a perpetual desire to make water.

THIS disease must be treated on the same principles as the immediately
preceding. The diet must be light and thin, and the drink cooling and diluting.
Bleeding is very proper at the beginning, and in robust constitutions, it will
often be necessary to repeat it. The bottom of the belly must be frequently
fomented with warm water, or a decoction of mild vegetables; and emollient
clysters must frequently be administered, etc.

THE patient should abstain from every thing that is of a hot, acrid, and
stimulating nature; and should live entirely upon small broths, gruels, or mild
vegetables.

A stoppage of urine may proceed from other causes besides an inflammation of
the bladder; as a swelling of the haemorrhoidal veins, hard foeces lodged in
the rectum; a stone in the bladder, excrescences in the urinary passages, a
palsy of the bladder, hysteric affections, etc. Each of these requires a
particular treatment, which does not fall under our consideration here. We
shall only observe, that in all of them a mild and gentle treatment is the
safest, as strong diuretic medicines, or things of an irritating nature,
generally increase the danger. Some persons have killed themselves by
introducing probes into the urinary passages, to remove, as they thought,
somewhat that obstructed the passage of the urine; and others have brought on a
violent inflammation of the bladder, by using strong diuretics for that purpose.

INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER.
THE liver is less subject to inflammation than any of the other viscera, as,
in it, the circulation is slower; but when an inflammation does happen, it is
with difficulty removed, and often ends in a suppuration, or schirrhous.

CAUSES. -- Besides the common causes of inflammation, we may here reckon the
following, viz. excessive fatness, a schirrhous of the liver itself, violent
shocks from strong vomits, when the liver was before un^ound, an adust or
atrabillarian state of the blood, any thing that suddenly cools the liver,
after it has been greatly heated, stones obstructing the course of the bile,
drinking strong wines or spiritous liquors, using hot spicy aliment, obstinate
hypochondriacal distempers, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- This disease is known by a painful tention of the right side
under the false ribs, attended with some degree of fever, a sense of weight, or
fullness of the part, difficulty of breathing, loathing of food, great thirst,
with a pale or yellowish color of the skin and eyes.

THE symptoms here are various, according to the degree of inflammation, and
likewise according to the particular part of the liver where the inflammation
happens. Sometimes the pain is so inconsiderable, that an inflammation is not
so much as suspected; but when it happens in the upper or unequal part of the
liver, the pain is more acute, the pulse quicker, and the patient is often
troubled with a dry cough, a hiccup, and a pain extending to the shoulder, with
difficulty of lying on the left side, etc.

THIS disease may be distinguished from the pleurisy by the pain being less
violent, seated under the false ribs, the pulse not so hard, and by the
difficulty of lying on the left side. It may be distinguished from the hysteric
and hypochondriac disorders by some degree of fever, with which it is always
attended.

THIS disease, if properly treated, is seldom mortal. A constant hiccupping,
violent fever, and excessive thirst, are very bad symptoms. If it ends in a
suppuration, and the matter cannot be brought to discharge itself outwardly,
the danger is great. When a schirrhous of the liver ensues, the patient, if he
observes a proper regimen, may live a number of years tolerably ^asy; but if he
indulges in animal food and strong liquors, or takes medicines of an acrid or
irritating nature, the schirrhous will be converted into a cancer, which must
infallibly prove fatal.

REGIMEN. -- The same regimen is to be observed in this as in other
inflammatory disorders. All hot things are to be carefully avoided, and cool
resolving liquors, as whey, barley water, etc. drank freely. The food must be
light and thin, and the body, as well as the mind, must be kept easy and quiet.

MEDICINE. -- Bleeding is proper at the beginning of this disease, and it will
often be necessary, even though the pulse should not feel hard, to repeat the
operation. The belly must be kept gently open; but all violent purgatives are
to be avoided. A decoction of tamarinds, with a little honey or manna, will
answer this purpose very well. The side affected must be frequently fomented
with warm water, in the manner directed in the foregoing diseases. Mild
laxative clysters should be frequently administered; and, if the pain should,
notwithstanding, continue violent, a blistering plaster may be applied over the
part affected.

MEDICINES which promote the secretion of urine, have a very good effect here.
For this purpose, half a dram of purified nitre, or half a tea spoonful of the
sweet spirits of nitre, may be taken in a cup of the patient's drink, three or
four times a day.

WHEN there is an inclination to sweat, it ought to be promoted, but not by
warm sudorifics. The only thing to be used for that purpose, is plenty of
diluting liquor drank about the warmth of the human blood. Indeed, the patient,
in this case, as well as in all other topical inflammations, ought to drink
nothing that is colder than the blood.

IF the stools should be loose, and even streaked with blood, nothing must be
given to stop them, unless they be so frequent as to weaken the patient. Loose
stools often prove critical, and carry off the disease.

IF the disorder, in spite of all endeavors to the contrary, should end in a
schirrhous, the patient must be careful to regulate his diet, etc. in such a
manner as not to aggravate the disease. He must not indulge in flesh, fish,
strong liquors, or any poignant or salted provisions; but must, for the most
part, live on mild vegetables, as fruits and roots, taking gentle exercise, and
drinking wh^y^ (...) water, or butter milk. If he takes any thing stronge^^
(...) should be ^^ne mild ale, which is much more safe than win^^ or spirits.

WE shall take no notice of inflammations of the other viscera. They must all
be treated upon the same principles as those already mentioned. The great rule,
with respect to all of them, is to avoid every thing that is strong, or of a
heating nature, to apply warm fomentations to the part affected, and to supply
the patient with plenty of weak, warm, diluting drink.

OF THE CHOLERA MORBUS, OR VOMITING AND LOOSENESS.
THIS is a violent purging and vomiting, attended with gripes, and a constant
desire to go to stool. It comes on suddenly, and is most common in autumn.
There is hardly any disease that kills more quickly than this, when proper
means are not used in due time for removing it.

CAUSES. -- It is occasioned by a redundency and putrid acrimony of the bile;
by food that easily turns rancid or sour on the stomach; as butter, fat pork,
sweet meats, cucumbers, melons, cherries, etc. It is sometimes the effect of
strong acrid purges or vomits; or of poisonous substances taken into the
stomach. It may likewise proceed from violent passions of the mind; as fear,
anger, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- It is generally preceded by a cardialgia, or heart burn, sour
belchings, and flatulences, with pain of the stomach and intestines. To these
succeed excessive vomiting, and purging of green, yellow, or blackish colored
bile, with a distention of the stomach, and violent griping pains. There is,
likewise, a great thirst, with a very quick unequal pulse, and often a fixed
acute pain about the region of the navel. As the disease advances, the pulse
often sinks so low as to become quite imperceptible, the extremities grow cold,
or cramped, and covered with a clammy sweat, the urine is obstructed, and there
is a palpitation of the heart. Violent hiccupping, fainting, and convulsions,
are the signs of approaching death.

MEDICINE. -- At the beginning of this disease, the efforts of nature to expel
the offending cause, must be assisted, by promoting the purging and vomiting.
For this purpose the patient must drink plenty of diluting liquors; as whey,
butter milk, warm water, thin water gruel, small posset, or, what is, perhaps,
preferable to any of them, very weak chicken broth. This should not only be
drank freely, to promote the vomiting, but a clyster of it given every hour, in
order to promote the purging.

AFTER these evacuations have been continued for some time, a decoction of
toasted oat bread, may be drank to stop the vomiting. The bread should be
toasted till it is of a brown color, but not burned, and afterward boiled in
spring water. If oat bread cannot be had, wheat bread, or oat meal, well
toasted, may be used in its stead. If this does not put a stop to the vomiting,
the saline mixture may be taken, as directed in page 175.

THE vomiting and purging, however, ought never to be stopped too soon. So long
as these discharges do not weaken the patient they are salutary, and may be
allowed to go on, or rather ought to be promoted. But when the patient is much
exhausted by the evacuations, or has a small intermitting pulse, coldness of
the extremities, with other symptoms of weakness, recourse must immediately be
had to opiates, and generous cordial medicines. Ten or fifteen drops of liquid
laudanum in half a glass of strong cinnamon water, may be taken every four or
five hours, till the violent symptoms be removed. Warm negas, or strong wine
whey, may likewise be taken to support the patient's spirits, and promote the
perspiration. His legs may be rubbed with flannel cloths, or wrapped in warm
blankets, and warm bricks applied to the soles of his feet.

WHEN the violence of the disease is over, to prevent a relapse, it will be
necessary, for some time, to continue the use of small doses of laudanum. Ten
or twelve drops may be taken in a glass of wine, at least twice a day, for
eight or ten days. The patient's food ought to be nourishing, but taken in
small quantities, and he should use moderate exercise. As the stomach and
intestines are generally much weakened, an infusion of the bark, or other
bitters, in small wine may be drank for some time.

THOUGH physicians are seldom called in due time in this disease, they ought
not, however, to despair of relieving the patient, even in the most desperate
circumstances. Of this I lately saw a very striking instance in an old man and
his son, who had been both seized with it about the middle of the night. I did
not see them till next morning, when they had much more the appearance of dead
than of living men. No pulse could be felt; the extremities were quite cold and
rigid; the countenance was ghastly, and the strength quite exhausted. Yet from
this deplorable condition they were both recovered by the use of opiates and
cordial medicines, with the regimen mentioned above.

OF A DIARRHOEA, OR LOOSENESS.
A looseness, in many cases, is not to be considered as a disease, but rather
as a salutary evacuation. It never ought to be stopped unless when it continues
too long, or evidently weakens the patient. As this, however, sometimes
happens, we shall point out the most common causes of a looseness, with the
method of treatment proper in each case.

WHEN a looseness is occasioned by catching cold, or an obstructed
perspiration, the patient ought to keep warm, to drink freely of weak diluting
liquors, to bathe his feet and legs frequently in lukewarm water, to wear
flannel next to his skin, and to take every other method to restore the
perspiration.

IN a looseness which proceeds from excess or repletion, a vomit is the proper
medicine. Vomits not only clean the stomach, but promote all the secretions,
which ^enders them of great importance in carrying off a debauch. Half a dram
of ipecacuanha in powder will answer the purpose very well. A day or two after
the vomit, the same quantity of rhubarb may be taken, and repeated two or three
times, if the looseness continues. The patient ought to live upon light
vegetable food, of easy digestion, and to drink whey, thin gruel, or ba^ley
water.

A looseness occasioned by the obstruction of any customary evacuation, as the
bleeding piles in men, the monthly discharges in women, etc. generally requires
bleeding. If that does not succeed, other evacuations, as issues, setons, etc.
may be substituted in the room of those which are obstructed. At the same time,
every method is to be taken to restore the usual discharges, as not only the
cure of the disease, but the patient's life may depend on this.

A periodical looseness ought never to be stopped. It is always an effort of
nature to carry off some offending matter, which, if retained in the body,
might produce fatal diseases. Children are very liable to this kind of
looseness, especially while teething. It is, however, so far from being hurtful
to them, that such children generally get their teeth with least trouble. If
these loose stools should at any time prove sour or griping, a tea spoonful of
magnesia alba, with four or five grains of rhubarb, may be given to the child
in a little pap or any other food. This, if repeated three or four times, will
generally correct the acidity, and carry off the griping stools.

A diarrhoea, or looseness which proceeds from violent passions or affections
of the mind, must be treated with the greatest caution. Vomits, in this case,
are highly improper. Nor are purges safe, unless they be very mild, and given
in small quantities. Opiates, and other antispasmodic medicines are most
proper. Ten or twelve drops of liquid laudanum may be taken in a cup of
valerian or pennyroyal tea, every eight or ten hours, till the symptoms abate.
Ease, cheerfulness, and tranquillity of mind, are here of the greatest
importance.

WHEN a looseness proceeds from acrid or poisonous substances taken into the
stomach, the patient must drink large quantities of diluting liquors, with oil
or fat broths, to promote vomiting and purging. Afterward, if the bowels are
inflamed, bleeding will be necessary. Small doses of laudanum may likewise be
taken to remove the spasms and the irritation of the bowels.

WHEN gouty matter, repelled from the extremities, occasions a looseness, it
is, by no means, to be stopped, but promoted by gentle doses of rhubarb, or
other mild purgatives. The gouty matter is likewise to be solicited to the
extremities by warm fomentations, and cataplasms. And the perspiration ought to
be promoted by warm diluting liquors; as wine whey, with spirits of hartshorn,
or a few drops of liquid laudanum in it.

WHEN a looseness proceeds from worms, such medicines ought to be used as kill
or carry off these vermin; as powder of tin, with purges of rhubarb and
calomel, etc. The proper doses of these medicines will be pointed out when we
come to treat of diseases occasioned by worms.

A looseness is often occasioned by bad water. When this is the case, the
disease generally proves epidemical. When there is reason to believe that this,
or any other disease, proceeds from the use of unwholesome water, it ought
immediately to be changed, or, if that cannot be done, it may be corrected by
mixing with it quicklime, chalk, or the like.

IN people whose stomachs are weak, violent exercise immediately after meals,
will occasion a looseness. Though the cure of this is obvious, yet it will be
proper, besides avoiding violent exercise, to use such medicines as tend to
brace and strengthen the stomach; as infusions of the bark, with other bitter
and astringent medicines, in white wine. The person ought, likewise, to take
frequently a glass or two of old red port, or good claret.

PERSONS who, from a peculiar weakness, or too great an irritability of the
bowels, are liable to frequent returns of this disease, should live
temperately, avoiding crude summer fruits, all unwholesome food, and meats of
hard digestion. They ought, likewise, to beware of cold, moisture, or whatever
may obstruct the perspiration, and should wear flannel next their skin. All
violent passions of the mind, as fear, anger, etc. are likewise carefully to be
avoided.

OF THE DYSENTERY, OR BLOODY FLUX.
THIS disease prevails in the spring and autumn. It is very infectious, and
often epidemical. Those persons are most liable to it who are much exposed to
the night air, or who live in places where the air is confined and unwholesome.
Hence it often proves fatal in camps, on shipboard, in jails, hospitals, and
such like places.

CAUSES. -- This disease may be occasioned by any thing that obstructs the
perspiration, or renders the humors putrid; as damp beds, wet clothes,
unwholesome diet, air, etc. But it is most frequently communicated by
infection. This ought to make people extremely cautious in going near such
persons as labor under the disease. Even the smell of the patient's excrements
has been known to communicate the infection.

SYMPTOMS. -- It is known by a flux of the belly, attended with a violent pain
of the bowels, a constant inclination to go to stool, and generally less or
more of blood in the stools. It begins, like other fevers, with chillness, loss
of strength, a quick pulse, great thirst, and an inclination to vomit. The
stools are at first greasy or frothy, afterward they are streaked with blood,
and, at last, have frequently the appearance of pure blood, mixed with small
filaments, or bits of skin, which is part of the internal coat of the
intestines abraded by the acrimony of the foeces. Sometimes, however, there is
no blood in the stools through the whole course of the disease. When the
patient goes to stool, he feels a bearing down, as if the whole bowels were
falling out, and sometimes a part of the intestine is actually protruded, which
proves exceeding troublesome, especially in children.

THIS disease may be distinguished from the diarrhoea, or looseness, by the
acute pain of the bowels, and the blood which generally appears in the stools.
It may be distinguished from the cholera morbus, by its not being attended with
such violent and frequent fits of vomiting, etc.

WHEN the dysentery attacks the old, the delicate, or such as have been wasted
by scorbutic, consumptive, or other lingering diseases, it generally proves
fatal. Vomiting and hiccupping are bad signs, as they show an inflammation of
the stomach. When the stools have an exceeding disagreeable smell, are green,
black, or mixed with small glandular substances, or bits of skin, the danger is
great. It is an unfavourable symptom when clysters are immediately returned;
but still more so, when the passage is so obstinately shut, that they cannot be
injected. A weak pulse, coldness of the extremities, with difficulty of
swallowing, and convulsions, are signs of approaching death.

REGIMEN. -- Nothing is of more importance in this disease than cleanliness. It
contributes greatly to the recovery of the patient, and no less to the safety
of such as attend him. In all contagious diseases, the danger is increased, and
the infection spread, by the neglect of cleanliness; but in none more than in
this. Every thing about the patient should be frequently changed. The
excrements should never be suffered to continue in his chamber, but removed
immediately, and buried under ground. A co^^^^nt stream of fresh air should be
admitted into the chamber; and it ought frequently to be sprinkled with
vinegar, juice of lemon, or some other strong acid.

THE patient must not be discouraged, but his spirits kept up in hopes of a
cure. Nothing tends more to render any putrid disease mortal than the fears and
apprehensions of the sick. All diseases of this nature have a tendency to sink
and depress the spirits, and, when that is increased by fears and alarms, from
those whom the patient believes to be persons of skill, it cannot fail to have
the worst effects.

A flannel vest worn next the skin has often a very good effect in a dysentery.
This promotes the perspiration without greatly heating the body. Great caution,
however, is necessary in leaving it off. I have often known a dysentery brought
on by imprudently throwing off a flannel vest before the season was
sufficiently hot. For, whatever purpose this piece of dress be worn, it should
never be left off but in a warm season.

IN this disease the greatest attention must be paid to the patient's diet.
Flesh, fish, and every thing that has a tendency to turn putrid or rancid on
the stomach, must be abstained from. Apples boiled in milk, water pap, and
plain light pudding, with broth made of the gelatinous parts of animals, may be
eat. Jelly broth not only answers the purpose of food, but likewise of
medicine. I have often known dysenteries cured ^y it, after pompous medicines
had proved ineffectual THE manner of making this broth is, to take a sheep's
head and feet with the skin upon them, and to burn the wool off with a hot
iron, in the manner they do in Scotland. Afterward to boil them till the broth
is quite a jelly. A little cinnamon or mace may be added, to give the broth an
agreeable flavor, and the patient may take a little of it warm, with toasted
bread, three or four times a day. A clyster of it may, likewise, be given twice
a day. Such as cannot use the broth made in this way, may have the head and
feet skinned; but we have reason to believe, that this hurts the medicine. It
is not our business here to reason upon the nature and qualities of medicines,
otherwise this might be shown to possess virtues every way suited to the cure
of a dysentery which does not proceed from a putrid state of the humors. One
thing we know, which is preferable to all reasoning, that whole families have
often been cured by it, after they had used many other medicines in vain. It
will, however, be proper that the patient take a vomit, and a dose or two of
rhubarb, before he begins to use the broth. It will, likewise, be necessary to
continue the use of it for a considerable time, and to make it the principal
food.
.

ANOTHER kind of food very proper in the dysentery, which may be used by such
as cannot take the broth mentioned above, is made by boiling a few handfuls of
fine flour, tied in a cloth, for six or seven hours, till it becomes as hard as
starch. Two or three table spoonfuls of this may be grated down, and boiled in
such a quantity of new milk and water as to be of the thickness of pap. This
may be sweetened to the patient's taste, and taken for his ordinary food THE
learned Dr. Rutherford, late professor of medicine in the university of
Edinburgh, used to mention this medicine in his public lectures with great
encomiums. He directed it to be made by tying three or four handfuls of the
finest flour, as tight as possible in a linen rag, afterward to dip it
frequently in water, and to dridge the outside with flour till a cake or crust
be formed around it, which prevents the water from soaking into it while
boiling. It is then to be boiled till it becomes a hard dry mass, as directed
above. This will not only answer the purpose of food, but may likewise be given
in clysters.
.

THE patient may likewise be allowed to eat freely of most kinds of good ripe
fruit; as apples, grapes, current berries, strawberries, etc. These may either
be eat raw or boiled, with or without milk, as the patient chooses. The
prejudice against fruit in this disease is so great, that many believe it to be
the common cause of dysenteries. This, however, is an egregious mistake. Both
reason and experience show, that good fruit is one of the best medicines, both
for the prevention and cure of the most dangerous kind of dysentery. In a
dysentery arising from a putrid state of humors, fruit is, in every respect,
calculated to counteract that tendency to putrefaction, from whence all the
danger proceeds. The patient, in such a case, ought, therefore, to be allowed
to eat as much fruit as he pleases, provided it be good I lately attended a
young gentleman who had been seized with a dysentery in North America. All
means had been tried for his relief, but to no purpose. At length, tired out
with disappointments from medicine, and reduced to skin and bone, he came over
to Britain, rather with a view to die among his relations than with any hopes
of a cure. After trying sundry medicines here, with no better success than
abroad, I advised him to leave off the use of drugs, and to trust entirely to a
diet of milk and fruits, with gentle exercise. Strawberries was the only fruit
he could procure at that season. These he eat with milk twice, and, sometimes,
thrice a day. The consequence was, that, in a short time, his stools were
reduced from upwards of twenty in a day to three or four, and sometimes not so
many. He used the other fruits as they came in, and was, in a few weeks, so
well as to leave the part of the country where I was, with a view to return to
America.
.

THE most proper drink in this disorder is whey. The dysentery has often been
cured by the use of clear whey alone. It may be taken both for drink, and in
form of a clyster. When whey cannot be had, barley water, sharpened with cream
of tartar, may be drank, or a decoction of barley and tamarinds; two ounces of
the former, and one of the latter, may be boiled in two English quarts of water
to one. Warm water, water gruel, or water wherein hot iron has been frequently
quenched, are all very proper, and may be drank in turns. Camomile tea, (...)
the stomach will bear it, is an exceeding proper drink. It both strengthens the
stomach, and by its antiseptic quality, tends to prevent a mortification of the
bowels.

MEDICINE. -- At the beginning of this disease it is always necessary to
cleanse the first passages. For this purpose, a vomit of ipecacuanha must be
given, and wrought off with weak camomile tea. Strong vomits are seldom
necessary here. A scruple, or at most half a dram of ipecacuanha, is generally
sufficient for an adult, and, sometimes, a very few grains will suffice. The
day after the vomit, half a dram, or two scruples of rhubarb, must be taken.
This dose may be repeated every other day for two or three times. Afterward
small doses of ipecacuanha may be taken for some time. Two or three grains of
the powder may be mixed in a table spoonful of the syrup of poppies, and taken
three times a day.

THESE evacuations, and the regimen prescribed above, will seldom fail to
perform the cure. Should it, however, happen otherwise, the following
astringent medicines must be used.

A clyster of starch or fat mutton broth, with twenty or thirty drops of liquid
laudanum in it, may be administered twice a day. At the same time, an ounce of
gum Arabic, and half an ounce of gum tragacanth, may be dissolved in an English
pint of barley water, over a slow fire, and a table spoonful of it taken every
hour.

IF these have not the desired effect, the patient may take four times a day,
about the bulk of a nutmeg of the ^aponic confection, drinking after it a tea
cupful of the decoction of logwood; which may be thus made: Boil three or four
ounces of the shavings of logwood in two English quarts of water to one;
toward the end, add two drams of cinnamon bark. This decoction gives the
stools a reddish color, which is sometimes mistaken for blood. We mention this
circumstance to prevent the patient from being alarmed at their appearance.

SOME have treated dysenteries very successfully, by giving the patient white
wax dissolved in milk. Others extol the virtues of the Cornessi root, the
Simaruba bark, etc. for the cure of this disease. When other medicines fail,
these strong astringents may be tried; but we hope they will seldom be found
necessary. At any rate, astringent, or binding medicines, never are to be used
till proper evacuations have been premised, otherwise they will fix the disease
instead of removing it.

PERSONS who have been cured of this disease are very liable to a relapse; to
prevent which, great circumspection with respect to diet is necessary. The
patient must abstain from all fermented liquors, except now and then a glass of
good wine; but he must drink no kind of malt liquor. He must, likewise, abstain
from animal food, as fish and flesh, and must live principally upon milk and
vegetables.

GENTLE exercise, and wholesome air, are likewise of importance. The patient
should go to the country as soon as his strength will permit, and should take
exercise daily on horseback, or in a machine. He may, likewise, use bitters
infused in wine or brandy, and may drink twice a day a gill of lime water,
mixed with an equal quantity of new milk.

WHEN dysenteries prevail, we would recommend a strict attention to
cleanliness, a spare use of animal food, and the free use of ^ound ripe fruits,
and other vegetables. The night air is to be carefully avoided, and all
communication with the sick. Bad smells are likewise to be shunned, especially
those which arise from putrid animal substances. The office houses where the
sick go are very dangerous. Nothing is more apt to occasion the disease than
being greatly afraid of it.

WHEN the first symptoms of the dysentery appear, the patient ought immediately
to take a vomit, to go to bed, and drink plentifully of weak, warm liquor, to
promote a sweat. This, with a dose or two of rhubarb, would often carry off the
disease at the beginning. In countries where dysenteries prevail, we would
advise such as are liable to them, to take either a vomit or a dose of physic
every spring and autumn, as a preventive.

THERE are sundry other fluxes of the belly, as the lientery and coeliac
passion, which, though less dangerous than the dysentery, yet merit
consideration. These diseases generally proceed from a relaxed state of the
stomach and intestines, which is sometimes so great, that the food passes
through them, without almost any sensible alteration; and the patient dies
merely from the want of nourishment.

WHEN the lientary or coeliac passion succeed a dysentery, they often prove
fatal. They are always dangerous in old age, especially when the constitution
has been broken by excess, or acute diseases. If the stools be very frequent,
and quite crude, the thirst great, with little urine, the mouth ulcerated, and
the face marked with spots of different colors, the danger is very great.

THE treatment of the patient is in general the same as in the dysentery. In
all obstinate fluxes of the belly, from whatever cause, the cure must be
attempted, by first cleaning the stomach and bowels with gentle vomits and
purges. Afterward, such a diet as has a tendency to brace and strengthen the
bowels, with opiates and astringent medicines, will generally perfect the cure.

THIS observation, likewise, holds with respect to a tenesmus, or frequent
desire of going to stool. It resembles the dysentery so much, both in its
symptoms and method of cure, that we think it needless to insist upon it.

OF A DIABETES, OR EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE OF URINE.
THE diabetes may be called a flux of the kidneys. It is seldom to be met with
among young people; but I have often known it happen to laborers in the
decline of life, especially those who followed the more violent employments,
and who had been hard drinkers in their youth.

CAUSES. -- A diabetes is often the consequence of acute diseases, as fevers,
fluxes, etc. where the patient has suffered excessive evacuations; it may also
be occasioned by excessive fatigue, as riding long journies upon a hard
trotting horse, carrying heavy burdens, running, etc. It may be brought on by
the use of strong stimulating diuretic medicines, as tincture of cantharides,
spirits of turpentine, and such like. It is often the effect of drinking large
quantities of mineral waters. Many imagine that these will do them no service
unless they be drank in large quantities, by which mistake it happens, that
they often occasion worse diseases than those they were taken to cure. In a
word, this disease may either proceed from too great a laxity of the organs
which secret the urine, from something that stimulates the kidneys too much,
or from a thin dissolved state of the blood, which makes too great a quantity
of it run off by the urinary passages.

SYMPTOMS. -- In a diabetes the urine generally exceeds in quantity all the
liquid food and drink which the patient takes. It is thin and pale, of a
sweetish taste, and an agreeable smell. The patient has a continual thirst,
with some degree of fever; his mouth is dry, and he spits frequently a frothy
spittle. The strength fails, the appetite decays, and the flesh wastes away,
till the patient is reduced to skin and bone. There is a heat of the bowels;
and frequently the loins, testicles, and feet are swelled.

THIS disease may be cured at the beginning; but, after it has continued long,
the cure becomes very difficult. In drunkards, and very old people, a cure is
not to be expected.

REGIMEN. -- Every thing that stimulates the urinary passages, or tends to
relax the habit, must be avoided. The patient should live chiefly on solid
food. His thirst may be quenched with acids, or sorrel, juice of lemon, or
vinegar. The mucilaginous vegetables, as rice, sago, and salop, with milk, are
the most proper food. Of animal substances, shellfish are to be preferred, as
oysters, crabs, etc.

THE drink may be Bristol water. When that cannot be obtained, lime water with
milk may be drank. This will be better if an ounce of gum Arabic be dissolved
in every pound of it. The white decoction, with isinglass dissolved in it, is
likewise a very proper drink. It is made by boiling two ounces of calcined
hartshorn, and half an ounce of gum Arabic, in three English pints of water to
two, and afterward straining it.

THE patient ought daily to take exercise, but it should be so gentle as not to
fatigue him. He should lie upon a hard bed or matress. Nothing hurts the
kidneys more than lying too soft. A warm dry air, the use of the flesh brush,
and every thing that promotes perspiration, is of service. For this reason, the
patient ought to wear flannel next his skin. A large strengthening plaster may
be applied to the back; or, what will answer the same end, a broad girdle may
be worn about the loins.

MEDICINE. -- Gentle purges, if the patient be not too much weakened by the
disease, have a good effect. They tend to promote a flux of the humors toward
the intestines, and, of course, to lessen the discharge by the kidneys. They
may consist of rhubarb, with cardamum seeds, or any other spiceries, infused in
wine, and may be taken in such quantities as to keep the belly gently open.

THE patient must next have recourse to astringents and corroborants. Half a
dram of powder, made of equal parts of alum and the gum called dragon's blood,
may be taken four times a day, or oftener if the stomach will bear it. The
alum must first be melted in a crucible; afterward they may both be pounded
together. Along with every dose of this powder the patient may take a tea
cupful of the tincture of roses. It is made by infusing in a stone ware vessel,
for four hours, an ounce of the dried leaves of red roses, with one dram of
spirit of vitriol, in two English pints of boiling water. Afterward the
tincture may be filtered, and four or five ounces of white sugar added to it.

IF the patient's stomach cannot bear the alum in substance, whey may be made
of it, and taken in the dose of three or four ounces three times a day. The
alum whey is prepared by boiling two English quarts of milk over a ^low fire,
with three drams of alum, till it be turned into whey.

OPIATES are of service in this disease, even though the patient rests well.
They take off spasms and irritation, and, at the same time, lessen the force of
the circulation. Ten or twelve drops of liquid laudanum may be taken in a cup
of the patient's drink two or three times a day.

THE best corroborants which we know, are the Jesuits bark and wine. A dram of
bark may be taken in a glass of red port or claret, three times a day. The
medicine will be more efficacious and less disagreeable, if fifteen or twenty
drops of the acid elixir of vitriol be added to every dose. Such as cannot take
the bark in substance, may use the decoction, mixed with an equal quantity of
red wine, and sharpened as above.

THERE is a disease pretty incident to laboring people in the decline of life,
called an incontinency of urine. This differs entirely from a diabetes, as the
water passes off involuntarily by drops, and does not exceed the usual
quantity. This disease is rather troublesome than dangerous. It is owing to a
relaxation of the spincter of the bladder, and is often the effect of a palsy.
Sometimes it proceeds from hurts, or injuries occasioned by blows, bruises,
preternatural labors, etc. Sometimes it is the effect of a fever. It may,
likewise, be occasioned by a long use of strong diuretics, or of stimulating
medicines, injected into the bladder.

THIS disease may be mitigated by the use of astringent and corroborating
medicines, such as have been mentioned above; but we do not remember ever to
have seen it cured.

OF A SUPPRESSION OF URINE.
IT has already been observed, that a suppression of urine may proceed from
various causes; as an inflammation of the kidneys, or bladder; small stones or
gravel lodged in the urinary passages, hard foeces lying in the rectum, a
spasm, or contraction of the neck of the bladder, clotted blood in the bladder,
a swelling of the haemorrhoidal veins, etc.

SOME of these cases require the cathater, both to remove the obstructing
matter, and to draw off the urine; but as this instrument can only be managed
with safety by persons skilled in surgery, we shall say nothing further of its
use.

WE would chiefly recommend, in all obstructions of urine, fomentations and
evacuations. If the patient be young, of a full habit, and if his pulse be
hard, frequent bleeding will be necessary, especially where there are symptoms
of a topical inflammation. Bleeding, in this case, not only abates the fever,
by lessening the force of the circulation, but by relaxing the solids, takes
off the spasm, or stricture upon the vessels, which occasioned the obstruction.

AFTER bleeding, fomentations must be used. These may either consist of warm
water alone, or decoctions of mild vegetables; as mallows, camomile flowers,
etc. Cloths dipped in these may either be applied to the part affected, or a
large bladder, filled with the decoction, may be kept continually upon it. Some
put the herbs themselves into a flannel bag, and apply them to the part, which
is far from being a bad method. These continue longer warm than cloths dipped
in the decoction, and, at the same time, keep the part equally moist.

IN all obstructions of urine, the belly ought to be kept open. This is not,
however, to be attempted by brisk purgatives, but by emollient clysters, or
gentle infusions of senna and manna. Clysters, in this case, not only open the
belly, but answer the purpose of an internal fomentation, and greatly assist in
removing spasms of the bladder, etc.

THE food must be light, and taken in small quantities. The drink may be weak
broth, or decoctions and infusions of mucilaginous vegetables, as marsh mallow
roots, lime tree buds, etc. A tea spoonful of the sweet spirits of nitre, or a
dram of Castile soap, may be frequently put into the patient's drink; and, if
there be no inflammation, he may drink small gin punch, without acid.

IN a suppression of urine, nature often attempts to relieve the patient by a
sweat, looseness, spitting, gulping up of clear water from the stomach, etc.
These discharges ought not to be suppressed, but encouraged, as the patient's
life often depends upon them.

PERSONS subject to a suppression of urine, ought to live very temperate. Their
diet should be light, and their liquor diluting. They ought to avoid all acids,
and wines that abound with tartar; they should likewise t^^^^^lenty exercise,
lie hard, and avoid study and sedentary ^^^^pations.

OF COSTIVENESS.
NO person can long enjoy good health, who does not go regularly to stool.
There is, however, a very great difference of persons in this respect, some
being able to bear costiveness much longer than others. We do not here mean to
treat of those astrictions of the bowels, which are the symptoms of diseases,
as in the colic, the iliac passion, etc. but only to take notice of that
infrequency of stools which sometimes happens, and which, in some particular
constitutions, may occasion diseases.

COSTIVENESS may proceed from an excessive heat of the liver; drinking rough
red wines, or other astringent liquors; too much exercise, especially on
horseback: It may, likewise, proceed from a long use of cold insipid food,
which does not sufficiently stimulate the intestines. Sometimes it is owing to
the bile not descending to the intestines, as in the jaundice; and, at other
times, it proceeds from diseases of the intestines themselves, as a palsy,
spasms, tumors, a cold dry state of the intestines, etc.

WHEN costiveness is constitutional, it may be borne a long time without any
bad effects; but when it proceeds from an inflammation or tumor in the
intestines, it is dangerous. Costiveness, when long continued, is apt to
occasion, pains of the head, vomiting, colics, etc. It is peculiarly hurtful to
hypochond^^^ and hysteric persons, as it generates wind and other grievous
symptoms.

PERSONS who are liable to be costive should live upon a moistening and
laxative diet, as roasted or boiled apples, pears, stewed prunes, raisins,
gruels with currants, butter, honey, and sugar, etc. Green broths, with
spinach, l^^ks, and other soft pot herbs, are, likewise, proper. Rye bread, or
that which is made of a mixture of wheat and rye together, ought to be eat. No
person troubled with costiveness should eat wheat bread alone, especially that
which is made of fine flour. The best bread for keeping the belly soluble, is
what the English call meslin. It is made of equal parts of wheat and rye; or,
more commonly, of two parts of the former, to one of the latter.

COSTIVENESS is increased by keeping the body too warm, and by every thing that
promotes the perspiration; as wearing flannel, lying too long in bed, etc.
Intense thought, and a sedentary life, are, likewise, hurtful. All the
s^^^etions and excretions are promoted by moderate exercise without doors, and,
by a gay, cheerful, sprightly temper of mind.

THE drink should be of an opening quality. All ardent spirits, austere and
astringent wines, as port, claret, etc. ought to be avoided. Malt liquor that
is fine, and of a moderate strength, is very proper. Butter milk, they, and
other watery liquors, are likewise proper, and may be drank in turns, as the
patient's inclination directs.

THE learned Dr. Arbuthnot advises those who are troubled with costiveness, to
use animal oils, as fresh butter, cream, marrow, fat broths; especially those
made of the internal parts of animals, as the liver, heart, midriff, etc. He,
likewise, recommends the expressed oils of mild vegetables, as olives, almonds,
pastaches, and the fruits themselves; all oily and mild fruits, as figs;
decoctions of mealy vegetables; these lubricate the intestines; some
saponaceous substances, which stimulate gently, as honey, hydromel, or boiled
honey and water, unrefined sugar, etc.

THE doctor observes, that such lenitive substances as are proper for persons
of dry atrabilarian constitutions, who are subject to astriction of the belly,
and the piles, and will operate when stronger medicinal substances are
sometimes ineffectual; but that such lenitive diet hurts those whose bowels are
weak and lax. He, likewise, observes, that all watery substances are lenitive,
and that even common water, whey, sour milk, and butter milk, have that effect.
-- That new milk, especially asses milk, stimulates still more, when it sours
on the stomach; and that whey turned sour, will purge strongly. -- That most
garden fruits are likewise laxative; and, that some of them, as grapes, will
throw such, as take them immoderately, into a cholera morbus, or incurable
diarrhoea.


THOSE who are troubled with costiveness ought, if possible, to remedy it by
diet, as the constant use of medicines, for that purpose, is attended with many
inconveniences, and often with bad consequences. I never knew any one get into
a habit of taking medicine for keeping the belly open, who could leave it off.
In time, the custom becomes necessary, and, generally, ends in a total
relaxation of the bowels, indigestion, loss of appetite, wasting of the
strength, and death.

WHEN the belly cannot be kept open without medicine, we would recommend gentle
doses of rhubarb to be taken twice or thrice a-week. This is not near so
injurious to the stomach, as aloes, jalep, or the other drastic purgatives so
much in use. Infusion of senna and manna may, likewise, be taken; or, half an
ounce of soluble tartar, dissolved in water gruel. About the size of a nutmeg,
of lenitive electuary taken twice or thrice a day, generally answers the
purpose very well.

OF INVOLUNTARY DISCHARGES OF BLOOD.
SPONTANEOUS, or involuntary discharges of blood, often happen from various
parts of the body. They are seldom, however, attended with great danger, and
prove often salutary. When such discharges are critical, which is frequently
the case i^ fevers, they ought not to be stopped. Nor, indeed, is it proper, at
any time, to stop them, unless they be so great as to endanger the patient's
life. Most people, afraid of the smallest appearance of blood from any part of
the body, fly immediately to the use of stiptic and astringent medicines, by
which means an inflammation of the brain, or some other fatal disease, is
occasioned, which, had the discharge been allowed to go on, might have been
prevented.

PERIODICAL discharges of blood, from whatever part of the body they proceed,
must not be stopped. These are always the efforts of nature to relieve herself,
and fatal diseases have often been the consequence of obstructing them. It may,
indeed, be sometimes necessary to check the violence of such discharges; but
even this requires the greatest caution. Instances may be given where the
stopping of a small periodical flux of blood, from one of the fingers, has
proved fatal to the person's health.

IN the early period of life, bleeding at the nose is most common. Those who
are farther advanced in life, are more liable to a haemoptoe, or discharge of
blood from the lungs. After the middle period of life, haemorrhoidal fluxes are
most common, and in the decline of life, discharges of blood from the urinary
passages.

INVOLUNTARY fluxes of blood may proceed from very different, and often from
quite opposite causes. Sometimes they are hereditary, or owing to a particular
construction of the body, as a sanguine temperament, a lax or plethoric habit,
etc. Sometimes they proceed from a determination of the blood toward one
particular part, as the head, the haemorrhoidal veins. They may likewise
proceed from an inflammatory disposition of the blood, in which case, there is
generally some degree of fever; this, likewise, happens when the flux is
occasioned by an obstructed perspiration, or a stricture upon the skin, the
bowels, or any particular part of the system.

BUT a dissolved state of the blood will, likewise, occasion haemorrhages.
Thus, in putrid fevers, the scurvy, the malignant smallpox, etc. there are
often very great discharges of blood from different parts of the body. They
may, likewise, be brought on by the use of any medicines which tend to dissolve
the blood, as mercury, cantharides, and the volatile alcaline salts, etc. Food
of an acrid or irritating quality, may, likewise, occasion haemorrhages; as
also strong purges and vomits, or any thing that greatly stimulates the bowels.

VIOLENT passions, or agitations of the mind, will also occasion haemorrhages.
These often cause bleeding at the nose, and I have known them sometimes
occasion an haemorrhage in the brain. Violent efforts of the body, by
overstraining or hurting the vessels, may, likewise, bring on haemorrhages,
especially when the body is long kept in an unnatural posture, as hanging the
head very low, etc.

THE cure of an haemorrhage must be adapted to its cause. When it proceeds from
too much blood, or a tendency to inflammation, bleeding, with gentle purges,
and other evacuations, will be necessary. It will, likewise, be proper for the
patient, in that case, to live chiefly upon a vegetable diet, to avoid all
strong liquors, and food that is of an acrid, hot, or stimulating quality. The
body should be kept cool, and the mind easy.

WHEN an haemorrhage is owing to a putrid or dissolved state of the blood, the
patient ought to live chiefly upon acid fruits with milk, and vegetables of a
nourishing nature, as sago, salop, etc. His drink may be wine diluted with
water, and sharpened with the juice of lemon, vinegar, or spirits of vitriol.
The best medicine, in this case, is the Jesuits bark. It may be taken as
directed in page 228.

WHEN a flux of blood is the effect of acrid food, or of strong stimulating
medicines, the cure is to be effected by such soft and mucilaginous diet as is
recommended in the dysentery or bloody flux. The patient may, likewise, take
frequently about the bulk of a nutmeg of Locatelli's balsam, or the same
quantity of spermaceti.

WHEN an obstructed perspiration, or a stricture upon any part of the system,
is the cause of an haemorrhage, it may be removed by drinking warm diluting
liquors, lying in bed, bathing the extremities in warm water, etc.

OF BLEEDING AT THE NOSE.
A bleeding at the nose is commonly preceded by some degree of quickness of the
pulse, a flushing of the face, pulsation of the temporal arteries, heaviness in
the head, dimness of the sight, heat and itching of the nostrils, etc.

TO persons who abound with blood, this discharge is very salutary. It often
cures a vertigo, the headache, a phrenzy, and even an epilepsy. In fevers, where
there is a great determination of blood toward the head, it is of the utmost
service. It is, likewise, beneficial in inflammations of the liver and spleen,
and often in the gout and rheumatism. In all diseases where evacuations are
necessary, a spontaneous discharge of blood from the nose, is of much more
service than the same quantity let with a lancet.

IN a discharge of blood from the nose, the great point is, to determine
whether it ought to be stopped or not. It is a common practice to stop the
bleeding without considering whether it be a disease, or the cure of a disease.
This conduct proceeds from fear; but it has many bad, and sometimes even fatal
consequences.

WHEN a discharge of blood from the nose happens in an inflammatory disease,
there is always reason to believe, that it may prove salutary; and, therefore,
it should be suffered to go on, at least as long as the patient seems to bear
it well.

WHEN it happens to persons in perfect health, who are full of blood, it ought
not to be stopped; especially if the symptoms of a plethora, mentioned above,
have preceded it. In this case, it cannot be stopped without risking the
patient's life.

IN fine, whenever bleeding at the nose relieves any bad symptom, and does not
proceed so far as to endanger the patient's life, it ought not to be stopped.
But when it returns frequently, or continues till the pulse becomes very low,
the extremities begin to grow cold, the lips pale, or the patient complains of
being sick, or like to faint, it must immediately be stopped.

THE patient should be set nearly upright, with his head inclining a little
backwards, and his legs immersed in water about the warmth of new milk. His
hands ought, likewise, to be put in lukewarm water, and his garters may be tied
a little tighter than usual, about three inches above the knee. Ligatures may,
likewise, be applied to the arms, about the place where they are usually made
for bleeding, and with nearly the same degree of tightness. These must be
gradually slackened as the blood begins to stop, and removed entirely as soon
as it gives over.

SOMETIMES, dry lint put up the nostrils will stop the bleeding. When this does
not succeed, dossils of lint dipped in strong spirits of wine, may be put up
the nostrils, or, if that cannot be had, they may be dipped in brandy. Roman
vitriol dissolved in water may, likewise, be used for this purpose, or a tent
dipped in the white of an egg well beat up, may be rolled in a powder made of
equal parts of white sugar, burnt alum, and white vitriol, and put up the
nostril from whence the blood issues.

INTERNAL medicines can hardly take place here, as they have seldom time to
operate. It may not, however, be amiss to give the patient half an ounce of
Glauber's salt, and the same quantity of manna, dissolved in four or five
ounces of barley water. This may be taken at a draught, and repeated if it does
not operate in a few hours. Ten or twelve grains of nitre may be taken in a
glass of cold water and vinegar every hour, or oftener, if the stomach will
bear it. If a stronger medicine be necessary, a tea cupful of the tincture of
roses, made as directed in page 227, with twenty or thirty drops of the small
spirit of vitriol, may be taken every hour. When these things cannot be had,
the patient may drink water, with a little common salt in it, or equal parts of
water and vinegar.

IF the genitals be immersed in cold water, it will generally stop a bleeding
at the nose. -- I have never known this fail.

SOMETIMES, when the blood is stopped outwardly, it continues to bleed
inwardly. This is very dangerous, and requires particular attention, as the
patient is apt to be suffocated with the blood, especially if he falls asleep,
which be is very ready to do after losing a great quantity of blood.

AFTER the bleeding is stopped, the patient ought to be kept as easy and quiet
as possible. He ought not to pick his nose, nor to take away the tents or
clotted blood, till they fall off of their own accord, and should not lie with
his head too low.

THOSE who are affected with frequent bleeding at the nose, ought to bathe
their feet often in warm water, and keep them warm and dry. They ought to wear
nothing tight about their necks, to keep their body as much in an erect posture
as possible, and never to view any object obliquely. If they have too much
blood, a vegetable diet, with now and then a dose of physic, is the safest way
to lessen it.

BUT when the disease proceeds from a thin dissolved state of the blood, the
diet should be rich and nourishing; as strong broths with bread, sago gruel
with wine and sugar, etc. Infusions of the Jesuits bark in wine, ought likewise
to be taken, and persisted in for a considerable time.

OF THE BLEEDING AND BLIND PILES.
A discharge of blood from the haemorrhoidal vessels is called the bleeding
piles. When the vessels only swell, and discharge no blood, but are exceeding
painful, the disease is called the blind piles.

PERSONS of a loose spungy texture, of a bulky size, who live high, and lead a
sedentary and inactive life, are most subject to this disease. It is often
owing to a hereditary disposition. Where this is the case, it attacks persons
more early in life than when it is accidental. Men are more liable to it than
women, especially those of a sanguine plethoric habit, or of a melancholy
disposition.

THE piles may be occasioned by an excess of blood, by strong aloetic purges,
high seasoned food, drinking great quantities of sweet wines, the neglect of
bleeding, or other customary evacuations, much riding, great costiveness, or
any thing that occasions hard or difficult stools. Anger, grief, and other
violent passions, will likewise occasion the piles. I have often known them
brought on by cold, especially about the anus. A pair of thin breeches will
occasion the disorder in a person who is subject to it, and sometimes even in
those who never had it before. Pregnant women are often afflicted with the
piles.

A flux of blood from the anus is not always to be reckoned a disease. It is
even more salutary than bleeding at the nose, and often prevents or carries off
diseases. It is peculiarly beneficial in the gout, rheumatism, asthmas, and
hypochondriacal complaints, and often proves critical in colics, and
inflammatory fevers.

IN the treatment of this disease, regard must be had to the patient's habit of
body, his age, strength, and manner of living. A discharge which might be
excessive and prove hurtful to one, may be very moderate, and even salutary to
another. That only is to be esteemed dangerous which

WHEN the piles are exceeding painful and swelled, but discharge nothing, the
patient must ^it over the steams of warm water. He may, likewise, apply a linen
cloth dipped in warm spirits of wine to the part, or poultices made of bread
and milk, or of leeks fried with butter. If these do not produce a discharge,
and the piles appear large, leeches must be applied as near the piles as
possible, or if they will fix upon the piles themselves so much the better.
When leeches will not fix, the piles may be opened with a lancet. The operation
is very easy, and is attended with no danger.

VARIOUS ointments, and other external applications, are recommended in the
piles; but I do not remember ever to have seen any effects from these worth
mentioning. Their principal use is to keep the part soft, which may be done
equally well by a soft poultice or an emollient cataplasm.

SPITTING OF BLOOD.
WE only mean here to treat of that discharge of blood from the lungs, which
commonly goes by the name of an haemoptoe, or spitting of blood. Persons of a
slender make, and a lax fiber, who have long necks and strait breasts, are most
liable to this disease. It is most common in the spring, and generally attacks
people before they arrive at the prime or middle period of life. It is a common
observation, that those who have been subject to bleeding at the nose when
young, are afterward most liable to an haemoptoe.

CAUSES. -- An haemoptoe may proceed from excess of blood, from a peculiar
weakness of the lungs, or a bad conformation of the breast. It is often
occasioned by excessive drinking, running, wrestling, singing, or speaking
aloud. Such as have weak lungs ought to avoid all violent exertions of that
organ, as they value life. They should, likewise guard against violent
passions, and every thing that occasions a rapid circulation of the blood.

THIS disease may likewise proceed from wounds of the lungs. These may either
be received from without, or they may be occasioned by hard bodies getting into
the windpipe, and so falling down upon the lungs, and hurting their tender
vessels. The obstruction of any customary evacuation, may occasion a spitting
of blood; as the neglect of bleeding or purging at the usual seasons, the
stoppage of the bleeding, piles in men, or the menses in women, etc. It may
likewise proceed from a polypus, schirrhous concretions, or any thing that
obstructs the circulation of the blood in the lungs. It is often the effect of
a long and violent cough; in which case, it is generally the forerunner of a
consumption. A violent degree of cold, suddenly applied to the external parts
of the body, will occasion an an haemoptoe. It may likewise be occasioned by
breathing in air which is too much rarefied to be able properly to expand the
lungs. This is often the case with those who work in hot places, as furnaces,
glass houses, etc. It may likewise happen to such as ascend to the top of very
high mountains, as the peak of Teneriff, etc.

SPITTING of blood is not always to be considered as a primary disease. It is
often only a symptom, and, in some cases, not an unfavourable one. This is the
case in pleurisies, peripneumonies, and sundry other fevers. In a dropsy,
scurvy, or consumption, it is a bad symptom, and shows that the lungs are
ulcerated.

SYMPTOMS. -- Spitting of blood is generally preceded by a sense of weight, and
oppression of the breast, a dry tickling cough, hoarseness, and a difficulty of
breathing. Sometimes it is ushered in with shivering, coldness of the
extremities, costiveness, great lassitude, flatulence, pains of the back and
loins, etc. As these show a general stricture upon the vessels, and a tendency
of the blood to inflammation, they are commonly the forerunners of a very
copious discharge. These symptoms do not attend a discharge of blood from the
gums or fauces, by which means they may always be distinguished from an
haemoptoe. Sometimes the blood that is spit up is thin, and of a florid red
color; and, at other times, it is thick, and of a dark or blackish color;
nothing, however, can be inferred from this circumstance, but that the blood
has lain a longer or shorter time in the breast before it was discharged.

SPITTING of blood, in a strong healthy person, of a ^ound constitution, is
seldom dangerous; but when it attacks the tender and delicate, or persons of a
weak lax fiber, it is not easily removed. When it proceeds from a schirrhous,
or polypus of the lungs, it is bad. The danger is greater when the discharge
proceeds from the rupture of a large vessel than of a small one. When the
extravasated blood is not spit up, but lodges in the breast, it corrupts, and
greatly increases the danger. When the blood proceeds from an ulcer in the
lungs, it is generally fatal.

REGIMEN. -- The patient ought to be kept cool, and perfectly at rest. Every
thing that heats the blood, or quickens the circulation, increases the danger.
The mind ought likewise to be soothed, and every occasion of exciting the
passion avoided. The diet should be soft, cooling, and slender; as rice, boiled
with milk, small broths, barley gruels, panada, etc. The diet, in this case,
can scarce be too low. Even water gruel is sufficient to support the patient
for some days. All strong liquors must be avoided. The patient may drink milk
and water, barley water, whey, butter milk, and such like. Every thing should
be drank cold, and in small quantities at a time. The patient must observe the
strictest silence, or, at least, speak with a very low voice.

MEDICINE. -- This, like the other involuntary discharges of blood, ought not
to be suddenly stopped by astringent medicines. More mischief is often done by
these than if it were suffered to go on. It may, however, proceed so far as to
weaken the patient, and even endanger his life, in which case, proper means
must be used for restraining it.

THE belly should be kept gently open by laxative diet; as roasted apples,
stewed prunes, etc. If these should not have the effect, a tea spoonful of the
lenitive electuary may be taken twice or thrice a day, as is found necessary.
If the bleeding proves violent, ligatures may be applied to the extremities, as
directed for the bleeding at the nose.

IF the patient be hot or feverish, bleeding, and small doses of nitre, will be
of use; a scruple, or half a dram, may be taken in a cup of his ordinary drink,
twice or thrice a day. His drink may likewise be sharpened with acids, as juice
of lemons, or a few drops of the spirit of vitriol; or he may take frequently a
cup of the tincture of roses, as directed in page 227.

BATHING the feet and legs in lukewarm water, by taking off spasms, has a very
good effect in this disease. Opiates too are sometimes beneficial for that
purpose; but these must be given with the greatest caution. Ten or twelve drops
of laudanum may be given in a cup of barley water twice a day, and continued
for some time, provided they be found beneficial.

THE conserve of roses is likewise a very good medicine in this case, provided
it be taken in sufficient quantity, and long enough persisted in. It may be
taken to the extent of three or four ounces a day; and, if the patient be
troubled with a cough, it should be made into an electuary with balsamic syrup,
and a little of the syrup of poppies.

IF stronger astringents be found necessary, fifteen or twenty drops of the
acid elixir of vitriol may be taken in a glass of water, three or four times
a day.

THOSE who are subject to frequent returns of this disease, should be careful
to avoid all excess. Their diet should be light and cool, consisting chiefly of
milk and vegetables. Above all, let them beware of vigorous efforts of the
body, and violent agitations of the mind.

VOMITING OF BLOOD.
THIS is not so common as the other discharges of blood which have already been
mentioned; but it is more dangerous, and requires the greatest attention.

VOMITING of blood is generally preceded by pains in the stomach, sickness and
nausea, and is accompanied with great anxiety, and frequent fainting fits.

VOMITING of blood is sometimes periodical; in which case it is less dangerous.
It often proceeds from an obstruction of the menses in women; and sometimes
from the stopping of the haemorrhoidal flux in men. It may be occasioned by any
thing that greatly stimulates or wounds the stomach, as strong vomits or
purges, acrid poisons, sharp or hard substances taken into the stomach, etc. It
is often the effect of obstructions in the liver, the spleen, or some of the
other viscera. It may likewise proceed from external violence, as blows or
bruises, or from any of the causes which produce inflammation.

A great part of the danger in this disease arises from the extravasated blood
lodging in the bowels, and becoming putrid, by which means a dysentery or
putrid fever may be occasioned. The best way of preventing this, is to keep the
belly gently open, by frequently exhibiting emollient clysters. Purges must not
be given till the discharge is stopped, otherwise they will irritate the stomach,
and increase the disorder. All the food and drink must be of a mild cooling
nature, and taken in small quantities. Even drinking cold water has sometimes
proved a remedy. When there are signs of an inflammation, bleeding may be
necessary; but the patient's weakness will seldom permit it. Astringents can
seldom be used, as they stimulate the stomach, and of course increase the
disease. Opiates may be of of use; but they must be given in very small doses,
as four or five drops of liquid laudanum twice or thrice a day. After the
discharge is over, as the patient is generally troubled with gripes, occasioned
by the acrimony of the blood lodged in the intestines, gentle purges will be
necessary.

OF BLOODY URINE.
THIS disorder is commonly called pissing of blood. It is a discharge of blood,
with or without urine, from the vessels of the kidneys or bladder, which may be
either enlarged, broken, or eroded. It is more or less dangerous according to
the different circumstances which attend it.

WHEN pure blood is voided suddenly without interruption and without pain, it
proceeds from the kidneys; but if the blood be in small quantity, of a dark
color, and emitted with heat and pain about the bottom of the belly, it
proceeds from the bladder. When bloody urine is occasioned by a large rough
stone descending from the kidneys to the bladder, which wounds the ureters, it
is attended with a sharp pain in the back and difficulty of making water. If
the coats of the bladder are hurt by a stone, and bloody urine follows, it is
attended with the most acute pain, and a previous stoppage of urine.

BLOODY urine may likewise be occasioned by falls, blows, the lifting or
carrying of heavy burdens, hard riding, or any violent motion. It may also
proceed from ulcers or erosions of the bladder, from a stone lodged in the
kidney^, or from violent purges, or sharp diuretic medicines, especially
cantharides.

BLOODY urine is always attended with some degree of danger; but it is
peculiarly so when mixed with purulent matter, as this she^^ an ulcer somewhere
in the urinary passages. Sometime^ this discharge proceeds from excess of
blood, in which case it is rather to be considered as a salutary evacuation
than a disease. If the discharge, however, be very great, it may waste the
patient's strength, and occasion an ill habit of body, a dropsy, or a
consumption, etc.

THE treatment of this disorder must be varied according to the different
causes from which it proceeds.

WHEN it is owing to a stone in the bladder, the cure ^epends upon an
operation, which it is not our business to describe.

IF it be attended with a plethora, and symptoms of an inflammation, bleeding
will be necessary. The belly must likewise be kept open by emollient clysters,
or cooling purgative medicines; as crystals of tartar, rhubarb, manna, or small
doses of lenitive electuary.

WHEN bloody urine proceeds from a dissolved state of the blood, it is commonly
the symptom of some malignant disease; as the smallpox, a putrid fever, or the
like. In this case, the patient's life depends on the liberal use of the
Jesuits bark and acids, as has already been shown.

WHEN there is reason to suspect an ulcer in the kidneys or bladder, the
patient's diet must be cool, and his drink of a soft, healing, balsamic
quality, as decoctions of marshmallow roots with liquorice, solutions of gum
Arabic, etc. Three ounces of marshmallow roots, and half an ounce of liquorice,
may be boiled in two English quarts of water to one; two ounces of gum Arabic,
and half an ounce of purified nitre, may be dissolved in the strained liquor,
and a tea cupful of it taken four or five times a day.

THE early use of astringents, in this disease has often bad consequences. When
the flux is stopped too soon, the grumous blood, by being confined in the
vessels, may produce inflammations, abscess, and ulcers. If, however, the case
be urgent, or the patient seem to suffer from the loss of blood, gentle
astringents may be necessary. In this case, the patient may take three or four
ounces of LIMEWATER is prepared by pouring two English gallons of water
gradually upon a pound of quicklime; when the ebullition is over, let the whole
stand to settle for two days, then filter the liquor through paper. It should
be kept in vessels closely stopped.
limewater, with half an ounce of the tincture of Jesuits bark, three times
a day. Or, he may take an ounce or two of the conserve of roses three or four
times a day, drinking a tea cupful of the tincture of roses after it. If
stronger styptics be necessary, a dram of Armenian bole may be taken in a cup
of whey three or four times a day.

OF VOMITING.
VOMITING may proceed from various causes; as excess in eating or drinking; a
foul stomach; the acrimony of the aliments; the translation of the morbific
matter of ulcers, the gout, the erysipelas, and other diseases, to the stomach.
It may likewise proceed from a looseness, or flux of blood being too suddenly
stopped, or from the stoppage of any customary evacuation, as the bleeding
piles, the menses, etc. Vomiting may proceed from the weakness of the stomach,
the colic, the iliac passion, a rupture, a fit of the gravel, worms, or from
any kind of poison taken into the stomach. It is an usual symptom of hurts of
the brain; as contusions, compressions, etc. It is likewise a symptom of
wounds, or inflammations of the diaphragm, intestines, spleen, liver, kidneys,
etc.

VOMITING may be occasioned by unusual motions; as riding backwards in a cart
or coach, sailing, etc. It may likewise be excited by violent passions, or by
the idea of nauseous objects, especially of such things as have formerly
produced vomiting. Sometimes it proceeds from a regurgitation of the bile into
the stomach; in this case, what the patient vomits is generally of a yellow or
greenish color, and has a bitter taste. Persons who are subject to nervous
affections are often suddenly seized with violent fits of vomiting. Lastly,
Vomiting is a common symptom of pregnancy. In this case, it generally comes on
about two weeks after the stopping of the menses, and continues during the
first three or four months.

WHEN vomiting proceeds from a soul stomach or indigestion, it is not to be
considered as a disease, but as the cure of a disease. It ought, therefore, to
be promoted by drinking lukewarm water, or thin gruel. If this does not put a
stop to the vomiting, a dose of ipecacuanha may be taken, and wrought off with
weak camomile tea.

WHEN the retrocession of gouty matter, or the obstruction of customary
evacuations occasion vomiting, all means must be used to restore these
discharges; or, if that cannot be effected, their place must be supplied by
others, as bleeding, purging, bathing the extremities in warm water, opening
issues, setons, perpetual blisters, etc.

WHEN vomiting proceeds from pregnancy, it may generally be relieved by
bleeding, and keeping, the belly gently open. The bleeding, however, ought to
be in small quantities at a time, and the purgatives should be of the mildest
kind, as figs, stewed prunes, manna or senna. Pregnant women are most apt to
vomit in the morning, immediately after getting out of bed, which is owing
partly to the change of posture, but more to the emptiness of the stomach. It
may generally be prevented by taking a dish of tea, or some light breakfast in
bed. Pregnant women, who are afflicted with vomiting, ought to be kept easy
both in body and mind. They should neither allow their stomachs to be quite
empty, nor should they eat much at once. Cold water is a very good drink in
this case; if the stomach be weak, a little brandy may be added to it. If the
spirits be low, and the person apt to faint, a spoonful of cinnamon water, with
a little marmalade of quinces or oranges, may be taken.

IF vomiting proceeds from weakness of the stomach, bitters will be of service,
as the Gentian root, camomile and snakeroot, infused in brandy or wine. To
these may be added as much rhubarb as will keep the belly gently open. The
Jesuits bark is likewise an excellent medicine for bracing and strengthening
the stomach. It may be drank in form of tea, or infused in wine or brandy, etc.
The elixir of vitriol is also a good medicine in this case. It may be taken in
the dose of fifteen or twenty drops, twice or thrice a day, in a glass of wine
or water.

A vomiting which proceeds from acidities in the stomach is relieved by
alkaline purges. The best medicine of this kind is the magnesia alba, a tea
spoonful of which may be taken in a dish of tea or a little milk, twice or
thrice a day, or oftener, if necessary, to keep the belly open.

WHEN vomiting proceeds from violent passions, or affections of the mind, all
kind of evacuations must be avoided, especially vomits. These are exceeding
dangerous. The patient, in this case, ought to be perfectly easy and quiet, to
have the mind soothed, and to take some gentle cordial, as negas, or a little
brandy and water. A few drops of liquid laudanum may likewise be taken, to calm
the spirits, and take off the irritation upon the nerves.

WHEN vomiting proceeds from spasmodic affections of the stomach, musk, castor,
and other antispasmodic medicines are of use. Aromatic plasters have likewise a
good effect. The stomach plaster of the London or Edinburgh dispensatory may be
applied to the pit of the stomach, or rather a little toward the left side, so
as to cover a part of the false ribs. Aromatic medicines may likewise be taken
inwardly, as cinnamon tea, mint tea, wine with spiceries boiled in it, etc. The
region of the stomach may be rubbed with ether, or, if that cannot be had,
with strong brandy, or other spirits. The belly should be fomented with warm
water, or the patient immersed up to the breast in a warm bath.

I have always found the saline draughts most effectual in stopping a vomiting,
from whatever cause it proceeded. These may be made by dissolving a dram of the
salt of tartar in an ounce and a half of fresh lemon juice, adding to it an
ounce of peppermint water, and half an ounce of spiritous cinnamon water. This
draught may be sweetened with a little white sugar, and taken in the act of
effervescence. It must be repeated every two hours, or every hour, if the
vomiting be very violent. I do not remember to have seen this medicine, when
duly persisted in, fail to stop a vomiting.

AS the least motion will often bring on the vomiting again, even after it has
been stopped, the patient must avoid all manner of action. His diet must be so
regulated as to ^it easy upon the stomach, and he should take nothing that is
hard of digestion. We do not, however, mean that the patient is to live upon
slops. Solid food, in this case, often ^its easier on the stomach than liquids.

OF THE HEADACHE.
THE headache is produced by various causes, and attended with different
symptoms, according to its different degrees, and the part where it is
situated. When it is ^light, and affects a particular part of the head, it is
called cephalaea; when the whole head is affected, cephalaea; and when one side
only, hemicrania. A fixed pain in the forehead, which may be covered with the
end of the thumb, is called clavis hystericus.

THERE are also other distinctions. Sometimes the pain is internal; sometimes
external; sometimes it is an original disease, and at other times only
symptomatic. When the headache proceeds from a hot bilious habit, the pain is
very acute and throbbing, with a considerable heat of the part affected. When
from a cold phlegmatic habit, the patient complains of a dull heavy pain, and
has a sense of coldness in the part. This kind of headache is sometimes attended
with a degree of stupidity or folly.

WHATEVER obstructs the free circulation of the blood through the vessels of
the head, may occasion a headache. In persons of a full habit, who abound with
blood, or other humors, the headache often proceeds from the suppression of
customary evacuations; as bleeding at the nose, sweating of the feet, etc. It
may likewise proceed from any cause that determines a greater flux of blood
toward the head; as coldness of the extremities, hanging of the head, etc.
Whatever prevents the return of the blood from the head, will likewise occasion
a headache; as looking long at any object obliquely, wearing any thing tight
about the neck, etc.

WHEN a headache proceeds from the stoppage of a running of the nose, there is a
heavy, obtuse, pressing pain in the forepart of the head, in which there seems
to be such a weight, that the patient can scarce hold it up. When it is
occasioned by the caustic matter of the venereal disease, it generally affects
the skull, and often produces a caries of the bones.

SOMETIMES the headache proceeds from the repulsion, or retrocession of the
morbific matter of the gout, the erysipelas, the smallpox, measles, itch, or
other eruptive diseases. A hemicrania generally proceeds from crudities or
indigestion.

THERE is likewise a most violent, fixed, constant, and almost intolerable
headache, which occasions great debility both of body and mind, prevents sleep,
disturbs digestion, destroys the appetite, causes a vertigo, dimness of sight,
a noise in the years, convulsions, epileptic fits, and sometimes vomiting,
costiveness, coldness of the extremities, etc.

THE headache is often symptomatic in continual and intermitting fevers,
especially quartans. It is likewise a very common symptom of hysteric and
hypochondriac complaints.

AN external pain of the head is seldom dangerous. When it attends an acute
fever, with pale urine, it is an unfavourable symptom. In excessive headachs,
coldness of the extremities is a bad sign. When the disease continues long, and
is very violent, it often terminates in blindness, an apoplexy, deafness, a
vertigo, the palsy, epilepsy, etc.

THE cool regimen in general is to be observed in this disease. The diet ought
to consist of such emollient substances as will correct the acrimony of the
humors, and keep the belly open; as apples boiled in milk, spinach, turnips,
and such like. The drink ought to be diluting; as barley water, infusions of
mild mucilaginous vegetables, decoctions of the sudorific woods THE decoction
of woods is thus made: Take shavings of guaiacum wood, three ounces; raisins of
the sun, stoned, two ounces; sassafras wood, shaved, one ounce; liquorice,
sliced, half an ounce: Boil the guaiacum and raisins in an English gallon of
water, over a gentle fire, to the consumption of one half; adding toward the
end the sassafras and liquorice. Strain the liquor, and having suffered it to
settle for some time, pour off the clear liquor from the foeces. This may be
taken at pleasure for ordinary drink.
, etc. The feet and legs ought to be kept warm, and frequently bathed in
lukewarm water; the head should be shaved, and bathed with water and vinegar.
The patient ought, as much as possible, to keep an erect posture, and not to
lie with his head too low.

WHEN the headache is owing to excess of blood, and in hot bilious
constitutions, bleeding is necessary. The patient may be bled in the jugular
vein, and the operation repeated if there be occasion. Cupping also, or the
application of leeches to the temples, and behind the ears, may be of service.
Afterward a blistering plaster may be applied to the neck, or behind the ears,
or to any part of the head that is most affected. In some cases it will be
proper to blister the whole head. In persons of a gross habit, issues, or
perpetual blisters, will be of service. The belly ought likewise to be kept
open by gentle laxatives.

BUT when the headache proceeds from a copious vitiated serum stagnating in the
membranes, either within or without the skull, with a dull, heavy, continual
pain, which will neither yield to bleeding nor gentle laxatives, then more
powerful purgatives are necessary, as pills made of aloes, resin of jalap, or
the like. It will also be necessary in this case to blister the whole head, and
to keep the back part of the neck open for a considerable time by a perpetual
blister.

WHEN the headache is occasioned by a stoppage of the running of the nose, the
patient should frequently smell to a bottle of vol^^^^^ salts; he may likewise
take snuff, or any thing that will irritate the nose, so as to promote a
discharge from it; as the herb mastich, ground ivy, etc.

A hemicrania, especially a periodical one, is generally owing to a foulness in
the stomach, for which gentle vomits will be beneficial, as also purges of
rhubarb. After the bowels have been sufficiently cleared, chalybeate waters,
and such bitters as strengthen the stomach, will be necessary.

WHEN the headache arises from a vitiated state of the humors, as in the scurvy
and venereal disease, the patient, after proper evacuations, must drink freely
of the decoction of woods, recommended above, or the decoction of sarsaparilla
with raisins and liquorice THIS is made by boiling three ounces of fresh
sarsaparilla, an ounce of raisins, and half an ounce of liquorice, in three
English quarts of water to one. The liquor must be strained, and an English
pint of it drank daily.
. These promote perspiration, sweeten the humors, and, if duly persisted in,
will produce very happy effects. When a collection of matter is felt under the
skin, it must be discharged by an incision, otherwise it will render the bone
carious.

WHEN the headache is so intolerable as to endanger the patient's life, or is
attended with continual watching* delirium, etc. recourse must be had to
opiates. These, after proper evacuation by clysters, or mild purgatives, may be
applied both externally and internally. The affected part may be rubbed with
Bate's anodyne balsam, or a cloth dipped in it may be applied to the part. The
patient may, at the same time, take twenty drops of laudanum, in a cup of
valerian or pennyroyal tea, twice or thrice a day. This is only to be done in
case of extreme pain. Proper evacuations ought always to accompany and follow
the use of opiates.

WHEN the patient cannot bear the loss of blood, his feet ought frequently to
be bathed in lukewarm water, and well rubbed with a coarse cloth. Cataplasms
with mustard or horseradish ought likewise to be applied to them. This course
is peculiarly necessary when the pain proceeds from a gouty humor affecting
the head.

WHEN the headache is occasioned by great heat, hard labor, or violent exercise
of any kind, it may be allayed by cooling medicines; as the saline draughts
with nitre, etc.

OF THE TOOTHACH.
THIS disease is so well known, that it needs no description. It has great
affinity with the rheumatism, and often succeeds pains of the shoulders and
other joints.

IT may proceed from various causes; as obstructed perspiration, or catching
cold; or from any of the common causes of inflammation. I have often known the
toothach occasioned by neglecting some part of the usual coverings of the head,
by sitting with the head bare near an open window, or its being any how exposed
to a draught of cold air. Food or drink taken either too hot or too cold, is
very hurtful to the teeth. Great quantities of sugar, or other sweetmeats, are
likewise hurtful. Nothing is more destructive to the teeth than cracking nuts,
or chewing any kind of hard substances. Picking the teeth with pins, needles,
or with any thing that may hurt the enamel with which they are covered, does
great mischief; as the tooth is sure to be spoilt whenever the air gets into
it. Pregnant women are very subject to the toothach, especially during the
first three or four months of pregnancy. The toothach often proceeds from
scorbutic humors affecting the gums. In this case, the teeth are sometimes
wasted, and fall out without any considerable degree of pain. The proximate or
immediate cause of the toothach is a rotten or carious tooth.

IN order to relieve the toothach, we must endeavor to draw off or divert the
humors from the part affected. This may be done by mild purgatives, bleeding
and bathing the feet frequently in warm water. The perspiration ought likewise
to be promoted, by drinking freely of weak wine whey, or other diluting
liquors, with small doses of nitre. Vomits too have often an exceeding good
effect in the toothach. It is seldom safe to administer opiates, or any kind of
heating medicines, or even to draw a tooth till proper evacuations have been
premised, and these alone will often effect the cure.

NEXT to evacuations we recommend fomenting the part with warm water, or
decoctions of emollient vegetables. Bags filled with boiled camomile flowers,
flowers of elder, or the like, may be applied to the part affected, with as
great a degree of warmth as the patient can bear, and renewed as they grow
cool. The patient may likewise receive the steams of warm water into his mouth,
through an inverted funnel, or by holding his head over the mouth of a
porringer filled with warm water, etc.

GARGLES are likewise of use to make a discharge from the part. Rob of elder
dissolved in small beer makes a very proper gargle, or an infusion of sage or
mulberry leaves.

SUCH things as promote the discharge of saliva, or cause the patient to spit,
are always proper. For this purpose, bitter, hot, or pungent vegetables may be
chewed; as gentian, calamus aromaticus, or pellatory of Spain. Allen recommends
the root of yellow water flower-de-luce in this case. This root may either be
rubbed upon the tooth or chewed. Brooks says, he hardly ever knew it fail to
ease the toothach.

MANY other herbs, roots, and seeds, etc. are recommended for curing the
toothach; as the leaves or roots of millefoil or yarrow chewed, tobacco smoaked
or chewed, or the ashes put into the hollow tooth, staves acre, or the seeds of
mustard chewed, etc. These bitter, hot, and pungent things, by occasioning a
great flow of saliva, fre^^^^ (...) ease in the toothach.

OPIATES often relieve the toothach. For this purpose a little cotton wet with
laudanum may be held between the teeth; or a piece of sticking plaster, about
the bigness of a sixpence, with a bit of opium in the middle of it, of a size
not to prevent the sticking of the other, may be laid on the temporal artery,
where the pulsation is most sensible. De la Motte affirms, that there are few
cases wherein this will not give relief. If there be a hollow tooth, a small
pill made of equal quantities of camphire and opium, put into the hollow, is
often beneficial. When this cannot be had, the hollow tooth may be filled with
gum mastich, wax, lead, or any substance that will stick in it, and keep the
external air out.

FEW applications give more relief in the toothach than blistering plasters.
These may be applied betwixt the shoulders, but they have the best effect when
put behind the ears, and made so large as to cover a part of the lower jaw.
Burning the nerve within the affected tooth with a hot iron, has frequently
given ease; but this operation ought to be done with care. Applying a hot iron
to the antetragus, or what is called the inner bar of the ear, is likewise a
noted cure for the toothach. Blistering, however, is more safe than either of
these, and is not less efficacious.

HOFFMAN says, When every thing else failed, that he had often great success
from the following pills.

TAKE of aromatic pill one dram, storax pill half a dram, extract of saffron
six grains. Make them into nine pills; of which six or eight are to be taken at
bed time for a dose.

AFTER all, when a tooth is carious, it is often impossible to remove the pain,
without drawing the tooth; and, as a spoilt tooth never becomes sound again, it
is prudent to draw it soon, left it should affect the rest. Tooth drawing, like
bleeding, is very much practiced by mechanics as well as persons of the medical
profession. The operation however is not without danger, and ought always to be
done with care. A person unacquainted with the structure of the parts, will be
in danger of breaking the jaw bone, or of drawing a ^ound tooth instead of a
rotten one, etc.

WHEN a sound tooth has been drawn, if it be replaced immediately, it will grow
in again. It is now a common practice to draw a rotten tooth, and put a sound
one, taken from the mouth of some other person, in its place. It is likewise an
easy matter to fix artificial teeth so neatly, as to answer most of the
purposes of the natural; but these are matters which do not properly fall under
our consideration.

WHEN the toothach returns periodically, and the pain chiefly affects the gums,
it may be cured by the bark.

SOME pretend to have found great benefit in the toothach, from the application
of an artificial magnet to the affected tooth. We shall not attempt to account
for its mode of operation; but, if it be found to answer, though only in
particular cases, it certainly deserves a trial, as it is attended with no
expense, and cannot do any harm.

PERSONS who have returns of the toothach at certain seasons, as spring and
autu^^^, might often prevent it by taking a dose of physic at these times.

KEEPING the teeth clean has no doubt a tendency to prevent the toothach. The
best method of doing this is to wash them daily with salt and water, or with
cold water alone. All brushing and scraping of the teeth is dangerous, and,
unless it be performed with great care, must do mischief.

OF THE EARACH.
THIS disorder chiefly affects the membrane which lines the inner cavity of the
ear, called the meatus auditorius. It is often so violent as to occasion great
restlessness and anxiety, and even delirium. Sometimes epileptic fits, and
other convulsive disorders, have been brought on by extreme pain in the ear.

THE earach may proceed from any of the causes which produce inflammation. It
often proceeds from a sudden suppression of perspiration, or from the head
being exposed to cold when covered with sweat. It may also be occasioned by
worms, or other insects getting into the ear, or being bred there; or from any
hard body sticking in the ear. Sometimes it proceeds from the translation of
morbific matter to the ear. This often happens in the decline of malignant
fevers, and occasions deafness, which is generally reckoned a favorable
symptom.

WHEN the earach proceeds from insects, or any hard body sticking in the ear,
every method must be taken to remove them as soon as possible. The membranes
may be relaxed by dropping into the ear oil of almonds, or olive oil.
Afterward the patient should be made to sneeze, by taking snuff, or some
strong sternutatory. If this should not force out the body, it must be
extracted by art. I have seen insects which have got into the ear, come out of
their own accord upon pouring in oil upon them, which is a thing they cannot
bear.

WHEN the pain of the ear proceeds from inflammation, it must be treated like
other topical inflammations, by a cooling regimen and opening medicines.
Bleeding at the beginning, either in the arm or jugular vein, or cupping in the
neck, will be proper. The ear may likewise be fomented with steams of warm
water, or flannel-bags filled with boiled mallows and camomile flowers may be
applied to it warm; or bladders filled with warm milk and water. An exceeding
good method of fomenting the ear is to apply it close to the mouth of a jug
filled with a strong decoction of camomile flowers.

THE patient's feet should be frequently bathed in lukewarm water, and he ought
to take small doses of nitre and rhubarb, viz. a scruple of the former, and ten
grains of the latter three times a day. His drink may be whey, or decoctions of
barley and liquorice, with figs or raisins, etc. The parts behind the ear ought
frequently to be rubbed with camphorated oil, or the volatile liniment; and a
few drops of the camphorated spirit of wine may be put into the ear with wool
or cotton.

WHEN the inflammation cannot be resolved, a poultice of bread and milk, or
roasted onions, may be applied to the ear, and frequently renewed, till it
breaks, or the abscess can be opened. Afterward the humors may be diverted
from the part by gentle laxatives, blisters, or issues; but the discharge must
not be suddenly dried up by any external application. I have often known the
sudden drying of a running of the ear produce fatal consequences.

OF THE HEART-BURN.
WHAT is called the heart-burn, is not a disease of that organ, but an uneasy
sensation of heat or acrimony about the pit of the stomach, which is sometimes
attended with anxiety, nausea, and vomiting.

IT may proceed from indigestion, from the acidity of the fluids, or contents
of the stomach, or from bilious humors. Stale liquors, vinegar, greasy
aliment, wind, etc. will cause the heart-burn. In some constitutions it is
occasioned by the use of acids, and in others by aromatics. Pregnant women are
very subject to it.

WHEN the heart-burn proceeds from indigestion, or a ^oul stomach, the patient
ought to take a vomit, and afterward a purge. After the stomach has been
cleansed, he may drink twice or thrice a day a cup of camomile tea, with
fifteen or twenty drops of elixir of vitriol in it, in order to strengthen the
stomach and promote digestion.

WHEN acidity or sourness of the stomach occasions the heart-burn, absorbents
are the proper medicines. In this case, chalk and water, or what is called the
chalk julep, often answers very well. It is made by mixing an ounce of powdered
chalk, half an ounce of fine sugar, and a quarter of an ounce of gum Arabic, in
two English pints of water. A tea cupful of this may be taken at pleasure. When
the gum Arabic cannot be had, the chalk may be mixed with milk, or taken in
water alone. The testacious powders are very proper here. A tea spoonful of
prepared oyster shells, or the powder called crab's eyes, may be taken in a
glass of peppermint water, or simple cinnamon water, as often as there is
occasion.

BUT the safest absorbent which we know, is the magnesia alba. This not only
acts as an absorbent, but by its purging quality cleanses the bowels; whereas
the chalk, and other absorbents of that sort, are apt to lie in the intestines,
and occasion obstructions. This powder is no way disagreeable, and may be taken
in a cup of tea, a little milk, or a glass of peppermint water. A large tea
spoonful is the usual dose, but there is no danger in taking a much greater
quantity, and it may be repeated as often as is found necessary.

WHEN the heart-burn proceeds from bilious humors, a tea spoonful of the sweet
spirits of nitre in a glass of water, or a cup of tea or coffee, will generally
give ease. If it be caused by fat or greasy aliments, a dram of brandy or rum
may be taken.

IF wind be the cause of this complaint, the medicines called carminatives are
proper; as aniseeds, juniper berries, cardamum seeds, etc. These may either be
chewed, or a glass of their distilled waters taken at pleasure. These, and
other warm aromatics, as ginger, canella alba, etc. give ease, but they ought
never to be used unless when necessary. They are only drams in a dry form, and
very pernicious to the stomach. One of the safest medicines of this kind is the
tincture made by infusing an ounce of rhubarb, and a quarter of an ounce of the
lesser cardamums, in an English pint of brandy. This must digest for two days;
afterward it should be strained, and four ounces of white sugar candy in
powder added to it. It must stand to digest again till the sugar be dissolved.
A table spoonful may be taken for a dose.

I have frequently known the heart-burn cured by the patient chewing green tea.

PAIN OF THE STOMACH.
THIS may proceed from various causes; as indigestion, wind, the acrimony of
the bile, or from sharp, acrid, or poisonous substances taken into the stomach.
It may likewise proceed from worms; the stoppage of customary evacuations, or
from a translation of gouty matter to the stomach, etc.

WOMEN, in the decline of life, are very liable to this disease, especially
such as are afflicted with hysteric complaints. It is likewise very common to
hypochondriac men of a sedentary and luxurious life. In such persons it often
proves so extremely obstinate, as to baffle all attempts of medicine.

WHEN the pain of the stomach is most violent after eating, there is reason to
suspect that it proceeds from some fault either in the digestion or the food.
In this case, the patient ought to change his diet, till he finds what kind of
food agrees best with his stomach, and should continue chiefly to use that. If
a change of diet does not remove the complaint, the patient may take a gentle
vomit, and afterward a dose or two of rhubarb. He ought likewise to take an
infusion of camomile flowers, or some other stomachic bitter, either in wine or
water. I have often known exercise remove this complaint, especially sailing,
or a long journey on horseback, or in a machine.

WHEN a pain of the stomach proceeds from flatulencies, the patient is
constantly belching up wind, and feels an uneasy distension of the stomach
after meals. This is a most deplorable disease, and is seldom cured. In
general, the patient ought to avoid all windy diet, and every thing that sours
on the stomach, as greens, roots, etc. This rule, however, admits of some
exceptions. I have known several instances of persons very much troubled with
wind, who received great benefit from eating parched peace THESE are prepared by
steeping or soaking peace in water, and afterward drying them in a pot or kiln
till they be quite hard. They may be used at pleasure.
, though that grain is well known to be of a windy nature. This complaint may
likewise be greatly relieved by exercise, especially digging, walking, or
riding, etc. I have found the elixir of vitriol answer very well in
flatulencies. It may be taken as directed in page 254.

WHEN a pain of the stomach is occasioned by the swallowing of acrid or
poisonous substances, they must be discharged by vomit; this may be excited by
butter, oils, or other soft things, which sheath and defend the stomach from
the acrimony of its contents.

WHEN a pain of the stomach proceeds from a translation of gouty matter, warm
cordials are necessary. Some have drank a whole bottle of brandy or rum, in
this case, in a few hours, without being in the least intoxicated, or even
feeling the stomach warmed by it. Generous wines, however, are more safe, as
genuine Madeira, etc. It is impossible to ascertain the quantities necessary
upon these occasions. This must be left to the feelings and discretion of the
patient. It is, however, the safest way not to go too far. When there is an
inclination to vomit, it may be promoted by drinking an infusion of camomile
flowers or carduus benedictus.

IF a pain of the stomach proceeds from the stoppage of customary evacuations,
bleeding will, in some cases, be necessary, especially in sanguine and very
full habits. It will likewise be of use to keep the belly gently open by mild
purgatives; as rhubarb or senna, etc. When this disease affects women in the
decline of life, after the stoppage of the menses, making an issue in the leg
or arm will be of peculiar service.

WHEN the disease is occasioned by worms, they must be destroyed, or expelled
by such means as are recommended in the following section.

OF WORMS.
THESE are chiefly of three kinds, viz. the taenia, or tape worm; the teres, or
round and long worm, and the ascarides, or round and short worm. There are many
other kinds of worms found in the human body; but as they proceed, in a great
measure, from similar causes, have nearly the same symptoms, and require almost
the same method of cure, we shall not spend time in enumerating them.

THE tape worm is white, very long, and all over jointed. It is generally bred
either in the stomach or small intestines. The round and long worm is likewise
bred in the small guts, and sometimes in the stomach. The round and short worms
commonly lodge in the rectum, or what is called the end gut, and occasion a
disagreeable itching about the anus.

THE long round worms occasion squeamishness, vomiting, an ill breath, gripes,
looseness, swelling of the belly, swoonings, loathing of food, and, at other
times, a voracious appetite, a dry cough, convulsions, epileptic fits, and
sometimes a privation of speech. These worms have been known to perforate the
intestines, and get into the cavity of the belly. The effects of the tape worm
are nearly the same with those of the long and round, but rather more violent.

ANDRY says, the following symptoms particularly attend the folium, which is a
species of the tape worm, viz. swoonings, privation of speech, and a voracious
appetite. The round worms called ascarides, besides an itching of the anus,
cause swoonings, and tenesmus, or an inclination to go to stool.

CAUSES. -- Worms may proceed from various causes; but they are seldom found
but in weak and relaxed stomachs, where the digestion is bad. Sedentary persons
are more liable to them than the active and laborious. Those who eat great
quantities of unripe fruit, or who live much on raw herbs and roots, are
generally subject to worms. Worms are often a symptom of fevers, and other
acute diseases. There seems to be a hereditary disposition in some persons to
this disease. I have often seen all the children of a family subject to worms
of a particular kind. They seem likewise frequently to be owing to the nurse.
Children of the same family, nursed by one woman, have often worms, when those
nursed by another have none.

CHILDREN are more liable to this disease than adults, especially after two
years of age. Infants while on the breast, are seldom troubled with worms. To
this, however, there are several exceptions. I lately saw an instance of a
child who passed worms before it was three months old. They were indeed of a
very particular kind, being real caterpillars. Some of them were above an inch
long; they had red heads, and were so brisk as to jump about; they lived
several days after the child had passed them. Another child suckled by the same
woman, passed the same kind of worms when upon the breast, and both children
suffered extremely before the worms came away.

SYMPTOMS. -- The common symptoms of worms are, paleness of the countenance,
and, at other times, an universal flushing of the face; itching of the nose,
this however is doubtful, as children pick their noses in all diseases;
starting, and grinding of the teeth in sleep; the appetite sometimes bad, at
other times quite voracious; looseness, a sour or stinking breath, a hard
swelled belly, great thirst, the urine frothy, and sometimes of a whitish
color, griping, or colic pains, an involuntary discharge of saliva, especially
when asleep; frequent pains of the side, with a dry cough, and unequal pulse;
palpitations of the heart, swoonings, drowsiness, cold sweats, palsy, epileptic
fits, with many other unaccountable nervous symptoms, which were formerly
attributed to witchcraft, or the influence of evil spirits. Small bodies in the
excrements, resembling melon or cucumber seeds, are symptoms of the tape worm.

THOUGH this is a very common disease, yet it is less so than is generally
imagined. Nurses impute most of the diseases of children to worms, and often
give medicine to kill these vermin where they do not exist. Even physicians are
often deceived with respect to worms. I have frequently opened children who
were thought to have been killed by them, and found none. In short there is no
certain proof of worms existing in the intestines, but their being passed; and
that will sometimes happen where no previous symptoms appeared.

MEDICINE. -- Though numberless medicines are extolled for killing and
expelling worms A medical writer of the present age, has enumerated upwards of
^^^ty British plants, all famous for killing and expelling worms out of the
body.
, yet no disease* more frequently baffles the physician's skill. In general,
the most proper medicines for their expulsion are* strong purgatives; and to
prevent their breeding, stoma-chic bitters, with now and then a glass of good
wine.

THE best purge for an adult is jalap and calomel. Five and twenty or thirty
grains of the former, with six or seven of the latter, mixed in syrup, may be
taken for a dose. This should be taken early in the morning. It will be proper
that the patient keep the house all day, and drink nothing cold. The dose may
be repeated once or twice a-week, for a fortnight or three weeks. On the
intermediate days the patient may take a dram of the powder of (...), twice or
thrice a day, mixed with syrup, honey, or treacle.

THOSE who do not choose to take calomel, may make use of the bitter
purgatives; as aloes, hiera picra, tincture of ^enna and rhubarb, etc.

OILY medicines are likewise of use for expelling worms. An ounce of salad oil
and a table spoonful of common salt, may be taken in a glass of red port wine
thrice a day, or oftener if the stomach will bear it. But the more common form
of using oil is in clysters. Oily clysters sweetened with sugar or honey, are
very efficacious in bringing away the short round worms called ascarides.

THE Harrowgate water is an excellent medicine for expelling worms, especially
the ascarides. As this water evidently abounds with sulphur, we may hence
infer, that sulphur alone must be a good medicine in this case; this is found
to be true in fact. Many practitioners give flour of sulphur in very large
doses, and with great success. It may be made into an electuary with honey or
treacle, and taken in such quantity as to purge the patient.

WHERE Harrowgate water cannot be obtained, sea water may be used, which is far
from being a contemptible medicine in this case. If sea water cannot be had,
common salt may be dissolved in water and drank. I have often seen this used by
country nurses, when they suspected their children were troubled with worms,
with very good effect.

BUT worms, though expelled, will soon breed again, if the stomach remains weak
and relaxed; to prevent this, we would recommend the Jesuits bark. Half a dram
of bark in powder may be taken in a glass of red Port wine, three or four times
a day, after the above medicines have been used. Lime water is likewise good
for this purpose, or a table spoonful of the chalybeate wine THE chalybeate
wine is made by digesting three ounces of filings of iron, and half a dram of
cochineal, in two English pints of Rhenish wine for three weeks, frequently
shaking the vessel. Afterward the liquor must be filtered.
, taken twice or thrice a day. Infusions or decoctions of bitter herbs may
likewise be drank; as the infusion of tansy, water trefoil, camomile flowers,
tops of wormwood, the lesser centaury, etc.

THE above directions are calculated for adults; but for children the medicines
must be more agreeable, and given in smaller doses.

FOR a child of four or five years old, ten grains of rhubarb, five of jalap,
and two of calomel, may be mixed in a spoonful of syrup or honey, and given in
the morning. The child should keep the house all day, and have nothing cold.
This dose may be repeated twice a-week for three or four weeks. On the
intermediate days the child may take a scruple of powder of tin, and ten grains
of aethiops mineral, in a spoonful of treacle twice a day. These doses must be
increased or diminished according to the age of the patient.

I have frequently known those big bellies, which in children are commonly
reckoned a sign of worms, quite removed by giving them white soap in their
pottage, or other food. Tansy, garlic, and rue, are all good against worms, and
may be used various ways. We might here mention many plants, both for external
and internal use, but think the powder of tin, with aethiops mineral, and the
purges of rhubarb and calomel, are much more to be depended on. It will not,
however, be amiss to give a child who is troubled with worms a glass of red
wine now and then, as every thing that braces and strengthens the stomach is
good both for preventing and expelling these vermin.

PARENTS who would preserve their children from worms, ought to allow them
plenty of exercise in the open air, to see that their food be wholesome and
sufficiently solid, and, as far as possible, to prevent their eating raw herbs,
roots, or green trashy fruits WE think it necessary here to warn people of
their danger who buy worm cakes and powders at random from quacks, and give
them to their children without proper care. The principal ingredient in most of
these medicines is mercury, which is never to be trifled with. I lately saw a
shocking instance of the danger of this conduct. A girl who had taken a dose of
worm-powder, bought of a traveling quack, went out, and I believe might be so
imprudent as to drink cold water, during its operation. She immediately
swelled, and died that very day, with all the symptoms of having been poisoned.
.

OF THE JAUNDICE.
THIS disease is first observable in the white of the eye, which appears of a
yellowish color. Afterward, the whole skin puts on a yellow, and sometimes a
blackish appearance. The urine too is of a saffron hue, and dies a white cloth,
if put into it, of the same color.

CAUSES. -- The immediate cause of the jaundice is an obstruction of the bile.
The remote or occasional causes are, the bites of poisonous animals, as the
viper, mad dog, etc. the bilious or hysteric colic, violent passions, as grief,
anger, etc. Strong purges or vomits will likewise occasion the jaundice.
Sometimes it proceeds from obstinate agues, or from that disease being
prematurely stopped by astringent medicines. In infants it is often occasioned
by the meconium not being sufficiently purged off. Pregnant women are very
subject to it. It is likewise a symptom in several kinds of fevers. Catching
cold, or the stopping of customary evacuations, as the menses, the bleeding
piles, issues, etc. will occasion the jaundice.

SYMPTOMS. -- The patient at first complains (...) excessive weariness, and has
great aversion to any kind of motion. His skin is dry, and he generally feels a
kind of itching or pricking pain over the whole body. The stools are of a
whitish or clay color, and the urine, as was observed served above, is yellow.
The breathing is difficult, and the patient complains of an unusual load or
oppression on his breast. There is a heat in the nostrils, a bitter taste in
the mouth, loathing of food, sickness at the stomach, vomiting, flatulency, and
frequently all objects appear to the eye of a yellow color.

IF the patient be young, and the disease complicated with no other malady, it
is seldom dangerous; but in old people, where it continues long, returns
frequently, or is complicated with the dropsy or hypochondriac symptoms, it
generally proves fatal. The black jaundice is more dangerous than the yellow.

REGIMEN. -- The diet should be cool, light, and diluting, consisting chiefly
of ripe fruits and mild vegetables; as apples boiled or roasted, stewed prunes,
preserved plumbs, boiled spinach, etc. Veal or chicken broth, with light bread,
are likewise very proper. The drink should be butter milk, whey, sweetened with
honey, or decoctions of cool opening vegetables; as marshmallow roots, with
liquorice, etc.

THE patient should take as much exercise as he can bear, either on horseback
or in a machine; walking, running, and even jumping, are likewise proper,
provided he can bear them without pain, and there be no symptoms of
inflammation. Patients have been often cured of this disease by a long journey,
after medicines had proved ineffectual.

AMUSEMENTS are likewise of great use in the jaundice. The disease is often
occasioned by a sedentary life, joined to a dull melancholy disposition.
Whatever therefore tends to promote muscular motion, and to cheer the spirits,
must have a good effect; as dancing, laughing, singing, etc.

MEDICINE. -- If the patient be young, of a full sanguine habit, and complains
of pain in the right side about the region of the liver, bleeding will be
necessary. After this a vomit must be administered; and if the disease proves
obstinate, it may be repeated once or twice. No medicines are more beneficial
in the jaundice than vomits, especially where it is not attended with
inflammation. Half a dram of i^ecacuanha in powder will be a sufficient dose
for an adult. It may be wrought off with weak camomile tea, or lukewarm water.

THE belly must likewise be kept open by mild purgatives. Castile soap, if
taken in sufficient quantities, answers this purpose extremely well. It may be
taken from half an ounce to an ounce daily, for a considerable time. As few
people have resolution to swallow such large quantities of soap, I generally
give pills made of soap, aloes, and rhubarb, which answer the same intention in
a smaller dose. They may be prepared in the following manner:

TAKE socotrine aloes and Turkey rhubarb in powder, of each a dram, Castile
soap an ounce. Beat them all together, with a little syrup, into a proper
consistence for pills. Let them be formed into pills of an ordinary size, and
five or six of them taken three times a day. They must be continued for some
time, and the quantity regulated by the patient's stools, of which he ought at
least to have one or two every day.

FOMENTING the parts about the region of the stomach and liver, and rubbing
them with a warm hand or flesh-brush, are likewise beneficial; but it is still
more so for the patient to ^it in a vessel of warm water up to the breast. He
ought to do this frequently, and should continue in it as long as his strength
will permit.

MANY dirty things are recommended for the cure of the jaundice; as lice, the
mill^pedes, etc. But these do more harm than good, as people trust to them, and
neglect more valuable medicines; besides, they are seldom taken in sufficient
quantity to produce any effects. People always expect that these out of the way
things should act as charms, and consequently seldom persist in the use of
them. Vomits, purges, fomentations, and exercise, will seldom fail to cure the
jaundice when it is a simple disease; and when complicated with the dropsy, or
other chronic complaints, it is hardly to be cured by any means.

NUMBERLESS British herbs are extolled for the cure of this disease. Dr. Short,
in his Medicina Britannica, mentions near a hundred, all famous for curing the
jaundice. The fact is, this disease often goes off of its own accord; in which
case the last medicine is always said to have performed the cure. I have
however seen considerable benefit in a very obstinate jaundice, from a
decoction of hemp seed. Four ounces of the ^eed may be boiled in two English
qua^ts of ale, and sweetened with coarse sugar. The dose is half an English
pint every morning. It may be continued for eight or nine days.

I have known Harrowgate water cure a very obstinate jaundice. I have known
patients, after taking many medicines without effect, go thither in the middle
of winter, and in few weeks return quite well. They both drank the sulphur
water, and bathed.

OF THE DROPSY.
THE dropsy is a preternatural swelling of the whole body, or some part of it,
occasioned by a collection of watery humor. It is distinguished by different
names, according to the part affected, as the anasarca, or a collection of
water under the skin; the ascites, or a collection of water in the belly; the
hydrops pectoris, or dropsy of the breast; the hydrocephalus, or dropsy of the
brain, etc. There is likewise a species of dropsy called tympany, which is
occasioned by ra^ified air pent up in the cavities or cells of the body.

CAUSES. -- A very common cause of the dropsy is a hereditary disposition. It
may likewise proceed from drinking ardent spirits, or other strong liquors. It
is true, almost to a proverb, that great drinkers die of a dropsy. The want of
exercise is also a very common cause of the dropsy. Hence it is justly reckoned
among the diseases of the sedentary. It often proceeds from excessive
evacuations, as frequent and copious bleedings, strong purges often repeated,
frequent salivations, etc. The sudden stoppage of customary or necessary
evacuations, as the menses, the haemorrhoids, or fluxes of the belly, may
likewise cause a dropsy.

I have often known the dropsy occasioned by drinking large quantities of cold,
weak, watery liquor after violent exercise, while the body was hot. A low,
damp, or marshy situation is likewise a frequent cause of it. Hence it is a
common disease in moist, ^lat, fenny countries. It may also be brought on by a
long course of poor watery diet, or the use of viscous aliment, that is hard of
digestion. It is often the effect of other diseases, as the jaundice, a
schirrhous of the liver, a violent ague, of long continuance, a diarrhoea, a
dysentery, an empyema, or a consumption of the lungs. In short, whatever
obstructs the circulation of the blood, or prevents its being duly prepared,
may occasion a dropsy.

SYMPTOMS. -- This disease generally begins with a swelling of the feet and
ancles toward night, which for some time disappears in the morning. In the
evening the parts, if pressed with the finger, will pit. The swelling gradually
ascends toward the belly, which at length grows big. When it is struck with
the hand, a fluctuation may be felt, and sometimes heard. Afterward the
breathing becomes difficult, the urine is in small quantity, and the thirst
great, the belly is bound, and the perspiration is greatly obstructed. To these
succeed torpor, heaviness, a slow wasting fever, and a troublesome cough. This
last is generally a fatal symptom, as it shows the lungs to be affected. In a
tympany, the belly when struck sounds like a drum.

WHEN the disease comes suddenly on, and the patient is young and strong, there
is reason to hope for a cure, especially if medicine be given early. But if the
patient be old, has led an irregular or a sedentary life, or if there be reason
to suspect that the liver, lungs, or any of the viscera are unfound, there is
great ground to fear that the consequences will prove fatal.

REGIMEN. -- The patient must abstain, as much as possible, from all drink,
especially weak and watery liquors, and must quench his thirst with acids, as
juice of lemons, oranges, sorrel, etc. His aliment ought to be dry, of a
heating and diuretic quality, as toasted bread, the flesh of birds, or other
wild animals, roasted; pungent and aromatic vegetables, as garlic, mustard,
onions, cresses, horseradish, rocambole, shalot, etc. They may also eat sea
biscuit, dipped in wine or brandy. This is not only nourishing, but tends to
quench thirst. Some have been actually cured of a dropsy by a total abstinence
from all liquids, and living entirely upon such things as are mentioned above.
If the patient must have drink, the Spaw water, or Rhenish wine, with diuretic
medicines infused in it, are the best.

EXERCISE is of the greatest importance in a dropsy. If the patient be able to
walk, run, dance, or jump about, he ought to continue these exercises as long
as he can. If he be not able to walk, etc. he must ride on horseback, or in a
machine, and the more violent the motion so much the better, provided he can
bear it. His bed ought to be hard, and the air of his apartments warm and dry.
If he lives in a damp country, he ought to be removed into a dry one, and, if
possible, into a warmer climate. In a word, every method must be taken to
promote the perspiration and to brace the solids. For this purpose, it will
likewise be proper to rub the patient's body two or three times a day, with a
hard cloth or the flesh brush, and he ought constantly to wear flannel next his
skin.

MEDICINE. -- If the patient be young, his constitution good, and the disease
has come on suddenly, it may generally be removed by strong vomits, brisk
purges, and such medicines as promote a discharge of sweat and urine. For an
adult, half a dram of ipecacuanha in powder, and half an ounce of oxymel of
squills, will be a proper vomit. This may be repeated three or four times, if
necessary, three or four days intervening betwixt each dose. The patient must
not drink much after the vomit, otherwise he destroys its effect. A cup or two
of camomile tea will be sufficient to work it off.

BETWIXT each vomit, on one of the intermediate days, the patient may take the
following purge. Take jalap in powder half a dram, cream of tartar two drams,
calomel six grains. These may be made into a bolus with a little syrup of pale
roses, and taken early in the morning. The less the patient drinks after it the
better. If he be much griped, he may take now and then a cup of chicken broth.

THE patient may likewise take every night at bedtime the following bolus: Take
four or five grains of camphire, one grain of opium, and as much syrup of
orange peel as is sufficient to make them into a bolus. This will generally
promote a gentle sweat, which should be encouraged by drinking now and then a
small cup of wine whey, with a tea spoonful of the spirits of hartshorn in it.

THE patient may take, three of four times a day, a tea cupful of the following
infusion: Take juniper berries, mustard seed, and horse radish, of each half an
ounce, ashes of broom half a pound; infuse them in a quart of Rhenish wine or
strong ale for a few days, and afterward strain of the liquor. Such as cannot
take this infusion, may use the decoction of Seneca root, which is both
diuretic and sudorific. It may be prepared and taken as directed in page 119.

AS this disease is very apt to return; after the water has been drained off,
to prevent its collecting again, the patient must continue to take exercise, to
use a dry diet, and such medicines as strengthen and brace the solids, as wine
with steel or bark infused in it; warm and aromatic bitters are likewise
proper, as the Virginian snakeroot, canella alba, orange peel, etc. infused in
wine or brandy: The patient must avoid all great evacuations, and ought, if he
can, to make choice of a dry warm situation.

THE above course will often cure an incidental dropsy, if the constitution be
good; but when the disease proceeds from a bad habit, or an unfound state of
the viscera, strong purges and vomits are not to be ventured upon. In this
case, the safer course is to palliate the symptoms by the use of such medicines
as promote the secretions, and to support the patient's strength by warm and
nourishing cordials.

THE discharge of urine may be greatly promoted by nitre. Brooks says, he knew
a young woman who was cured of a dropsy by taking a dram of nitre every morning
in a draught of ale, after she had been given over as incurable. The powder of
squills is likewise a good diuretic. Six or eight grains of it, with a scruple
of nitre, may be given twice a day in a glass of strong cinnamon water. Ball
says, a large spoonful of unbruised mustard seed taken every night and morning,
and drinking half an English pint of the decoction of the tops of green broom
after it, has produced a cure, after other powerful methods had proved
ineffectual.

TO promote perspiration, the patient may use the decoction of Seneca root, as
directed above; or he may take two spoonfuls of THIS spirit is prepared by
gradually pouring distilled vinegar upon any quantity of the volatile ^al
ammoniac till the effervescence ceases, occasionally shaking the vessel to
promote the action of the vinegar on the salt.
Mindererus's spirit, in a cup of wine whey, three of four times a day. The
saline draughts recommended in page 105, are likewise very proper in this case.
These medicines, with the regimen mentioned above, if they do not cure, will,
at least, alleviate the disease, which, in worn out constitutions, is a safer
course than attempting to extirpate it. When other means fail, recourse must be
had to tapping, which is a safe and easy operation, though it seldom produces a
radical cure.

OF THE GOUT.
THERE is no disease which shows the imperfection of the medical art more than
the gout. Nor does any malady show the advantages of temperance and exercise in
a stronger light. Few who pay a proper regard to these are troubled with the
gout, unless when it is hereditary. This points out the true source from whence
that pest originally sprung, viz. excess and idleness. Few persons are affected
with the gout till the decline of life, except those who inherit it from their
parents. Men are more liable to it than women, especially those of a full,
gross habit.

CAUSES. -- One very common cause of the gout is a hereditary disposition.
Persons who know themselves to be tainted this way, ought therefore to guard
against its attack, by steadily pursuing a course directly opposite to that
which occasions the disease. Full living, but especially indulging in rich,
pungent, or stimulating sauces and generous wines, has a great tendency to
bring on the gout. Intense thought, or application of the mind to abstruse
subjects, particularly night studies, has likewise this effect. The plentiful
use of acids, as sour punch, pricked wines, etc. are also hurtful; but nothing
more certainly induces this disease than excess of venery, especially in the
early period of life.

SOMETIMES the gout has been known to prove infectious; but this is rarely the
case. It may proceed from an obstruction or defect of any of the usual
discharges, as the perspiration, sweating of the feet, the menses, etc. A
sudden chilling of the fe^t after sweat, or drying them at the fire after being
wet and cold, are likewise bad. The modern custom of eating a hot flesh supper,
drinking warm strong liquors after it, and sitting up the greater part of the
night, is one very great cause of the gout, and indeed of many other diseases.

SYMPTOMS. -- A fit of the gout is generally preceded by indigestion,
drowsiness, wind, a slight headache, sickness, and sometimes vomiting. The
patient complains of weariness and dejection of spirits, and has often a pain
in the limbs, with a sensation as if wind or cold water were passing down the
thigh. The appetite is often remarkably keen a day or two before the fit, and
there is a slight pain in passing urine, and sometimes an involuntary shedding
of tears. Sometimes these symptoms are much more violent, especially upon the
near approach of the fit; and some observe, that as the fever which ushers in
the gout is, so will the fit be; if the fever be short and sharp, the fit will
be so likewise; if it be feeble, long, and lingering, the fit will be such
also. But this observation can only hold with respect to very regular fits of
the gout.

THE regular gout generally makes its attack in the spring, or beginning of
winter, in the following manner: About two or three in the morning, the patient
is seized with a pain in his great toe, sometimes in the heel, and at other
times in the ancle or calf of the leg. This pain is accompanied with a
sensation, as if cold water were poured upon the part, which is succeeded by a
shivering, with some degrees of fever. Afterward the pain increases, and
fixing among the small bones of the foot, the patient feels all the different
kinds of torture, as if the part were stretched, burnt, squeezed, gnawed, or
torn in pieces, etc. The part at length becomes so exquisitely sensible, that
the patient cannot bear to have it touched, nor even suffer any person to walk
across the room.

THE patient is generally in exquisite torture for twenty-four hours, from the
time of the coming on of the fit: He then becomes easier, the part begins to
swell, appears red, and is covered with a little moisture. Toward morning he
drops asleep, and generally falls into a gentle breathing sweat. This
terminates the first paroxysm, a number of which constitutes a fit of the gout;
which is longer or shorter according to the patient's age, strength, the season
of the year, and the disposition of the body to this disease.

THE patient is always worse toward night, and easier in the morning. The
paroxysms however generally grow milder every day, till at length the matter is
discharged by perspiration, urine, and the other evacuations. In some patients
this happens in a few days; in others it requires weeks, and in some months, to
finish the fit. Those whom age and frequent fits of the gout have greatly
debilitated, seldom get free of it before the approach of summer, and sometimes
not till it be pretty far advanced.

REGIMEN. -- As there are no medicines, yet known, that will cure the gout, we
shall confine our observations mostly to regimen, both in and out of the fit.

IN THE FIT, if the patient be young and strong, his diet ought to be thin and
cooling, and his drink of a diluting nature; but where the constitution is
weak, and the patient has been accustomed to live high, this is not a proper
time to retrench. In this case, he must keep nearly to his usual diet, and
should take frequently a cup of strong negas, or a glass of generous wine. Wine
whey is a very proper drink in this case, as it promotes the perspiration
without heating the patient. It will answer this purpose better, i^ a tea
spoonful of sal volatile oleosum, or spirits of hart^horn, be put into a cup of
it twice or thrice a day. It will likewise be proper for the patient to take at
bed time a tea spoonful of the volatile tincture of guaiacum in a large draught
of warm wine whey. This will greatly promote perspiration through the night.

AS we know no safe way of discharging the gouty matter but by perspiration,
this ought to be kept up by all means, especially in the part affected. For
this purpose, the leg and foot affected should be wrapped in soft flannel, for or
wool. The last is most readily obtained, and seems to answer the purpose as
well, if not better, than any thing else. The people of Lancashire look upon
wool as a kind of specific in the gout. They wrap a great quantity of it ^^^bed
about the leg and foot affected, and cover it (...) of shamoy leather. This
they suffer to continue (...) eight or ten days, and sometimes for a fortnight
or three weeks, or longer if the pain does not cease. I never knew any external
application answer so well in the gout. I have often seen it applied when the
swelling and inflammation were very great, with violent pain; and have found
all these symptoms relieved by it in a few days. The wool which they use is
generally greased, and carded or combed. They choose the softest which can be
had, and seldom or never remove it till the fit be entirely gone off.

THE patient ought likewise to be kept quiet and easy during the fit. Every
thing that affects the mind (...) the paroxysm, and tends to throw the gout
upon the (...) parts. For the same reason, all external applications that repel
the matter are to be avoided as death. They do not cure the disease, but remove
it from a safe to a more dangerous part of the body, where it often proves
fatal. A fit of the gout is rather to be considered as Nature's method of
curing a disease than a disease itself, and all that we can do, with safety, is
to promote her intentions, and to assist her in expelling the enemy in her own
way. Evacuations by bleeding, stool, etc. are likewise hurtful. They do not
remove the cause of the disease, and by weakening the patient, they generally
prolong the fit.

MANY things will indeed shorten a fit of the gout, and some will drive it off
altogether; but nothing has yet been found which will do this with safety to
the patient. In pain we eagerly grasp at any thing that promises immediate
ease, and even hazard life itself for a momentary relief. This is the true
reason why so many infallible remedies have been proposed for the gout, and why
such numbers have lost their lives by them. It would be as prudent to stop the
smallpox from rising, and to drive them into the blood, as to attempt to repel
the gout. The latter is as much an effort of Nature to free herself from an
offending cause as the former, and ought equally to be promoted. In fine, there
is no disease which Nature makes a greater effort to cure than the gout; nor is
it difficult to see which way her endeavors tend. She always attempts to throw
the disease upon the extremities, and when that is accomplished, her work is
half done. It may safely lodge there till it be gradually expelled by the vital
powers, and it cannot lodge safely any where else, nor be expelled in any other
way.

AFTER the fit is over, the patient ought to take a dose or two of the bitter
tincture of rhubarb, or some other warm stomachic purge. He should also drink a
weak infusion of stomachic bitters, in small wine or ale; as gentian, with
cinnamon, or Virginian snakeroot, and orange peel. The diet at this time should
be light, but nourishing, and gentle exercise should be taken on horseback, or
in a machine, etc.

OUT OF THE FIT, it is in the patient's power to do many things toward
preventing a return of the disorder, or rendering the fit, if it should return,
less severe. This, however, is not to be attempted by medicine. I have
frequently known the gout kept off for several years, by the Jesuits bark, and
other medicines; but in all the cases where I had occasion to see this tried,
the persons died suddenly, and, to all appearance, for want of a regular fit of
the gout. One would be apt, from hence, to conclude, that a fit of the gout, to
some constitutions, in the decline of life, is rather salutary than hurtful.

THOUGH it may be dangerous to stop a fit of the gout by medicine, yet if the
constitution can be so changed by diet and exercise, as to lessen or totally
prevent its return, there certainly can be no danger in following such a
course. It is well known that the whole humors may be so altered by a proper
course of diet, as quite to eradicate this disease; and those only who have
resolution enough to persist in such a course have reason to expect a cure.

THE course which we would recommend for preventing the gout, is as follows: In
the first place, universal temperance. In the next place, plenty of exercise.
By this we do not mean sauntering about in an indolent manner, but labor,
sweat, and toil. These only can render the humors wholesome, and keep them so.
Going early to bed, and rising by times, are of great importance. It is
likewise proper to avoid night studies, and all intense thought. The supper
should be light, and taken early. All strong liquors, especially generous wines
and sour punch, are to be avoided. Above all, we would recommend a milk diet.
The use of milk is not to be gone into all at once, but increased gradually,
till it becomes the principal part of the diet.

WE would likewise recommend some doses of magnesia alba and rhubarb to be
taken every spring and autumn; and afterward a course of stomachic bitters, as
tansy or water trefoil tea* an infusion of gentian and camomile flowers, or a
decoction of burdock root, etc. Any of these, or an infusion of any wholesome
bitter that is more agreeable to the patient, may be drank for two or three
weeks twice a day. An issue or perpetual blister has a great tendency to
prevent the gout. If these were not generally used, in the decline of life,
they would not only often prevent the gout, but also many other maladies. Such
as can afford to go to Bath will find great benefit from bathing and drinking
the water. It both promotes digestion and invigorates the habit.

WHEN the gout attacks the head or lungs, every method must be taken to draw it
toward the feet. They must be frequently bathed in warm water, and acrid
cataplasms applied to the soles. Blistering plasters ought likewise to be
applied to the ancles or calves of the legs. Bleeding in the feet or ancles is
also necessary, and warm stomachic purges. The patient ought to keep in bed for
the most part, if there be any signs of inflammation, and should be very
careful not to catch cold.

IF it attacks the stomach with a sense of cold, the most warm cordials are
necessary; as strong wine* cinnamon water, peppermint water, and even brandy or
rum. The patient should keep in bed, and endeavor to promote a sweat by
drinking warm liquors; and if he should be troubled with a nausea, or
inclination to vomit, he may drink camomile tea or small posset.

WHEN the gout attacks the kidneys, and imitates gravel pains, the patient
ought to drink freely of a decoction of marshmallows, and to have the parts
fomented with warm water. An emollient clyster ought likewise to be given, and
afterward an opiate. If the pain be very violent, twenty or thirty drops of
laudanum may be taken in a cup of the decoction.

PERSONS who have had the gout should be very attentive to any complaints that
may happen to them about the time when they have reason to expect a return of
the fit. The gout imitates many other disorders, and by being mistaken for
them, and treated accordingly, is often diverted from its proper course, to the
great danger of the patient's life.

THOSE who never had the gout, but who, from their constitution or manner of
living, have reason to expect it, ought likewise to be very circumspect with
regard to its first approach. If the disease by wrong conduct or improper
medicines, be diverted from its proper course, the miserable patient has a
chance to be ever after tormented with headachs, coughs, pains of the stomach
and intestines; and generally falls, at last, a victim to its attack upon some
of the more noble parts.

OF THE RHEUMATISM.
THIS disease has great affinity with the gout. It generally attacks the joints
with exquisite pain, and is sometimes attended with inflammation and swelling.
It is most common in the spring and toward the end of autumn. It is usually
distinguished into acute and chronic; or the rheumatism attended with a fever,
and that which is not.

CAUSES. -- The causes of a rheumatism are frequently the same as those of an
inflammatory fever, viz. an obstructed perspiration, the immoderate use of
strong liquors, etc. Sudden changes of the weather, and all quick transitions
from heat to cold, are very apt to occasion the rheumatism. The most
extraordinary case of a rheumatism that I ever saw, where almost every joint of
the body was distorted, was in a man who used to work one part of the day by
the fire, and the other part of it in the water. Very obstinate rheumatisms
have likewise been brought on by persons, not accustomed to it, allowing their
feet to continue long wet. The same effects are often produced by wet clothes,
damp beds, or lying upon the ground, especially in the night.

THE rheumatism may either be occasioned by excessive evacuations or the
stoppage of usual discharges. It is often the effect of chronic diseases, which
vitiate the humors; as the scurvy, the lues venerea, obstinate autumnal agues,
etc.

THE rheumatism prevails most in low, damp, marshy countries. It is likewise
very common amongst the poorer sort of peasants, who are ill clothed, live in
low, cold houses, and eat coarse unwholesome food, which contains but little
nourishment, and is not easy assimilated.

SYMPTOMS. -- The acute rheumatism commonly begins with weariness, shivering, a
quick pulse, restlessness, thirst, and other symptoms of fever. Afterward the
patient complains of flying pains, which are increased by the least motion.
These at length fix in the joints, which are often affected with swelling and
inflammation. If blood be let in this disease, it has generally the same
appearance as in the pleurisy.

IN this kind of rheumatism the treatment of the patient is nearly the same as
in an acute or inflammatory fever. If he be young and strong, bleeding is
necessary, which may be repeated according to the exigencies of the case.

THE belly ought likewise to be kept open by emollient clysters, or cool
opening liquors; as decoctions of tamarinds and liquorice, cream of tartar,
whey, etc. The diet should be light, and in small quantity, consisting chiefly
of roasted apples groat gruel, or very weak chicken broth. After the feverish
symptoms have abated, if the pain still continues, the patient must keep his
bed, and take such things as promote perspiration; as wine whey with spiritus
Mendereri, in the manner directed in page 267. The patient may likewise take,
for a few nights, at bed time, in a cup of wine whey, a dram of cream of
tartar, and half a dram of gum guaiacum in powder.

WARM bathing, after proper evacuations, has often an exceeding good effect.
The patient may either be put into a bath of warm water, or have cloths wrung
out of it applied to the parts affected. Great care must be taken that he do
not catch cold after bathing.

THE chronic rheumatism is seldom attended with any considerable degree of
fever, and is generally confined to some particular part of the body, as the
shoulders, the back, or the loins. There is seldom any inflammation or swelling
in this case. Persons in the decline of life are most subject to the chronic
rheumatism. In such patients it often proves extremely obstinate, and sometimes
incurable.

IN this kind of rheumatism the regimen should be nearly the same as in the
acute. Cool and diluting diet, consisting chiefly of vegetable substances, as
stewed prunes, coddled apples, currants or gooseberries boiled in milk, is most
proper. Arbuth^ot says, If there be a specific in aliment for the rheumatism,
it is certainly whey; and adds, That he knew a person subject to this disease,
who could never be cured by any other method but a diet of whey and bread. He
likewise says, That cream of tartar in water gruel, taken for several days,
will ease rheumatic pains considerably. This I have often experienced, but
found it always more efficacious when joined with gum guaiacum, as directed
above. In this case the patient may take the dose mentioned above twice a day,
and likewise a tea spoonful of the volatile tincture of gum guaiacum at bed
time in wine whey.

THIS course may be continued for a week, or longer, if the case proves
obstinate, and the patient's strength will permit. It ought then to be omitted
for a few days, and repeated again. At the same time, leeches or a blistering
plaster may be applied to the part affected. What I have generally found answer
better than either of these, in obstinate fixed rheumatic pains, is the warm
plaster. It is made by melting over a gentle fire, an ounce of gum plaster,
with two drams of blistering plaster. This may be spread upon soft leather, and
applied to the part affected. It should be taken off and wiped every three or
four days, and may be renewed once a fortnight. Cupping upon the part affected
is likewise often beneficial, and is greatly preferable to the application of
leeches.

THOUGH this disease may not seem in the least to yield to medicines for a long
time, yet they ought still to be persisted in. Persons who are subject to
frequent returns of the rheumatism, will often find their account in using
medicines, whether they be immediately affected with it or not. The chronic
rheumatism is similar to the gout in this respect, that the most proper time
for using medicines to extirpate it, is when the patient is most free from it.

TO those who can afford to go thither, we would recommend the warm baths of
Buxton or Matlock in Derbyshire. These have often cured very obstinate
rheumatisms, and are always safe either in or out of the fit. When the
rheumatism is complicated with scorbutic complaints, which is not seldom the
case, the Harrowgate waters and those of Moffat are proper. They should both be
drank and used as a warm bath.

THERE are several of our own domestic plants which may be used with advantage
in the rheumatism. One of the best of them is the white mustard seed. A table
spoonful of this may be taken twice or thrice a day, in a glass of water or
small wine. The water trefoil is likewise of great use in this complaint. It
may be infused in wine or ale, or drank in form of tea. The ground ivy,
camomile, and several other bitters, are also beneficial, and may be used in
the same manner. No benefit however is to be expected from these unless they be
used for a considerable time. Excellent medicines are often despised in this
case, because they do not perform a cure instantaneously; whereas nothing would
be more certain than their effect, were they duly persisted in. The want of
perseverance in the use of medicines is one great cause why chronic diseases
are so seldom cured.

COLD bathing, especially in salt water, often cures the rheumatism. We would
also recommend riding on horseback, and wearing flannel next the skin. A
flannel shirt, in an obstinate rheumatism, especially if the patient be old, is
one of the best medicines we know. Issues are likewise very proper; they have
often been known to cure a chronic rheumatism. If the pain affects the
shoulders, an issue may be made in the arm; but if it affects the loins, it
should be put in the leg or thigh. Rheumatic persons ought to make choice of a
dry warm air, to avoid wet clothes as much as possible, and make frequent use
of the flesh-brush.

OF THE SCURVY.
THIS disease prevails chiefly in cold northern countries, especially in low
damp situations, near large marshes, or great quantities of stagnating water.
Sedentary people, of a dull melancholy disposition are most subject to it. It
proves often fatal to sailors in long voyages, particularly in ships that are
not properly ventilated, and have many people on board.

CAUSES. -- The scurvy is occasioned by cold moist air, by the long use of
salted or smoke-dried provisions, or of any kind of food that is hard of
digestion, and affords little nourishment. It may also proceed from excessive
evacuations, or the suppression of customary discharges; as the menses,
haemorrhoidal flux, etc. It is sometimes owing to a hereditary taint, in which
case a very small cause will excite the latent disorder. Grief, fear, and other
depressing passions, have a great tendency to produce this disease. It may
likewise proceed from neglect of cleanliness, bad clothing, the want of proper
exercise, confined air, excess in eating or drinking, or from any disease which
greatly weakens the body, or vitiates the humors.

SYMPTOMS. -- This disease may be known by unusual weariness, heaviness of the
body, and difficulty of breathing, especially after bodily motion; rottenness
of the gums, which are apt to bleed on the slightest touch* a stinking breath,
frequent bleeding of the nose, difficulty of walking; sometimes a swelling, and
sometimes a falling away of the legs, on which there are livid, yellow, or
violet colored spots; the face is generally of a pale or leaden color. As the
disease advances, other symptoms come on; as rottenness of the teeth,
haemorrhages, or discharges of blood from various parts of the body, foul
obstinate ulcers, which no applications will cure; the patient complains of
pains in various parts of the body, especially about the breast, and his body
is covered with dry scaly eruptions. At last a wasting or hectic fever comes
on, and the miserable patient is often carried off by a dysentery, or
diarrhoea, a dropsy, the palsy, fainting fits, or a mortification of some of
the bowels.

CURE. -- We know no method of curing this disease, but by pursuing a course
directly opposite to that which brought it on. It proceeds from a vitiated
state of the humors, occasioned by errors in diet, air, or exercise; and this
can be removed no other way than by a proper attention to these important
articles.

IF the patient has been obliged to breathe a cold, damp, or confined air, he
should be removed, as soon as possible, to a dry, open, and moderately warm
one. If the disease proceeds from a sedentary life, or depressing passions, as
grief, fear, etc. the patient must take daily as much exercise in the open air
as he can bear, and his mind should be diverted by cheerful company and other
amusements. Nothing has a greater tendency either to prevent, or remove this
disease, than constant cheerfulness and good humor. But this, alas, is seldom
the lot of persons afflicted with the scurvy; they are generally surly,
peevish, sour, morose, and dull.

WHEN the scurvy has been brought on by a long use of salted provisions, the
proper medicine is a diet consisting chiefly of fresh vegetables; as oranges,
lemons, apples, tamarinds, water cresses, scurvy grass, brooklime, etc. The use
of these with milk, pot herbs, new bread, and fresh beer or cider, will seldom
fail to remove a scurvy of this kind, if taken before it be too far advanced;
but to have this effect they must be persisted in for a considerable time. When
fresh vegetables cannot be had, pickled or preserved ones may be used; and if
these cannot be obtained, the chemical acids may be taken in their stead. All
the patient's food and drink must be sharpened with cream of tartar, elixir of
vitriol, vinegar, or the spirit of sea salt, etc.

THESE things, however, will more certainly prevent than cure the scurvy; for
which reason seafaring people, especially on long voyages, ought to lay in
plenty of them. Cabbage, onions, gooseberries, and many other vegetables, may
be kept a long time by pickling, preserving, etc. When these fail, the chemical
acids, mentioned above, which will keep for any length of time, may be used. We
have reason to believe, if ships were well ventilated, good store of fruits,
greens, and portable soup, etc. laid in, and a proper regard paid to
cleanliness and warmth, that sailors would be the most healthy people in the
world, and would seldom suffer either from the scurvy or putrid fevers, which
are so fatal to that useful set of men; but it is too much the temper of such
people to despise all precaution; they will not think of any calamity till they
find it, when it is too late to ward off the blow.

IT must indeed be owned, that many of them have it not in their power to make
the provision we are speaking of; but in this case it is the business of their
employers to make it for them; and no man ought to engage in a long voyage
without having this article secured.

I have often seen very extraordinary effects in the scurvy from a milk diet.
This preparation of nature is a mixture of animal and vegetable properties,
which of all others is the most fit for restoring a decayed constitution, and
removing that particular acrimony of the humors, which seems to constitute the
very essence of the survy, and many other diseases. But men despise this
wholesome and nourishing food, because it is cheap, and guzzle down flesh, and
fermented liquors, while milk is only deemed fit for their hogs.

THE most proper drink in the scurvy is whey or buttermilk. When these cannot
be had, sound cider or perry may be used. Wort has been found to be a proper
drink in the scurvy, and may be used at sea, as malt will keep during the
longest voyage. A decoction of the tops of the spruce fir is also good. It may
be drank in the quantity of an English pint twice a day. Tar water may likewise
be used for this purpose, ordecoctions of any of the mild mucilaginous
vegetables; as sarsaparilla, marshmallow roots, etc. Infusions of the bitter
plants, as ground ivy, the lesser centaury, marsh trefoil, etc. are likewise
beneficial. I have seen the peasants in some parts of Britain express the juice
of the last mentioned plant, and drink it with good effect in those foul
scorbutic eruptions with which they are often troubled in the spring season.

THE Harrowgate water is certainly an excellent medicine in the scurvy. I have
often seen patients in the most deplorable condition from that disease, greatly
relieved by drinking the sulphur water, and bathing in it. The chalybeate water
may also be used with advantage, especially with a view to brace the stomach
after drinking the sulphur water, which, though i^ sharpens the appetite, never
fails to weaken the power of digestion.

A slight degree of scurvy may be carried off by frequently sucking a little of
the juice of a bitter orange, or lemon. When the disease affects the gums only,
this practice, if continued for some time, will generally carry it off. We
would, however, recommend the bitter orange as greatly preferable to lemon. It
seems to be as good an acid, and is not near so hurtful to the stomach. Perhaps
our own sorrel may be little inferior to either of them. All kinds of salad are
good in the scurvy, and ought to be eat in great plenty; as spinach, lettuce,
parsley, celery, endive, radish, dandelion, etc. It is amazing to see how soon
fresh vegetables in the spring cure the brute animals of any scab or foulness
which is upon their skins. Is it not natural to suppose that their effects
should be as great upon the human species?

THE LEPROSY, which was so common in this country long ago, seems to have been
near akin to the scurvy. Perhaps its appearing so seldom now, may be owing to
the inhabitants of Britain eating more vegetable food than formerly, living
more upon tea and other diluting diet, using far less salted meat, and being
greatly more cleanly and better clothed, etc. -- Where this disease happens,
we would recommend the same course of diet and medicine as in the scurvy.

OF THE SCROPHULA, OR KING's EVIL.
THIS disease chiefly affects the glands, especially those of the neck.
Children and young persons of a sedentary life are most subject to it. It is
one of those diseases that may be removed by proper regimen, but seldom yields
to medicine. The inhabitants of cold, damp, marshy countries, are most liable
to the scrophula.

CAUSES. -- This disease may proceed from a hereditary taint, infection, a
scrophulous nurse, etc. Children who have the misfortune to be born of sickly
parents, whose constitutions have been worn out by the French Pox, or other
chronic diseases, are apt to be affected with the scrophula. It may likewise
proceed from such diseases as weaken the habit or vitiate the humors, as the
smallpox, measles, etc. External injuries; as blows, bruises, compressions,
etc. sometimes produce scrophulous ulcers; but there is reason to believe, when
this happens, that it is owing either to a predisposition in the habit to this
disease, or to the confinement of the patient. In short, whatever tends to
vitiate the humors, or relax the solids, predisposes to this disease; as the
want of exercise, too much heat or cold, confined air, unwholesome food, bad
water, the use of poor, weak, watery aliments, the neglect of cleanliness, or
suffering children to continue long wet, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- At first small knots appear under the chin or behind the ears,
which gradually increase in number and size, till they form one large hard
tumor. This often continues for a long time without breaking, and when it does
break, it only discharges a thin sanies or watery humor. Other parts of the
body are likewise liable to its attack, as the armpits groins, feet, hands,
eyes, breasts, etc. Nor are the internal parts exempt from it. It often affects
the lungs, liver or spleen; and I have frequently seen the glands of the
mesentery greatly enlarged by it.

THESE obstinate ulcers which break out upon the feet and hands with swelling,
and little or no redness, commonly called the spina ventosa, are of the
scrophulous kind. They seldom discharge good matter, and are exceeding
difficult to cure. The white swellings of the joints seem likewise to be of
this kind. They can seldom be brought to a suppuration, and when opened they
only discharge a thin ichor. There is not a more general symptom of the
scrophula than a swelling of the upper lip and nose. It likewise frequently
begins in a single toe or finger, which continues long swelled, with no great
degree of pain, till at length the bone becomes carious.

REGIMEN. -- As this disease proceeds, in a great measure, from relaxation, the
diet ought to be generous and nourishing, but at the same time light and of
easy digestion, as good light bread, the flesh and broth of young animals, with
now and then a glass of generous wine, or good ale. The air ought to be open,
dry, and not too cold, and the patient should take as much exercise as he can
bear. Exercise is here of the utmost importance. Children will seldom be
troubled with the scrophula who have enough of exercise, and if they be, it
alone has the greatest chance to cure them.

MEDICINE. -- The vulgar are remarkably credulous with regard to the cure of
the scrophula, many of them believing in the virtue of the royal touch, that of
the seventh son, etc. The truth is, we know but little either of the nature or
cure of this disease, and where reason or medicines fail, superstition always
comes in their place. Hence it is, that in diseases which are the most
difficult to understand, we always hear of the greatest number of miraculous
cures being performed. Here, however, the deception on is easily accounted for.
The scrophula at a certain period of life, often cures of itself; and, if the
patient happens to be touched about this time, the cure is imputed to the
touch, and not to nature, who is really the physician. In the same way the
insignificant nostrums of quacks and old women often gain applause when they
deserve none.

THERE is nothing more pernicious, than the custom of dosing children with
strong purgative medicines in the scrophula. People imagine, that it proceeds
from humors which must be purged off, without considering, that these
purgatives increase the relaxation and aggravate the disease. It has indeed
been found that keeping the belly gently open, especially with seawater, has a
good effect; but this should only be given in such quantity as to procure one,
or at most two stools every day. Bathing in the salt water has likewise a very
good effect, especially in the warm season. I have often known a course of
bathing in salt water, and drinking it in such quantities as to keep the belly
gently open, cure a scrophula, after many medicines had been tried in vain.
When salt water cannot be had, the patient may be bathed in fresh water, and
his belly kept open by small quantities of salt and water, or some other mild
purgative.

NEXT to cold bathing and drinking the salt water, we would recommend the
jesuits bark. The cold bath may be used in summer, and the bark in winter. It
may either be taken in substance mixed with wine, or if the patient cannot be
brought to use it in that form, a decoction of it may be drank. An ounce of the
jesuits bark, and a dram of Winter's bark grossly powdered, may be boiled in an
English quart of water to a pint; toward the end, half an ounce of sliced
liquorice-root, and a handful of raisins may be added, which will both render
the medicine less disagreeable and make it take up more of the bark. The liquor
must be strained, and two, three, or four spoonfuls, according to the age of
the patient, taken three times a day. The patient ought at the same time to
take, twice or thrice a day, a glass of good wine, with ten, twenty, or thirty
drops of volatile tincture of guaiacum in it. I have often given the bark in
obstinate scrophulous cases with very good effect. An adult may take at least
two drams of it daily, and must continue to use it for several months.

THE Moffat and Harrowgate waters are likewise very proper medicines in the
scrophula, especially the latter. They ought not however to be drank in large
quantities, but should be taken so as to keep the belly gently open, and must
be used for a considerable time.

AS to external applications, they are of little avail. Before the tumor
breaks, nothing ought to be applied to it, unless a piece of flannel, or
something to keep it warm. After it breaks, the sore may be dressed with some
digestive ointment. What I have always found to answer best, was the yellow
basilicon mixed with about a sixth or eighth part of its weight of red
precipitate. The sore may be dressed with this twice a day; and if it be very
fungous, and does not digest well, a larger proportion of the precipitate may
be added.

MEDICINES which mitigate this disease, though they do not cure it, are not to be
despised. If the patient can be kept alive by any means till he arrives at the
age of puberty, he he has a great chance to get well; but if he does not
recover at this time, in all probability he never will. Persons afflicted with
this disease ought not to marry. There is no malady which parents are so apt to
communicate to their offspring as the scrophula, and surely it is a cruel thing
to entail misery on posterity.

FOR the means of preventing this disease, we must refer the reader to the
observations on nursing, at the beginning of the book.

OF THE RICKETS.
THIS disease generally attacks children betwixt the age of nine months and two
years. It appeared first in England, about the time when manufactures began to
be introduced, and still prevails most in towns where the inhabitants follow
sedentary employments, and by that means neglect either to take proper exercise
themselves, or to give it to their children. It has a great resemblance to the
foregoing disease both in its causes and method of cure.

CAUSES. -- One cause of the rickets in children is diseased parents. Mothers
of a weak relaxed habit, who neglect exercise, and live upon weak watery diet,
can neither be expected to bring forth strong and healthy children, nor to be
able to nurse them, after they are brought forth. Accordingly we find, that the
children of such women generally die of the rickets, the scrophula,
consumptions, etc. Children begotten by men in the decline of life, who are
afflicted with the gout, the gravel, or other chronic diseases, or who have
been often affected with the venereal disease in their youth, are likewise
liable to the rickets.

ANY disorder that weakens the constitution, or relaxes the habit of children,
as the smallpox, measles, teething, the hooping-cough, etc. predisposes them
to this disease. It may likewise be occasioned by improper diet, as food that
is either too weak and watery, or so viscid that the stomach cannot digest it.
Too great a quantity of rich and nourishing diet may likewise vitiate the
humors and occasion the rickets. Bad nursing is often the cause of this
disease. When the nurse is either diseased, or has not enough of milk to
nourish the child, it must suffer. But children suffer oftener by want of care
in nurses than want of food. Allowing an infant to continue long wet, or not
keeping it thoroughly clean in its clothes, etc. has the most pernicious
effects. Wet shoes, stocking, and other clothes, relax the bodies of children,
and greatly obstruct their growth. The want of free air, is likewise very
hurtful to children in this respect. A nurse who lives in a close, small house,
where the air is damp and confined, and who is too indolent to carry her child
abroad into the open air, will hardly fail to give it the rickets. But want of
exercise is the chief cause of this disease. A healthy child should always be
in motion, unless when asleep; but if it be suffered to lie, or sit, instead of
being tossed and dandled about, it can hardly escape this baneful malady.

SYMPTOMS. -- At the beginning of this disease the child's flesh grows soft and
flabby; its strength is diminished; it loses its wonted cheerfulness, looks
more grave and composed than is natural for its age, and does not care to be
moved. The head and belly become too large in proportion to the other parts;
the face appears full, and the complexion florid. Afterward the bones begin to
be affected, especially in the more soft and spungy parts, or toward the ends.
Hence the wrists and ancles become thicker than usual; the spine or backbone
puts on an unnatural shape; the breast is likewise often deformed; and the
bones of the arms and legs grow crooked. All those symptoms vary according to
the violence of the disease. The pulse is generally quick, but feeble; the
appetite and digestion, for the most part, bad; the teeth come slowly and with
difficulty, and they often rot and fall out afterward. Ricketty children
generally have great acuteness of mind, and an understanding above their years.
Whether this be owing to their being more in the company of adults than other
children, or the enlargement of the brain, we shall not pretend to determine.

REGIMEN. -- As this disease is always attended with evident signs of weakness
and relaxation, our chief aim in the cure must be to brace and strengthen the
solids, and to promote the digestion and due preparation of the fluids. These
important ends will be best promoted by wholesome nourishing diet, suited to
the age and strength of the patient, and often repeated; by open dry air, and
plenty of exercise. If the child has a bad nurse, who either neglects her duty,
or has not enough of milk, she should be changed. If the season be cold, the
child ought to be kept warm; and when the weather is hot it ought to be kept
cool; as sweating is very apt to weaken it; and too great a degree of cold has
the same effect. The limbs should be rubbed frequently with a warm hand, and
the child should be kept as cheerful as possible.

THE diet ought to be light and dry, as good bread, roasted flesh, etc. Biscuit
is generally reckoned the best bread; and pigeons, pullets, veal, rabbets, or
mutton roasted or minced, are the most proper flesh. If the child be too young
for flesh meats, he may have rice, millet, or pearl barley boiled with raisins,
to which may be added a little wine and spice. His drink may be good claret, of
which he may take half a glass three or four times a day. Those who cannot
afford claret, may give the child now and then a wine glass of fine mild ale.

MEDICINE. -- Medicines are here of little avail. The disease may often be
cured by the nurse, but seldom by the physician. In children of a gross habit,
gentle purges or vomits may sometimes be of use; but they will never carry off
the malady. That must depend upon bracing alone: For which purpose, besides the
regimen mentioned above, we would recommend the cold bath, especially in the
warm season. It must however be administered with prudence, as some ricketty
children cannot bear it. The best time for using the cold bath is in the
morning, and the child should be well rubbed with a dry cloth immediately
after. If the child should be weakened by the use of the cold bath, it must be
discontinued.

SOMETIMES issues have been found beneficial both in this and the foregoing
disease. They are peculiarly necessary for children who abound with gross
humors. An infusion of the jesuits-bark, in wine or ale, is likewise of use;
but it is scarce possible to bring children to take it. We might here mention
many other medicines which have been recommended for the rickets; but, as there
is far more danger in trusting to these than in neglecting them altogether, we
choose rather to pass them over, and to depend entirely on regimen.

OF THE ITCH.
THE ITCH is a disease of the skin, and is generally communicated by infection.
It seems originally to proceed from the want of cleanliness, bad air, or
unwholesome diet; as the inmates of jails, hospitals, and such as live upon
salted and smoke dried provisions are seldom free from it.

IT generally appears in form of small watery pustules, first about the wrists,
or betwixt the fingers, and afterward it affects the arms, legs, and thighs,
etc. These pustules are attended with an intolerable itching, especially when
the patient is warm in bed, or sits near the fire. Sometimes the skin is
covered with large blotches or scabs, and at other times with a white scurf, or
scaly eruption. This last is called the dry itch, and is the most difficult to
cure.

THE itch is seldom a dangerous disease, unless when it is rendered so by
neglect or improper treatment. If it be suffered to continue too long, it may
vitiate the whole mass of humors; and, if it be suddenly drove in, without
proper evacuations, it may occasion fevers, inflammations of the viscera, or
other internal disorders.

THE safest medicine for the itch is sulphur, which ought to be applied both
externally and internally. The parts most affected may be rubbed with an
ointment made of common sulphur and flower of brimstone, each an ounce; crude
sal ammonia^, finely powdered, two drams; hog's lard, or butter, four ounces. A
scruple, or half a dram of of the essence of lemon may be added, to take away
the disagreeable smell. About the bulk of a nutmeg of this may be rubbed upon
the extremities; at bedtime, twice or thrice a week. It is seldom necessary to
rub any part but the extremities, and even these ought not all to be rubbed at
the same time, but by turns, as it is dangerous to stop too many pores at once.

BEFORE the patient begins to use the ointment, he ought, if he be of a full
habit, to bleed and take a purge or two. It will likewise be proper, during the
use of it, to take every night and morning as much of the flower of brimstone,
in a little treacle or new-milk, as will lie upon a shilling. He should beware
of catching cold, should wear more clothes than usual, and take every thing
warm. The same clothes, the linen excepted, ought to be kept on all the time of
using the ointment; and such clothes, as have been worn while the patient was
under the disease, are not to be used again, unless they have been fumigated
with brimstone, and thoroughly cleaned, otherwise they will communicate the
infection anew.

I never knew brimstone, if used as directed above, fail to cure the itch; and
I have reason to believe, that, if duly persisted in, it never will fail: but
if it be only used once or twice, and cleanliness be neglected, it is no wonder
if the disorder returns. The great secret both for preventing and curing the
itch is CLEANLINESS. Where it prevails, the itch will seldom approach, and if
it should, it will soon be banished. The quantity of ointment mentioned above
will generally be sufficient for the cure of one person; but, if any symptoms
of the disease should appear again, the medicine may be repeated. It is both
more safe and efficacious when persisted in for a considerable time, than when
a large quantity is applied at once. It will likewise be proper that the
patient, while he is using the ointment, should take a purge once a week.

PEOPLE ought to be extremely cautious not to mistake other eruptions for the
itch; as the stoppage of these may be attended with fatal consequences. Many of
the eruptive diseases to which children are liable, have a near resemblance to
the itch; and I have often known infants killed by being rubbed with greasy
ointments that made these eruptions strike suddenly in, which nature had thrown
out to preserve the patient's life, or prevent some other disease.

MUCH michief is likewise done by the use of mercury in this disease. I have
known some persons mad enough to wash the parts affected with a strong solution
of the corrosive sublimate, which had almost proved fatal. Others use the
mercurial ointment without taking the least care either to avoid cold or
observe a proper regimen. The consequences of such conduct may be easily
guessed. I have known even the mercurial girdles produce tragical effects, and
would advise every person, as he values his health, to beware how he uses them.
Mercury ought never to be used as a medicine without the greatest care.
Ignorant people look upon these girdles as a kind of charm, without considering
that the mercury enters the blood.

AS sulphur is both the most safe and efficacious medicine for the itch, we
shall not recommend any other. Other medicines may be used by persons of skill,
but are not to be ventured upon by the ignorant. Those who would avoid this
detestable disease ought to beware of infected persons, to use wholesome food,
and to study universal cleanliness.

OF THE ASTHMA.
THE asthma is a disease of the lungs, which seldom admits of a cure. Persons
in the decline of life are most liable to this disease. It is divided into the
moist and dry, or humoural and nervous. The former is attended with
expectoration or spitting; but in the latter the patient seldom spits, unless
sometimes a little tough phlegm by the mere force of coughing.

CAUSES. -- The asthma is sometimes hereditary. It may likewise proceed from a
bad formation of the breast; the fumes of metals or minerals taken into the
lungs I know a person whose lungs were set in a manner stock-still, by the
fumes of antimony. It happened in the night, after he had been preparing a
great quantity of the regulus of antimony through the day. He was relieved by
clysters, fomentations and oily emulsions.
; violent exercise, especially running; the obstructions of customary
evacuations, as the menses, haemorrhoids, etc; the sudden retrocession of the
gout, or striking in of eruptions, as the smallpox, measles, etc; violent
passions of the mind, as sudden fear, or surprise. In a word, the disease may
proceed from any cause that either impedes the circulation of the blood through
the lungs, or prevents their being duly expanded by the air.

SYMPTOMS. -- An asthma is known by a quick laborious respiration, which is
generally performed with a kind of wheezing noise. Sometimes the difficulty of
breathing is so great that the patient is obliged to keep an erect posture,
otherwise he is in danger of being suffocated. A fit or paroxism of the asthma
is very apt to happen after a person has been exposed to cold easterly winds,
or has been abroad in thick foggy weather, or has got wet, or continued long in
a damp place under ground, or the like.

A fit of the asthma is generally ushered in with great listlessness, want of
sleep, hoarseness, cough, belching of wind, a sense of heaviness about the
breast; and difficulty of breathing. To these succeed heat, fever, pain of the
head, sickness and nausea, great oppression of the breast, palpitation of the
heart, a weak and sometimes intermitting pulse, an involuntary flow of tears,
bilious vomitings, etc. All the symptoms grow worse toward night; the patient
is easier when up than in bed, and is very desirous of cool air.

REGIMEN. -- The food ought to be light, and of easy digestion. Boiled meats
are generally preferred to roasted, and the flesh of young animals to that of
old. All windy food, and whatever is apt to swell upon the stomach* is to be
avoided. Light puddings, white broths, and ripe fruits baked, boiled or
roasted, are proper. Strong liquor of all kinds, especially malt-liquor, is
hurtful. The patient should eat a very light supper, or rather none at all. His
clothing should be warm, especially in the winter-season. A flannel shirt or
waistcoat, and thick shoes, are of great service; as all disorders of the
breast are much relieved by keeping the feet warm, and promoting the
perspiration.

BUT nothing is of so great importance in the asthma as pure and moderately
warm air. Asthmatic people can seldom bear either the close heavy air of a
large town, or the sharp, keen atmosphere of a bleak hilly country; a medium
between these is therefore to be chosen. The air near a large town is often
better than at a distance, provided the patient be removed so far as not to be
affected by the smoke. Some asthmatic patients indeed breathe easier in town
than in the country; but this is seldom the case, especially in towns where
much coal is burnt. Asthmatic persons who are obliged to be in town all day,
ought, at least, to sleep out of it. Even this will often prove of great
service. Those who can afford it ought to travel into a warmer climate. Many
asthmatic persons who cannot live in Britain enjoy very good health in the
south of France, or in Spain or Italy.

EXERCISE is likewise of very great importance in the asthma, as it promotes
the digestion, and greatly assists in the preparation of the blood. The blood
of asthmatic persons is seldom duly prepared, owing to the proper action of the
lungs being impeded. For this reason such people ought daily to take as much
exercise, either on foot, horseback, or in a machine, as they can bear.

MEDICINE. -- Almost all that can be done by medicine in this disease, is to
relieve the patient when seized with a violent fit. This indeed requires the
greatest expedition, as the disease often proves suddenly fatal. In the
paroxism or fit, the body is generally bound, a clyster ought therefore to be
administered, and if there be occasion, it may be repeated two or three times.
The patient's feet ought to be put into warm water, and afterward rubbed with
a warm hand, or dry cloth. If there be a violent spasm about the breast or
stomach, warm fomentations, or bladders filled with warm milk and water, may be
applied to the part affected, and warm cataplasms to the soles of the feet. The
patient must drink freely of diluting liquors, and may take a tea-spoonful of
the tincture of castor and saffron, mixed together in a cup of valerian-tea,
twice or thrice a day. Sometimes a vomit has a very good effect, and snatches
the patient, as it were, from the jaws of death. This will be more safe after
other evacuations have been premised.

OUT OF THE FIT. In the moist asthma, such things as promote expectoration or
spitting, ought to be used; as the syrup of squills, gum-ammoniac, and such
like. A common spoonful of the syrup or oxomell of squills, mixed with an equal
quantity of cinnamon water, may be taken three or four times a day. Any
quantity of gum-ammoniac, with an equal quantity of asafoetida, may be made
into pills, and four or five of them taken every night at bedtime.

IN the convulsive or nervous asthma, antispasmodics and bracers are the most
proper medicines. The patient may take a tea-spoonful of the paregoric elixir
twice a day. The jesuits bark is likewise proper in this case. It may be taken
in substance, or infused in wine. In short, every thing that braces the nerves,
or takes off spasm, may be of use in a nervous asthma. It is often relieved by
the use of asses milk; I have likewise known cows milk drank warm of a morning,
have a very good effect in this case.

IN every species of asthma issues have a good effect; they may either be made
in the back or side, and should never be allowed to dry up. We shall here, once
for all, observe, that in most chronic diseases, issues are extremely proper.
They are both a safe and efficacious remedy; and and though they do not always
cure the disease, yet they will often prolong the patient's life.

OF THE APOPLEXY.
THE apoplexy is a sudden loss of sense and motion, wherein the patient is to
all appearance dead, only the heart and lungs still continue to move. This
disease, by a little care, might often be prevented, but can seldom be cured.
It chiefly attacks sedentary persons of a gross habit, who use a rich and
plentiful diet, and indulge in strong liquors. People in the decline of life
are most subject to the apoplexy. It prevails most in winter, especially in
long rainy seasons, and very low states of the barometer.

CAUSES. -- The immediate cause of an apoplexy is a compression of the brain,
occasioned by an effusion of blood, or of watery humors on that part. The
former is called a sanguine, and the latter a serous apoplexy. It may be
produced by any cause that increases the circulation toward the brain, or
prevents the return of the blood from the head; as intense study; violent
passions I knew a woman who in a violent fit of anger was seized with a
sanguine apoplexy. She at first complained of extreme pain, as if daggers had
been thrust through her head, as she expressed it. Afterward she became comatose
and dull, her pulse sunk very low, and was exceeding (...). By the help of
bleeding, blistering, and other evacuations, she (...) kept alive for about a
fortnight. When her head was opened, a (...) quantity of extravasated blood was
found in the left ventricle of the (...).
; viewing objects for a long time obliquely; wearing any thing too tight about
the neck; a rich and luxurious diet; suppression of urine; suffering the body
to cool suddenly after having been very hot; continuing long in a warm bath;
the excessive use of spiceries, or high-seasoned food; excess of venery; the
sudden striking in of any eruption; suffering issues, seatons, etc. suddenly to
dry up, or the stoppage of any customary evacuation; a mercurial salivation
suddenly checked by cold; wounds or bruises on the head; long exposure to
excessive cold; poisonous exhalations; etc.

SYMPTOMS, and method of cure. -- The usual forerunners of an apoplexy are
giddiness, pain, (...) swimming of the head; loss of memory; drowsiness; (...)
in the ears; the night mare; a spontaneous flux of tears, and laborious
respiration. When persons of an apoplectic make observe these symptoms, they
have reason to fear the approach of a ^it, and should endeavor to prevent it
by plentiful bleeding, low diet, and opening medicines.

IN the sanguine apoplexy, if the patient does not die suddenly, the
countenance appears florid, the face is swelled or puffed up, and the
blood vessels, especially about the neck and temples, are turged; the pulse
beats strong; the eyes are prominent and fixed, and the breathing is difficult,
and performed with a s^orting noise. The excrements and urine are often voided
spontaneously, and the patient is sometimes seized with a vomiting.

IN this case every method must be taken to lessen the force of the blood
toward the head. The patient should be kept perfectly easy and cool. His head
should be raised pretty high, and his feet suffered to hang down. His clothes
ought to be loosened, especially about the neck, and fresh air admitted into
his chamber. His garters should be tied pretty tight, by which means the motion
of the blood from the lower extremities will be retarded. As soon as the
patient is placed in a proper posture, he should be bled pretty freely in the
neck or arm, and, if there be occasion, the operation may be repeated in two or
three hours. A laxative clyster with plenty of sweet oil, or fresh butter and a
large spoonful of common salt in it, may be administered every two hours; and
blistering plasters applied betwixt the shoulders, and to the calves of the
legs.

AS soon as the symptoms are a little abated, and the patient is able to
swallow, he ought to drink freely of some diluting opening liquor, as a
decoction of tamarinds and liquorice, cream-tartar-whey, or common whey with
cream of tartar dissolved in it. Or he may take any cooling purge, as Glauber's
salts, or manna dissolved in an infusion of senna, or the like. All spirits and
other strong liquors are to be avoided. Even volatile salts held to the nose do
mischief. Vomits, for the same reason, ought not be given, nor any thing that
may increase the motion of the blood toward the head.

IN the serous apoplexy, the symptoms are nearly similar, only the pulse is not
so strong, the countenance is less florid, and the breathing less difficult.
Bleeding is not so necessary here, as in the former case. It may however
generally be performed once with safety and advantage; but should not be
repeated. The patient should be placed in the same posture as directed above,
and should have blistering plasters applied, and receive opening clysters in
the same manner. Purges are here likewise necessary, and the patient may drink
strong balm tea. If he be inclined to sweat, it ought to be promoted by
drinking small wine whey, or an infusion of carduus benedictus. A plentiful
sweat kept up for a considerable time, has often carried off a serous apoplexy.

WHEN apoplectic symptoms proceed from opium, or other narcotic substances
taken into the stomach, vomits are necessary. The patient is generally
relieved, as soon as he has discharged the poison in this way.

PERSONS of an apoplectic make, or those who have been attacked by it, ought to
use a very spare and slender diet, avoiding all strong liquors, spiceries, and
high seasoned food. They ought likewise to guard against all violent passions,
and to avoid the extremes of heat and cold. The head should be shaved, and
daily washed with cold water. The feet ought to be kept warm, and never
suffered to continue long wet. The belly must, by all means, be kept open,
either by food or medicine, and blood ought to be let every spring and fall.
Moderate exercise should likewise be taken; but it ought never to be continued
too long. Nothing has a greater effect in preventing an apoplexy than issues or
perpetual blisters; but great care must be taken never to suffer them to dry
up, without opening others in their stead. Apoplectic persons ought never to go
to sleep with a full stomach, nor to lie with their heads too low, or wear any
thing tight about their necks.

OF THE PALSY.
THE palsy is a loss or diminution of sense, or motion, or of both, in one or
more parts of the body. It is more or less dangerous, according to the
importance of the part affected. A palsy of the heart, lungs, or any part
necessary for life, is mortal. When it affects the stomach, the intestines, or
the bladder, it is highly dangerous. If the face be affected, the case is bad,
as this shows, that the disease proceeds from the brain. If the part affected
feels cold, is insensible, or wastes away, there is small hopes of a cure,
especially, if the judgment and memory begin to fail.

CAUSES. -- THE immediate cause of the palsy is whatever prevents the regular
exertion of the nervous power upon any particular muscle or part of the body.
The occasional and predisposing causes are various, as drunkenness; wounds of
the brain, or spinal marrow; pressure upon the brain or nerves; very cold or
damp air; the suppression of customary evacuations; sudden fear; want of
exercise; or or whatever greatly relaxes the system, as drinking much tea, Many
people imagine, that tea has no tendency to hurt the nerves, and that drinking
the same quantity of warm water would be equally pernicious. This however seems
to be a mistake. I know many persons who daily drink three or four cups of warm
milk and water without feeling any bad consequences; yet the same quantity of
tea will make their hands shake for twenty-four hours.
or coffee, etc. Wounds of the nerves themselves, or any thing that obstructs
the regular action of that vital power contained in them, will occasion a
palsy. It may likewise proceed from the poisonous fumes of metals or minerals,
as mercury, lead, arsenick, etc.

IN young persons of a full habit, where there are symptoms of inflammation,
the palsy must be treated in the same manner as the sanguine apoplexy. The
patient must be bled, blistered, and have his belly kept open by sharp clysters
or pugative medicines. But, in old age, or when the disease proceeds from
relaxation or debility, which is generally the case, a quite contrary course
must be pursued. The diet mu^^ be warm and attenuating, consisting chiefly of
spicy and aromatic vegetables, as mustard, horseradish, etc. The drink may be
generous wine, mustard-whey, or brandy and water. Friction with the flesh
brush, or a warm hand, is extremely proper, especially on the parts affected.
Blistering-plasters may likewise be applied to the affected parts with
advantage. When this cannot be done, they may be rubbed with the volatile
liniment, or the nerve-ointment of the Edinburgh dispensatory. But the best
external application is electricity. The shocks should be received on the part
affected; and they ought daily to be repeated for several weeks. This is not
only proper for curing, but also for preventing a palsy.

VOMITS are very beneficial in this kind of palsy, and ought to be frequently
administered. Caephalic snuff, or any thing that makes the patient sneeze, is
likewise useful. Some pretend to have found great benefit from rubbing the
parts affected with nettles; but this does not seem to be any ways preferable
to blistering. If the tongue be affected, the patient may gargle his mouth
frequently with brandy and mustard; or he may hold a bit of sugar in his mouth
wet with the palsy-drops or compound spirits of lavender. The wild valerian
root is a very proper medicine in this case. It may either be taken in an
infusion with sageleaves, or half a dram of it in powder may be given in a
glass of wine three times a day. If the patient cannot use the valerian, he may
take of sal volatile oleosum, compound spirits of lavender, and tincture of
castor, each half an ounce; mix these together, and take forty or fifty drops
in a glass of wine, three or four times a day. A table spoonful of mustard seed
taken frequently is a very good medicine. The patient ought likewise to chew
cinnamon bark, ginger, or other warm spiceries.

EXERCISE is of the utmost importance in the palsy; but the patient must beware
of cold, damp, and moist air. He ought to wear flannel next his skin; and, if
possible, should remove into a warmer climate.

OF THE EPILEPSY, OR FALLING SICKNESS.
THE epilepsy is a sudden deprivation of all the senses, wherein the patient
falls suddenly down, and is affected with violent convulsive motions. Children,
especially those that are delicately brought up, are most subject to it. It
more frequently attacks men than women, and is very difficult to cure. When the
epilepsy attacks children, there is reason to hope it may go off about the time
of puberty. When it attacks any person after twenty years of age, the cure is
difficult; but when after forty, a cure is hardly to be expected. If the fit
continues only for a short space, and returns seldom, there is reason to hope;
but if it continues long and returns frequently, the prospect is bad. It is a
very unfavourable symptom, when the patient is seized with the fits in his
sleep.

CAUSES. -- Sometimes the epilepsy is a hereditary disease. It may likewise
proceed from a sudden fright of the mother when with child of the patient; from
blows, bruises, or wounds on the head; a collection of water, blood, or serous
humors in the brain; a polypus; tumors or concretions within the skull;
excessive drinking; intense study; excess of venery; worms; teething;
suppression of customary evacuations; too great emptiness or repletion; violent
passions or affections of the mind, as fear, joy, etc. hysteric affections;
contagion received into the body, as the infection of the smallpox, measles,
etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- An epileptic fit is generally preceded by an unusual weariness;
pain of the head; dullness; giddiness; noise in the ears; dimness of sight;
palpitation of the heart; disturbed sleep; difficult breathing; the bowels are
inflated with wind; the urine is in great quantity, but thin; the complexion is
pale; the extremities are cold, and the patient feels as it were a stream of
cold air ascending toward his head.

IN the fit, the patient generally makes an unusual noise; his thumbs are drawn
in toward the palms of the hands; his eyes are distorted; he starts, and foams
at the mouth; his extremities are bent or twisted various ways; he often
discharges his seed, urine, and foeces involuntarily; and is quite destitute of
all sense and reason. After the fit is over, his senses gradually return, and
he complains of a kind of stupor, weariness, and pain of his head; but has no
remembrance of what happened to him during the fit.

SOMETIMES the fits return at stated periods, as at the full or change of the
moon: at other times they are excited by violent affections of the mind, a
debauch of liquor, excessive heat, cold, or the like.

THIS disease, from the difficulty of investigating its causes, and its strange
symptoms, was formerly attributed to the wrath of the gods, or the agency of
evil spirits. In modern times it has often, by the vulgar, been imputed to
witchcraft or fascination. It depends however as much upon natural causes as
any other malady; and its cure can only be effected by persisting in the use of
proper means.

REGIMEN. -- Epileptic patients ought, if possible, to breathe a pure and free
air. Their diet should be nourishing, but of easy digestion. They ought to
drink nothing strong, to avoid swines flesh, waterfowl, and likewise all windy
and oily vegetables, as cabbage, nuts, etc. They ought to keep themselves
cheerful, carefully avoiding all occasions of violent passions, as anger, fear,
etc It has already been observed that epileptic sits are often the effect of
fear, and are (...) by that idle custom among young people of frightening one
another. Though this be generally done out of mere frolic, it has many dreadful
consequences, and ought by all means to be discouraged. It is finely a smaller
crime to take away a person's life, than to render him at once miserable in
himself, and a burden to society.
.

EXERCISE is likewise of great use; but the patient must be careful to avoid
all extremes either of heat or cold, all dangerous situations, as standing upon
precipices, riding deep waters, etc. Any thing that makes him giddy, is apt to
occasion a ^it, as turning round, looking into a deep pit, or the like; all
these ought therefore to be avoided with the utmost care.

MEDICINE. -- The intentions of cure must vary according to the cause of the
disease. If the patient be of a sanguine temperament, and there be reason to
fear an inflammation in the brain, bleeding and other evacuations will be
necessary. When the disease is occasioned by the stoppage of customary
evacuations, these, if possible, must be restored; if this cannot be done,
others may be substituted in their place. Issues or setons, in this case, have
often a very good effect. When there is reason to believe that the disease
proceeds from worms, proper medicines must be used to kill or carry off these
vermin. When the disease proceeds from teething, the belly should be kept open
by emollient clysters, the feet frequently bathed in warm water, and, if the
fits prove obstinate, a blistering plaster may be put betwixt the shoulders.
The same method is to be followed, when epileptic fits precede the eruption of
the smallpox, or measles, etc.

WHEN the disease is hereditary, or proceeds from a wrong formation of the
brain a cure is not to be expected. When it is owing to some fault in the
nervous system such medicines as tend to brace and strengthen the nerves may be
used, as the Jesuits bark, Valerian root, misletoe of the oak, snake-root, etc.

FULLER recommends the following electuary as a most excellent anti-epileptic.
Take Jesuits bark in powder three ounces, Virginian snake-root powdered one
ounce, as much syrup of paeony or cloves as is sufficient to form it into a
soft electuary. The dose to an adult is a dram, or about the size of a nutmeg,
morning and evening. It must be continued for three or four months, and
afterward repeated, three or four days before the new and full moon, for some
time.

MEAD recommends an electuary against the epilepsy much of the same nature,
only he uses Valerian-root in place of the snake-root. It must be taken in the
same manner as the above. The patient ought always to be bled, and to take a
purge or two before he begins to use these medicines. They will likewise have a
better effect if the patient drinks a tea-cupful of the decoction of guaiacum
after each dose. It may be made by boiling two ounces of guaiacum shavings, and
one ounce of raisins of the sun stoned, in two English quarts of water to one.
Strain the liquor, and afterward let it stand to settle, then pour off the
clear from the feces.

COLEBATCH says, that the misletoe cures an epilepsy as certainly as the
Jesuits bark does an intermittent fever. The dose to an adult is half a dram of
the powder, four times a day, drinking after it a draught of a strong infusion
of the same plant. Though this medicine has not been found to answer the high
encomiums which have been passed upon it, yet in obstinate epileptic cases it
deserves a trial. It must be used for a considerable time, in order to produce
any salutary effects.

MUSK has sometimes been found to answer very well in the epilepsy. Ten or
twelve grains of it, with the same quantity of factitious cinnabar, may be made
up into a bolus and taken every night and morning.

SOMETIMES the epilepsy has been cured by electricity.

CONVULSION FITS proceed from the same causes, and must be treated in the same
manner as the epilepsy.

THERE is one particular species of convulsions, which commonly goes by the
name of St. Vitus's dance, wherein the patient is agitated with strange motions
and gesticulations, which by the common people are generally believed to be the
effects of witchcraft. This disease may be cured by repeated bleedings and
purges; and afterward using the medicines prescribed above for the epilepsy,
viz. the jesuits-bark, and snake-root, etc. Chalybeate waters, are found to be
beneficial in this case. The cold bath is likewise of singular service, and
ought never to be neglected when the patient can bear it.

OF NERVOUS, HYSTERIC, AND HYPOCHONDRIAC DISORDERS.
OF ALL diseases incident to mankind, those of the nervous kind are the most
complicated and difficult to cure. A volume would not be sufficient to point
out the various symptoms. They imitate almost every disease; and are seldom
alike in two different persons, or even in the same person at different times.
Like Proteus, they are continually changing shape; and upon every fresh attack,
the patient thinks he feels symptoms which he never experienced before. Nor do
they only effect the body, the mind likewise suffers, and is often thereby
rendered extremely weak and peevish. The low spirits, timorousness, melancholy,
and fickleness of temper which generally attend nervous disorders, induce many
people to believe, that they are entirely diseases of the mind; but this change
of temper is rather a consequence, than the cause of nervous diseases.

CAUSES. -- Every thing that tends to relax or weaken the body, predisposes it
to nervous diseases, as indolence, excessive venery, drinking great quantities
of tea, or other weak watery liquors, frequent bleeding, purging, vomiting,
etc. Whatever hurts the digestion, or prevents the proper assimilation of the
aliment, has likewise this effect, as long fasting, excess in eating or
drinking, the use of windy, crude, or unwholesome aliments, a bending posture
of the body, etc.

NERVOUS disorders often proceed from affections of the mind, as grief,
disappointments, anxiety, intense study, etc. Few studious persons are free
from nervous diseases. Nor is this at all to be wondered at; intense thinking
not only preys upon the spirits, but prevents the person from taking proper
exercise, by which means the digestion i^-impaired, the nourishment prevented,
the solids relaxed, and the whole mass of humors vitiated. Grief and
disappointment likewise produce the same effects. I have known more hysteric
and hypochondriac patients, who dated the commencement of their disorders from
the loss of a husband, a favorite child, or from some disappointment in life,
than from any other cause. In a word, whatever weakens ^he body, or depresses
the spirits, may occasion nervous disorders, as unwholesome air, want of sleep,
great fatigue, etc.

SYMPTOMS. -- We shall only mention some of the most general symptoms of these
disorders, as it would be both an useless and impracticable task to point out
the whole. They generally begin with windy inflations or distensions of the
stomach and intestines, especially under the false ribs of the left side, where
a hard tumor may sometimes be perceived. The appetite and digestion are
generally bad; yet sometimes there is an uncommon craving for food, and a quick
digestion. The food often turns sour on the stomach; and the patient is
troubled with vomiting of clear water, tough phlegm, or a blackish colored
liquor resembling the grounds of coffee. Excruciating pains are often felt
about the navel, attended with a rumbling or murmuring noise in the bowels. The
belly is sometimes loose, but more commonly bound, which occasions a retention
of wind and great uneasiness.

THE urine is sometimes in small quantity, at other times very copious and
quite clear. There is a great straitness of the breast with difficulty of
breathing; violent palpitations of the heart; sudden flushings of heat in
various parts of the body; at other times a sense of cold, as if water were
poured on them; flying pains in the arms and limbs; pains in the back and
belly, resembling those occasioned by gravel; the pulse very variable,
sometimes uncommonly slow, and at other times very quick; yawning, the hiccup,
frequent sighings and a sense of suffocation, as if from a ball or lump in the
throat; alternate fits of crying and convulsive laughing; the sleep is unsound,
and seldom refreshing; and the patient is often troubled with the nightmare.

AS the disease increases, the patient is molested with headachs, cramps, and
fixed pains in various parts of the body; the eyes are clouded, and often
affected with pain and dryness; there is a noise in the ears, and often a
dullness of hearing; in short, the whole animal functions are impaired. The
mind is disturbed on the most trivial occasions, and is hurried into the most
perverse commotions, inquietudes, terror, sadness, anger, diffidence, etc. The
patient is apt to entertain wild imaginations, and extravagant fancies; the
memory becomes weak, and the reason fails. Nothing is more characteristic of
this disease than a constant dread of death. This renders the patients peevish,
fickle, impatient, and apt to run from one physician to another; which is one
reason why they seldom reap any benefit from medicine, as they have not
sufficient resolution to persist in any one course till it has time to produce
its proper effects. They are likewise apt to imagine that they labor under
diseases from which they are quite free, and are very angry if any one attempts
to laugh them out of their ridiculous notions.

REGIMEN. -- Hysteric and hypochondriac persons ought never to fast long. Their
food should be solid and nourishing, but of easy digestion. Fat meats, and
heavy sauces, are hurtful. All excess should be carefully avoided. They ought
never to eat more at a time than they can easily digest. Heavy suppers are to
be avoided. If the patient feels himself weak and faint between meals, he ought
to eat a bit of bread, and drink a glass of wine. Though wine in excess enfeebles
the body, and impairs the faculties of the mind, yet taken in moderation, it
strengthens the stomach, and promotes digestion. Wine and water is a very
proper drink at meals. If wine sours on the stomach, or the patient is much
troubled with wind, brandy and water will answer better. Every thing that is
windy, or hard of digestion, must be avoided. All weak and warm liquors are
hurtful, as tea, coffee, punch, etc. People may find a temporary relief from
these, but they always increase the malady, as they weaken the stomach, and
hurt digestion. Above all things, drams are to be avoided. Whatever immediate
ease the patient may feel from the use of ardent spirits, they are sure to
aggravate the malady, and prove certain poisons at last. These cautions are the
more necessary here, as all hysteric and hypochondriac persons are peculiarly
fond of tea and ardent spirits; to the use of which many of them fall a victim.

EXERCISE is of such importance in nervous disorders, that it is worth all
other medicines. Riding on horseback is generally esteemed the best, as it
gives motion to the whole body, without fatiguing it. I have known some
patients, however, with whom walking agreed better, and others who were most
benefited by riding in a machine. Every one ought to use that which he finds
most beneficial. Long sea-voyages have an excellent effect; and to those who
can afford to take them, and have sufficient resolution, we would by all means
recommend this course. Even change of place, and the sight of new objects, by
diverting the mind, have a great tendency to remove these complaints. For this
reason a long journey, or a voyage, is of much more advantage than riding short
journeys near home.

A cool and dry air is the best, as it braces and imparts vigor to the whole
body. Nothing tends more to relax and enervate than hot air, especially that
which is rendered so by great fires, or stoves in small apartments. But when
the stomach or bowels are weak, the body ought to be well guarded against cold,
especially in winter, by wearing a thin flannel waistcoat next the skin. This
will keep up an equal perspiration, and defend the alimentary canal from many
impressions, to which it would otherwise be subject, upon every sudden change
from warm to cold weather. Rubbing the body frequently with a flesh-brush, or a
coarse linen cloth, is likewise beneficial, as it promotes the circulation,
perspiration, etc. Persons who have weak nerves ought to rise early, and take
exercise before breakfast, as lying too long a-bed cannot fail to relax the
solids. They ought likewise to be diverted, and to be kept as easy and cheerful
as possible. Nothing hurts the nervous system, or weakens the digestive powers
more than fear, grief, or anxiety.

MEDICINES. -- Though nervous diseases are seldom radically cured, yet their
symptoms may sometimes be alleviated, and the patient's life rendered, at
least, more comfortable, by proper medicines.

WHEN the patient is costive, he ought to take a little rhubarb, or some other
mild purgative, and should never suffer his belly to be long bound. All strong
and violent purgatives are however to be avoided, as aloes, jalap, etc. I have
generally seen an infusion of senna and rhubarb in brandy answer very well.
This may be made of any strength, and taken in such quantity as the patient
finds necessary.

WHEN the digestion is bad, and the stomach relaxed and weak, bitters will be
of service. The best of these are the jesuits bark and gentian root, which may
be prepared and used in the following manner. Take jesuits bark in powder, an
ounce and a half, gentian-root and orange peel bruised, of each half an ounce.
Infuse these ingredients in a bottle of brandy or whisky, for five or six days,
then strain the liquor, and take a table spoonful in half a glass of water an
hour before breakfast, dinner, and supper.

NOTHING tends more to strengthen the nervous system than cold bathing. This
practice, if duly persisted in, will produce very extraordinary effects; but
when the liver or other viscera are obstructed, or otherwise unsound, the cold
bath is improper. The most proper seasons for it are summer and autumn. It will
be sufficient, especially for persons of a spare habit, to go into the cold
bath three or four times a week. If the patient be weakened by it, or feels
chilly for a long time after coming out, it is improper.

IN patients afflicted with wind, I have always observed the greatest benefit
from the acid elixir of vitriol. It may be taken in the quantity of fifteen,
twenty, or thirty drops, twice or thrice a day, in a glass of water. This both
expels wind, strengthens the stomach, and promotes digestion.

OPIATES are greatly extolled in these maladies; but as they only palliate the
symptoms, and generally afterward increase the disease, we would advise people
to be extremely cautious in the use of them, lest habit render them at last
absolutely necessary.

IT would be an easy matter to enumerate many medicines which have been
extolled for relieving nervous disorders; but whoever wishes for a thorough
cure must expect it from regimen alone; we shall therefore omit mentioning more
medicines, and again recommend the strictest attention to DIET, AIR, EXERCISE,
and AMUSEMENTS.

OF MELANCHOLY AND MADNESS.
MELANCHOLY and madness are nearly allied. They both proceed from the same
origin, and may be considered as only different degrees of the same disease. A
delirium without a fever is the common definition of madness: Indeed it is not
a very accurate one; but there is no great occasion to be solicitous about the
definition of a disease which every body knows. It is of far greater importance
to know how it is occasioned, and by what means it may be cured.

CAUSES. -- It may proceed from a hereditary disposition; intense thinking,
especially where the mind is long occupied about one object; violent passions
or affections of the mind, as love, fear, joy, grief, overweening pride, and
such like. It may also be occasioned by excessive venery; narcotic or
stupifactive poisons; a sedentary life; solitude; the suppression of customary
evacuations; accute fevers, or other diseases. Violent anger will change
melancholy into madness; and excessive cold, especially of the lower
extremities, will force the blood into the brain, and produce all the symptoms
of madness. It may likewise proceed from the use of aliment that is hard of
digestion, or which cannot be easily assimilated; from a callous state of the
integuments of the brain, or a dryness of the brain itself. To all which we may
add gloomy or mistaken notions of religion THE mind by dwelling too long upon
the dark side of religion, is often, at length, overwhelmed with the deepest
melancholy, which ends in madness. What a pity that religion, which was
intended to alleviate the calamities of life, to keep the mind cheerful, and to
raise (...) above disappointment, should ever be perverted into the means of
producing these very evils it was designed to cure?
.

SYMPTOMS. -- When persons begin to be melancholy, they are dull; dejected;
timorous; watchful; fond of solitude; fretful; fickle; captious and
inquisitive; solicitous about trifles; sometimes niggardly, and at other times
prodigal. The belly is generally bound; the urine thin, and in small quantity;
the stomach and bowels inflated with wind; the complexion pale; the pulse slow
and weak. The functions of the mind are also greatly perverted, in so much that
the patient often imagines himself dead, or changed into some other animal.
Some have imagined, their bodies were made of glass, or other brittle
substances, and were afraid to move lest they should be broken in pieces. The
unhappy patient, in this case, unless carefully watched, is apt to put an end
to his own miserable life.

THE signs of approaching madness are: Redness of the eyes, with a tremulous
and constant vibration of the eyelids; a change of disposition and behavior;
supercilious looks; a haughty carriage; grinding of the teeth; unaccountable
malice to particular persons; excessive watchfulness, violent headachs;
quickness of hearing; noise in the ears, etc.

PERSONS actually mad are in an excessive rage when provoked to anger. Some
wander about, others make a hideous noise. Some shun the sight of men; others,
if permitted, would tear themselves, or those whom they meet, to pieces. Some
in the highest degree of the disorder see images before their eyes, and fancy
themselves struck with lightening. To these we may add incredible strength, and
great insensibility to hunger and cold.

WHEN the disease is owing to an obstruction of customary evacuations, or any
bodily disorder, it is easier cured than when it proceeds from the mind.
Madness attended with mirth is not so dangerous as that which is accompanied
with sadness. A discharge of blood from the nose, a violent looseness, scabby
eruptions, the bleeding piles, or the menses, sometimes carry off this disease.

DISEASES of the mind often intermit for several years, and return again. In
some they return annually at the sol^^ics; in others about the time of the
equinoxes. Sometimes the raving fits observe the lunar periods; in which ^ase
the disease is thought to have some affinity with the epilepsy.

REGIMEN. -- The diet ought to consist chiefly of vegetables of a cooling and
opening quality. Animal food, especially salted or smoke-dried fish or flesh,
ought to be avoided. All kinds of shellfish are bad. Aliments prepared with
onions, garlic, or any thing that generates thick blood, are likewise improper.
All kinds of fruits that are wholesome may be eat with advantage. Boerhaave
gives an instance of a patient who by a long use of whey, water, and
garden-fruits, evacuated a great quantity of black matter, and recovered his
senses. This seems to have been the method of cure practiced at the Assyrian
court; where we find the monarch himself, when seized with madness, was turned
out to graze.

STRONG liquors of every kind ought to be avoided as poison. The most proper
drink is water, whey, or very small beer. Tea and coffee are improper. If honey
agrees with the patient, it may be eat freely, or his drink sweetened with it.
Infusions of balm-leaves, pennyroyal, the roots of wild valerian, or the
flowers of the lime-tree, may be drank freely, either by themselves, or
sweetened with honey, as the patient shall choose.

THE patient ought to take as much exercise in the open air as he can bear.
This helps to dissolve the viscid humors, it removes obstructions, promotes
the perspiration, and all the other secretions. Every kind of madness is
attended with a diminished perspiration; all means ought therefore to be used
to promote that necessary and salutary discharge. Nothing can have a more
direct tendency to increase the disease than the common method of confining the
patient to a close apartment. Were a proper space allotted for him to run about
in, where he could neither hurt himself nor others, it would contribute much to
promote a cure. It would have still a better effect, if he were obliged to
labor a piece of ground. By (...), hoeing, planting, sowing, etc. both the
body and mind would be exercised.

A PLAN of this kind, with a strict vegetable diet, would be a more rational
method of cure than confining the patient in Bedlam, o^ sending him to a
private mad-house. These institutions, as they are generally managed, are far
more likely to make a wise man mad than to restore a madman to his senses. Even
running about at large, though it may be attended with some bad consequences, is
more likely to restore the patient than confining him in a mad-house. I have
known several instances of persons cured by exercise, amusements, and a
vegetable diet, who, in all probability, had they been confined, would have
continued lunatic for life. A long journey, or a voyage, especially into a
warmer climate, with agreeable companions, has often very happy effects.

MEDICINE. -- IN the cure of madness, great regard must be paid to the mind.
When the patient is in a low melancholy state, his mind ought to be soothed and
diverted with variety of amusements, as entertaining stories, pastimes, music,
etc. This seems to have been the method of curing melancholy among the Jews, as
we learn from the story of King Saul; and indeed it is a very rational one.
Nothing can remove diseases of the mind so effectually as applications to the
mind itself, the most efficacious of which is music. The patient's company
ought likewise to consist of such persons as are agreeable to him. People in
this state are apt to conceive unaccountable aversions against particular
persons; and the very sight of such persons is sufficient to distract their
minds, and throw them into the utmost perturbation. In all kinds of madness, it
is better to sooth and calm the mind than to ruffle it by contradiction.

WHEN the patient is high, evacuations are necessary. In this case he must be
bled, and have his belly kept open by purging medicines, as manna, rhubarb,
cream of tartar, or the solube tartar. I have seen the last have very good
effects. It may be taken in the dose of half an ounce, dissolved, in water
gruel every day, for sundry weeks, or even for months, if necessary. More or
less may be given according as it operates. Vomits have likewise a good effect;
but they must be pretty strong, otherwise they will not operate.

MADNESS has sometimes been cured by camphire. Ten or twelve grains of it may
be rubbed in a mortar with half a dram of nitre, and taken twice a day, or
oftener if the stomach will bear it. If it will not sit upon the stomach in this
form, it may be made into pills with gum asafaetida and Russian castor, and
taken in the quantity above directed. Musk has likewise been found efficacious
in this case; b^^ to have any effect, it must be given in large doses. A
scruple or twenty five grains may be made into a bolus with a little honey or
syrup, and taken twice or thrice a day. The antimonial wine is by some extolled
for the cure of madness. It may be taken in the dose of forty or fifty drops,
twice or thrice a day, in a cup of tea. The tincture of hellebore h^s likewise
been in great esteem; but I never saw any considerable effects from it. Each of
the above medicines may be of service in some particular case, provided it be
duly persisted in, and where one fails, it may not be amiss to try another.

AS it is very difficult to induce patients in this disease to take medicines,
we shall mention some outward applications which sometimes do good; the
principal of these are issues, setons, and cold bathing. Issues may be (...) in
any part of the body, but they generally have the (...) effect near the spine
of the back. The discharge from these may be greatly promoted by dressing them
with the mild blistering ointment, and keeping what are commonly called the
orrice peace in them. The salt water is most proper for bathing in; but when
that cannot be obtained, the patient may be daily immersed in fresh water. Some
recommend bathing the body in warm water, and at the same time pouring cold
water upon the head.

THAT kind of madness or delirium which proceeds from mere weakness, requires a
quite different method of treatment. It is often the effect of fevers
injudiciously treated, wherein the patient's strength has been exhausted by
frequent bleedings and purgings. This must be removed by nourishing diet,
exercise proportioned to the patient's strength, and cordial medicines. All
evacuations are here carefully to be avoided. The patient may take frequently a
glass of good wine, in which a little jesuits bark has been infused.

OF POISONS.
EVERY person ought, in some measure, to be acquainted with the nature and cure
of poisons. They are generally taken unawares, and their effects are often so
sudden and violent, as not to admit of delay, or allow time to procure the
assistance of physicians. Indeed no great degree of medical knowledge is here
necessary, the remedies for most poisons being generally at hand, or easily
obtained, and nothing but common prudence needful in the application of them.

THE vulgar notion that every poison is cured by some counter poison, as a
specific, has done much hurt. People believe they can do nothing for the
patient, unless they know the particular antidote to that kind of poison which
he has taken. Whereas the cure of all poisons taken into the stomach, without
exception, depends on discharging them as soon as possible.

THERE is no case wherein nature points out the method of cure more clearly
than in this. Poison is seldom long in the stomach before it occasions sickness
with an inclination to vomit. This shows plainly what ought to be done. Indeed
common sense dictates to every man, that, if any thing has been taken into the
stomach which endangers life, it ought immediately to be discharged. Were this
duly regarded, most of the mischief occasioned by poison might be prevented.
The method of cure is obvious, and the means of performing it are in the hands
of every man.

POISONS, either belong to the animal, vegetable, or mineral kingdom.

MINERAL poisons are commonly of an acrid or corrosive quality, as arsenic, the
corrosive sublimate of mercury, etc.

THOSE of the vegetable kind are generally of a narcotic or stupifactive
quality, as poppy, hemlock, henbane, berries of the deadly nightshade, etc.

POISONOUS animals communicate their infection, either by the bite or sting.
This poison is very different from the former, both in its symptoms and cure.

MINERAL POISONS. -- Arsenic is the most common of this class; and, as the
whole of them are pretty similar both in their effects and method of cure, what
is said with respect to it will be applicable to every other species of
corrosive poison.

WHEN a person has taken arsenic, he soon percieves a burning heat, and violent
pricking pain in his stomach and bowels, with vomiting and intolerable thirst.
The tongue and throat feel rough and dry; and, if proper help be not soon
administered, the patient is seized with great anxiety, hiccupping, faintings,
and coldness of the extremeties. To these succeed black vomits, foetid stools,
with a mortification of the stomach and intestines, which are the immediate
forerunners of death.

ON the first appearance of these symptoms, the patient should drink large
quantities of new milk and salad oil till he vomits; or he may drink warm water
mixed with oil. Fat broths are also proper, provided they can be got ready in
time. Where no oil is to be had, fresh butter may be melted and mixed with the
milk or water. These things are to be drank as long as the inclination to vomit
continues. Some have drank eight or ten English quarts before the vomiting
ceased; and it is never safe to leave off drinking while one particle of the
poison remains in the stomach.

THESE oily or fat substances not only provoke vomiting, but likewise blunt the
acrimony of the poison, and prevent its wounding the bowels; but if they should
not make the person vomit, half a (...) or two scruples of the powder of
ipecacoanha must be given, or a few spoonfuls of the oxymel of squills mixed
with the water which he drinks. Vomiting may likewise be excited by tickling
the inside of the throat with a feather.

IF the tormenting pains are felt in the lower belly, and there is reason to
fear, that the intestines are attacked, clysters of milk and oil must be very
frequently thrown up; and the patient must drink emollient decoctions of
barley, oatmeal, marshmallows, and such like.

AFTER the poison has been evacuated, the patient ought, for some time, to live
upon such things as are of a healing and cooling quality. To abstain from flesh
and all strong liquors, and to live upon milk, broth, gruel, light puddings,
and other spoon mea^s of easy digestion. His drink should be barley-water,
linseed-tea, or infusions of any of the mild mucilaginous vegetables.

VEGETABLE POISONS, besides heat and pain of the stomach, commonly occasion
some degree of giddiness, and often a kind of stupidity or folly. Persons who
have taken these must be treated in the same manner as for the mineral or
corrosive.

THOUGH the vegetable poisons, when allowed to remain in the stomach, often
prove fatal; yet the danger is generally over as soon as they are discharged.
Not being of such a caustic or corrosive nature, they are less apt to wound and
inflame the bowels than mineral substances, no time however ought to be lost in
having them expelled the stomach.

OPIUM, being frequently taken by mistake, merits particular attention. It is
used as a medicine both in a solid and liquid form, which latter commonly goes
by the name of laudanum. It is indeed a valuable medicine when taken in proper
quantity; but as an over-dose proves a strong poison, we shall point out its
common effects, together with the method of cure.

TOO great a quantity of opium generally occasions great drowsiness, with
stupor and other apoplectic symptoms. Sometimes the person has so great an
inclination to sleep, that it is almost impossible to keep him awake. Every
method must however be tried for this purpose. He should be tossed, shaked, and
moved about. Sharp blistering plasters should be applied to his legs or arms,
and stimulating medicines, as salts of hartshorn, etc. held under his nose. It
will also be proper to let blood. At the same time every method must be taken
to make him discharge the poison. This may be done in the manner directed
above, viz. by the use of strong vomits, drinking plenty of warm water with
oil, etc.

MEAD, besides vomits, in this case, recommends acid medicines with lixivial
salts. He says, that he has often given salt of wormwood mixed with juice of
lemon in repeated doses with great success.

IF the body should remain weak and languid after the poison has been
discharged, nourishing diet and cordials will be necessary; but when there is
reason to fear that the stomach or bowels are inflamed, the greatest
circumspection is necessary both with regard to food and medicine.

ANIMAL POISONS. -- We shall begin with the bite of a mad dog, as it is both
the most common and dangerous animal poison in this country.

THE creatures naturally liable to contract the hydrophobia are, so far as we
yet know, all o^ the dog-kind, viz. dogs, foxes, and wolves. O^ the last we
have none in this island; and it so seldom happens that any person is bit by
the second, that they scarce deserve to be taken notice of. If such a thing
should happen, the method of treatment is precisely the same as for the bite of
a mad dog.

THE symptoms of madness in a dog are as follow. At first he looks dull, shows
an aversion to food and company: He does not bark as usual, but seems to
murmur, is peevish, and apt to bite strangers: His ^ars and tail droop more
than usual, and he appears drowsy. Afterward he begins to loll out his tongue,
and froth at the mouth, his eyes seeming heavy and watery. He now, if not
confined, takes off, runs panting along with a kind of dejected air, and
endeavors to bite every one he meets. Other dogs are said to fly from him.
Some think this a certain sign of madness supposing that they know him by the
smell; but it is not to be depended on. If he escapes being killed, he seldom
runs above two or three days, till he dies exhausted with heat, hunger, and
fatigue.

THIS disease is most frequent after long dry hot seasons; and such dogs as
live upon putrid stinking carrion, without having enough of fresh water, are
most liable to it.

WHEN any person is bit by a dog, the strictest enquiry ought to be made,
whether the animal be really mad. Many disagreeable consequences arise from
neglecting to ascertain this point. Some people have lived in continual anxiety
for many years, because they had been bit by a dog which they believed to be
mad; but, as he had been killed on the spot, it was impossible to ascertain the
fact. This should induce us, instead of killing a dog the moment he has bit any
person, to do all in our power to keep him alive, at least till we can be
certain whether he be mad or not.

MANY circumstances may contribute to make people imagine a dog mad. He loses
his master, runs about in quest of him, is set upon by other dogs, and perhaps
by men. The creature thus frightened, beat, and abused, looks wild, and lolls
out his tongue as he runs along. Immediately a crowd is after him; while he,
finding himself closely pursued, and taking every one he meets for an enemy,
naturally attempts to bite in self-defence. He soon gets knocked on the head,
and passes currently for a mad dog, as it is then impossible to prove the
contrary.

THIS being the true history of, by far, the greater part of those dogs which
pass for mad, is it any wonder that numberless whimsical medicines have been
extolled for preventing the effects of their bite? This readily accounts for
the great variety of infallable remedies for the bite of a mad dog, which are
to be met with in almost every family. Though not one in a thousand has any
claim to merit, yet they are all supported by numberless vouchers. No wonder
that imaginary diseases should be cured by imaginary remedies. In this way
credulous people first impose upon themselves, and then deceive others. The
same medicine that was supposed to prevent the effects of the bite, when the
dog was not mad, is recommended to a person who has had the misfortune to be
bit by a dog that was really mad. He takes it, trusts to it, and is undone.

TO these mistakes we must impute the frequent ill success in preventing the
effects of the bite of a mad dog. It is not owing so much to a defect in
medicine, as to wrong applications. I am persuaded if proper medicines were
taken immediately after the bite is received, and continued for a sufficient
length of time, we should not lose one in a thousand of those who have the
misfortune to be bit by a mad dog.

THIS poison is generally communicated by a wound, which, nevertheless, heals
as soon as a common wound: But afterward it begins to feel painful, and as the
pain spreads toward the neighboring parts, the person becomes heavy and
listless. His sleep is unquiet with frightful dreams; he sighs, looks dull, and
loves solitude. These are the forerunners, or rather the first symptoms, of
that dreadful disease occasioned by the bite of a mad dog. But as we do not
propose to treat the disease itself, but to point out the method of preventing
it, we shall not take up time in showing its progress from the first invasion
to its commonly fatal end.

THE common notion, that this poison may lie in the body for many years, and
afterward prove fatal, seems not to be well founded. It must render such
persons as have had the misfortune to be bit very unhappy, and can have no good
effects. If the person takes proper medicines for forty days after being bit,
and feels no symptoms of the disease, there is reason to believe him out of
danger. Some indeed have gone mad twelve months after being bit; but I never
knew it happen later; and of this I only remember to have seen one instance.

THE medicines recommended for preventing the effects of the bite of a mad dog,
are chiefly such as promote urine and perspiration; to which may be added
antispasmodics.

DR MEAD recommends a preventive medicine, which he says he never knew fail,
though in the space of thirty years he had used it a thousand times.

THE medicine is as follows:

"TAKE ash-colored ground liver-wort, cleaned, dried, and powdered, half an
ounce; of black pepper powdered, a quarter of an ounce. Mix these well
together, and divide the powder into four doses; one of which must be taken
every morning fasting, for four mornings successively, in half an English pint
of cows milk warm.

AFTER these four doses are taken, the patient must go into the cold bath, or a
cold spring or river, every morning fasting, for a month; he must be dipped all
over, but not stay in (with his head above water) longer than half a minute, if
the water be very cold. After this he must go in three times a-week for a
fortnight longer.

THE person must be bled before he begins to use the medicine I was, some time
ago, favored with the following prescription for the bite of a mad dog, which
had been long kept a secret in a gentleman's family in the north of England,
and is said never to have failed, when given as a preventive either to man or
beast. -- "Take six ounces of Ru^ clean picked and bruised, four ounces of
garlic pealed and bruised, four ounces of Venice treacle, four ounces of
scraped tin or pewter. Boil all these ingredients in two English quarts of the
best ale, in a vessel close covered, over a slow fire, for the space of an
hour; then strain the liquor, and give eight or nine spoonfuls of it warm to an
adult person every morning fasting, for three or four mornings running. Less
may be given to a young person, or one of a weak constitution. Some of the
ingredients may be bound upon the wound, if it can be conveniently done." This
is ordered to be given within nine days after the bite. No doubt the sooner it
is given the better. -- The dose ordered for a horse is twelve spoonfuls, the
same quantity for a bullock; and for a sheep, hog, or dog, four or five.
."

WE shall next mention the famous East India specific, as it is called. This
medicine is composed of cinnabar and musk. It is esteemed a great
antispasmodic, and by many, thought to be an infallible remedy for preventing
the effects of the bite of a mad dog.

"TAKE native and factitious cinnabar, of each twenty-four grains, musk sixteen
grains. Let these be made into a fine powder, and taken in a glass of arrack or
brandy."

THIS single dose is said to secure the person for thirty days, at the end of
which it must be repeated; but if he has any symptoms of the disease, it must
be repeated in three hours.

THE following is likewise a good antispasmodic medicine.

TAKE of Virginian snake-root in powder, half a dram, gum asafoetida twelve
grains, gum Camphire seven grains; make these into a bolus with a little syrup
of saffron.

CAMPHIRE may also be given in the following manner:

TAKE purified nitre half an ounce, Virginian snake-root in powder two drams,
camphire one dram; rub them together in a mortar, and divide ^he whole into ten
doses.

MERCURY is another medicine of great efficacy, both in the prevention and cure
of this kind of madness. When used as a preventive, it will be sufficient to
rub daily a dram of the ointment into the parts about the wound.

VINEGAR is likewise of considerable service, and should be taken freely,
either in the patient's food or drink.

THESE are the principal medicines recommended for preventing the effects of
the bite of a mad dog. We would not however advise people to trust to any one
of them; but from a proper combination of their different powers, there is the
greatest reason to hope for success.

THE great error in the use of these medicines lies in not taking them for a
sufficient length of time. They are used more like charms than medicines
intended to produce any change in the body. To this, and not to the
insufficiency of the medicines, must we impute their frequent want of success.

DR MEAD says, that the virtue of his medicine consists in promoting urine. But
how a poison should be expelled by urine, with only three or four doses of any
medicine, however powerful, is not easy to conceive. More time is certainly
necessary; and here the defect of the Doctor's prescription seems to lie.

THE East India specific is still more exceptionable on this account.

AS these and most other medicines, taken singly, have frequently been found to
fail, we shall recommend the following course.

IF a person be bit in a fleshly part, where there is no hazard of hurting any
large blood-vessel, the parts adjacent to the wound may be cut away. But if
this be not done soon after receiving the bite, it will be better to omit it.

THE wound may be washed with salt and water, or a pickle made of vinegar and
salt, and afterward dressed twice a day with yellow basilicon mixed with some
red precipitate.

THE patient should begin to use either Dr Mead's medicine, or some of the
others mentioned above. If he takes Mead's medicine he may use it as the Doctor
directs for four days successively. Let him then omit it for two or three days,
and again repeat the same number of doses as before.

DURING this course, he must rub into the parts about the wound, daily, one
dram of the mercurial or blue ointment, as it is called. This may be done for
ten or twelve days at least.

WHEN this course is over, he may take a purge or two, and then begin to use
the cold bath. This must be used every morning for five or six weeks; but if
the patient should feel cold and chilly for a long time after coming out of the
cold bath, it will be better to use a t^pid one, or to have the water (...)
little warmed.

IN the mean time, we would advise him not to leave off all internal medicines,
but to take either one of the boluses of snake-root, asafoetida and camphire;
or one of the powders of nitre, camphire, and snake-root, twice a day. These
may be continued for a fortnight or three weeks longer.

IF the person has gone through the above course of medicine, and no symptoms
of madness appear, he may be reckoned out of danger. It will nevertheless be
advisable, for the greater safety, to take a dose or two of Dr Mead's
medicine, at every full or change of the moon, for the three or four succeeding
months.

DURING the use of the mercurial ointment, the patient must keep within doors,
and take nothing cold.

A PROPER regimen must be observed during the whole course. The patient should
abstain from flesh, and all salted and high-seasoned provisions. He must avoid
strong liquors, and live mostly upon a light and rather spare diet. His mind
should be kept as easy and cheerful as possible, and all excessive heat and
violent passions avoided with the utmost care.

I HAVE never seen this course of medicine, with proper regimen, fail to
prevent the hydrophobia, and cannot help again observing, that the want of
success must generally be owing either to the application of improper
medicines, or not using proper ones for a sufficient length of time.

MANKIND are extremely fond of every thing that promises a sudden or miraculous
cure. By trusting to these they often lose their lives, when a regular course
of medicine would have rendered them absolutely safe. This holds remarkably in
the present case: Numbers of people, for example, believe if they or their
cattle be once dipped in the sea, it is sufficient: as if the salt water were a
charm against the effects of the bite. This and such like whims have proved
fatal to many.

SOME people believe, if a person be bit by a dog that is not m^d, if he should
go mad afterward, that the person will be seized with the disorder at the same
time. This notion is too ridiculous to deserve a serious confutation It is
surprising that no proper inquiry has ever been made into the truth of the
common opinion, that a dog which has been wormed cannot bite after he goes mad.
This circumstance not only merits the attention of physicians, but of the
legislature. If the fact could be ascertained, and the practice rendered
general, it would save both the lives and properties of many.
.

THE next poisonous animal that we shall mention is the VIPER. The grease of
this animal rubbed into the wound is generally reckoned a cure for the bite.
Though this is all that the viper-catchers commonly do when they are bit, I
should hardly think it sufficient for the bite of an enraged viper. It would
surely be more safe to have the wound well sucked, The practice of sucking out
poisons is very ancient; and indeed nothing can be more rational. It is the
most likely method of extracting the poison where the bite cannot be cut out.
There is no danger in performing this office; as the poison does no harm unless
it be taken into the body by a wound. The person who sucks the wound ought
however to wash his mouth frequently with salad-oil, which will secure him from
even the least inconveniency. The ancient Psylli in Africa, and the Mar^i in
Italy were famed for curing the bites of poisonous animals by sucking the
wound; and we are told, that the Indians in North America practice the same at
this day.
and afterward rubbed with warm salad oil. A poultice of bread and milk, with
plenty of salad oil in it, should likewise be applied to the wound, and the
patient ought to drink freely of wine whey with some spirits of hartshhorn; or,
if that be not at hand, of water gruel with vinegar in it, to make him sweat.
If the patient be sick, he may take a vomit. This course will be sufficient for
the bite of any of the poisonous animals of this country.

WITH regard to poisonous insects, as the be, wasp, hornet, etc. their stings
are seldom attended with great danger, unless where a person happens to be
stung by a number of them at once. In this case something should be done to
abate the pain and inflammation. Some, for this purpose, apply honey, others
lay pounded parsley to the part. Some recommend a mixture of vinegar and
Venice-treacle; but I have always found rubbing the part with warm salad-oil
succeed very well. Indeed, if the stings be so numerous as to endanger the
patient's life, which is sometimes the case, he must not only have oily
poultices applied to the part, but must likewise be bled and take some cooling
medicines, as nitre, cream of tartar, etc. with plenty of diluting liquors.

IT is the happiness of this island to have very few poisonous animals, and
even these are not of the most virulent kind. Nine tenths of the effects
usually attributed to poison or venom are really other diseases, and depend
upon quite different causes.

WE cannot however make the same observation with regard to poisonous
vegetables. These abound every where, and prove often fatal to the ignorant and
unwary The principal of th^se are, hemlock, henbane, monkshood, columbine,
hellebore, berries of the deadly nightshade, thorn-apple, all the spurges, and
most mushrooms, etc.
. This indeed is, in a great measure, owing to carelessness. Children ought
early to be cautioned against eating any sort of roots or berries which they do
not know. We would likewise advise parents to destroy all poisonous plants in
their gardens, etc. or else to keep them in places where their children can
have no access.

BUT it is not children alone who suffer by eating poisonous plants: We have
every year accounts of adults poisoned by eating hemlock-roots instead of
parsnips, or some fungus which they gather for mushrooms, etc. These examples
ought to put people upon their guard with respect to the former, and put the
latter entirely out of use.

OF THE STONE AND GRAVEL.
WHEN small stones are lodged in the kidneys, or discharged along with the
urine, the patient is said to be afflicted with gravel. If one of these stones
happens to make a lodgment in the bladder for some time, it accumulates fresh
matter, and at length becomes too large to pass off with the urine. In this
case the patient is said to have the stone.

CAUSES. -- THIS disease may be occasioned by high living; the use of strong
astringent wines It is a common notion that the tartar in wine generates the
stone: but there is more reason to believe that its astringency, together with
the fixed air contained in it, produce this effect. I know many persons who
never fa^l to pass less urine, and to complain of a pain in their kidneys for
several days after drinking freely of red wine.
; a sedentary life; lying too hot, soft, or too much on the back; the constant
use of water which is impregnated with earthy or stony particles, aliments of
an astringent or windy nature, etc. It may likewise proceed from an hereditary
disposition. Persons in the decline of life, and those who have been much
afflicted with the gout or rheumatism are most subject to it.

SYMPTOMS. -- SMALL stones or gravel in the kidneys occasion pain in the loins;
sickness; vomiting; and sometimes bloody urine. When the stone descends into
the ureter, and is too large to pass along with ease, all the above symptoms
are increased; the pain extends toward the bladder; the thigh and leg of the
affected side feel benumbed; the testicles are drawn upwards, and the urine is
obstructed.

A STONE in the bladder is known from a pain at the time, as well as before and
after making water; from the urine coming away by drops, or stopping suddenly
when in a full stream; by a violent pain in the neck of the bladder upon
motion, especially on horseback or in a coach on rough road; from a white,
thick, copious, stinking, mucous sediment in the urine; from an itching in the
top of the penis; from an inclination to go to stool while the urine is
discharged; from the patient's passing his urine more easily when lying than in
an erect posture; and from a kind of convulsive motion occasioned by the sharp
pain in discharging the last drops of the urine.

REGIMEN. -- Persons afflicted with the gravel or stone should, avoid aliments
of a windy or heating nature, as salt-meats, sour fruits, etc. Their diet ought
chiefly to consist of such things as tend to promote the secretion of urine,
and to keep the belly open. Artichoaks, asparagus, spinnage, lettuces, succory,
parsley, purslane, turnip^, potatoes, carrots, and radishes may be safely eat.
Onions, leeks, and cellery are, in this case, reckoned medicinal. The most
proper drink is whey, butter-milk, milk and water, barley-water; decoctions of
the roots of marshmallows, parsley, liquorice; or of other mild mucilaginous
vegetables, as linseed, etc. If the patient has been accustomed to generous
liquors, he may drink small gin-punch without acid. But spirits must be used
very sparingly, as every thing that heats is hurtful.

GENTLE exercise is proper; but if violent, it is apt (...) occcasion bloody
urine. We would therefore advise that it should be taken in moderation. Persons
afflicted with gravel often pass a great number of stones after riding on
horseback, or in a machine; but those who have a stone in the bladder are
seldom able to bear these kinds of exercise. Where there is a hereditary
tendency to this disease, a sedentary life ought never to be indulged. Were
people careful, upon the first symptoms of gravel, to observe a proper regimen
of diet, and to take sufficient exercise, it might often be carried off, or, at
least, prevented from increasing; but if the same course which occasioned the
disease be persisted in, it cannot fail to become worse.

MEDICINE. -- In what is called a fit of the gravel, which is commonly
occasioned by a stone sticking in the ureter or some part of the urinary
passages, the patient must be bled, warm fomentations applied to the parts,
emolient clysters administered, and diluting mucilaginous liquors drank, etc.
The treatment of this case has been fully pointed out under the articles,
inflammation of the kidneys and bladder, to which we refer the reader.

DR WHYTT advises patients who are subject to frequent fits of gravel in the
kidneys, but have no stone in the bladder, to drink every morning, two or three
hours before breakfast, an English pint of oyster or cockle-shell limewater.
The Doctor very justly observes, that though this quantity might be too small
to have any sensible effect in dissolving a stone in the bladder; yet it may
very probably prevent its growth.

WHEN a stone is formed in the bladder, the Doctor recommends Alicant soap, and
oyster or cockle-shell limewater Oyster-shell limewater is prepared by
pouring an English gallon and a half of boiling water upon a pound of
oyster-shells reduced to quicklime by being burnt. Where oyster or
cockle-shells cannot be had, common quick lime may be used in their stead.
After the clear liquor has been poured off, the same quantity of time will make
a second or third quantity of water of nearly the same strength as the first.
to be taken in the following manner. The patient must swallow every day, in
any form that is least disagreeable, an ounce of the internal part of Alicant
soap, and drink three or four English pints of oyster or cockle-shell
limewater. The soap is to be divided into three doses; the largest to be taken
fasting in the morning early; the second at noon; and the third at seven in the
evening, drinking above each dose a large draught of the limewater; the
remainder of which he may take any time betwixt dinner and supper, instead of
other liquors.

THE patient should begin with a smaller quantity of the limewater and soap
than what is mentioned above; at first an English pint of the former and three
drams of the latter, taken daily, may be enough. This quantity, however, he may
increase by degrees, and ought to persevere in the use of these medicines,
especially if he finds any abatement of his complaints, for several months;
nay, if the stone be very large, for years. It may likewise be proper for the
patient, if he be severely pained, not only to begin with the soap and
limewater in small quantities, but to take the second or third limewater
instead of the first. However, after he has been for some time accustomed to
these medicines he may not only take the first water, but, if he finds he can
easily bear it, heighten its dissolving power still more by pouring it a second
time on fresh calcined shells.

THE only other medicine which we shall mention is the uva ursi. It has been
greatly extolled of late years both for the gravel and stone. It seems,
however, to be, in all respects, inferior to the soap and limewater; but as it
is less disagreeable, and has frequently, to my knowledge, relieved gravelly
complaints, it deserves a trial. It is generally taken in powder from half a
dram to a whole dram, two or three times a day. It may be mixed in a cup of tea
or gruel, or taken in any way that is most agreeable to the patient.

OF THE HICCUP.
THE hiccup is a spasmodic or convulsive affection of the stomach and midriff,
arising from any cause that irritates their nervous fibers.

IT may proceed from excess in eating or drinking; from a hurt of the stomach;
poisons; inflammations of the stomach, intestines, bladder, midriff, or the
rest of the viscera. In gangrenes, acute and malignant fevers, a hiccup is
often the forerunner of death. I have known an obstinate hiccup proceed from a
schirrous tumor of the pylorus, or right orifice of the stomach.

WHEN the hiccup proceeds from excess, especially from aliment that is
flatulent, or hard of digestion, a draught of generous wine, or a dram of any
spiritous liquor, will generally remove it. If poison be the cause, plenty of
milk and oil must be drank, as has been formerly recommended. When it proceeds
from an inflammation of the stomach, etc. it is very dangerous. In this case
the cooling regimen must be observed. The patient must be bled, and take
frequently a few drops of the sweet spirits of nitre in a cup of wine-whey. His
stomach must likewise be fomented with cloths dipped in warm water; or bladders
filled with warm milk and water applied to it.

A HICCUP proceeding from a gangrene, or mortification, is generally incurable.
In this case the Peruvian bark, with other antiseptic medicines, are most
likely to succeed. If the hiccup be a primary disease, and proceeds from a foul
stomach, loaded either with a pituitous or a bilious humor, a gentle vomit and
purge, if the patient be able to bear them, will be of service. If it arises
from flatulencies, the carminatives directed for the heart-burn, page 255. must
be used.

WHEN the hiccup proves very obstinate, recourse must be had to the most
powerful aromatic and antispasmodic medicines. The principal of these is musk;
fifteen or twenty grains of which may be made into a bolus, and repeated
occasionally. Opiates are likewise of service; but they must be used with
caution. A bit of sugar dipped in compound spirits of lavender, or the volatile
aromatic tincture, may be taken frequently. The Peruvian bark is likewise of
use. External applications are sometimes also beneficial; as the stomach
plaster, or a cataplasm of the Venice treacle of the Edinburgh or London
dispensatory, applied to the stomach.

I LATELY attended a patient who had almost a constant hiccup for above nine
weeks. It was frequently stopped by the use of musk, opium, wine, and other
cordial and antispasmodic medicines, but always returned. Nothing indeed gave
the patient so much ease as brisk small beer. By drinking freely of this, the
hiccup was often kept off for several days, which was more than could be done
by the most powerful medicines. He was at length seized with a vomiting of
blood, which soon put an end to his life. Upon opening his body, a large
schirrous tumor was found near the pylorus or right orifice of the stomach.

CRAMP OF THE STOMACH.
THOUGH this, for the most part, is only a symptom of nervous or hysteric
disorders, we thought proper to treat it separately; as it often seizes people
suddenly, is very dangerous, and requires immediate assistance.

IF the patient has any inclination to vomit, he ought to take some draughts of
warm water, or weak camomile tea, to clean his stomach. After this, if he has
been costive, a laxative clyster must be given. He ought then to take some
doses of laudanum. The best way of administering it is in a clyster. Sixty or
seventy drops of liquid laudanum may be given in a clyster of warm water. This
is much more certain than laudanum given by the mouth, which is often vomited,
and in some cases increases the pain and spasms in the stomach.

IF the pain and cramps return with great violence, after the effects of the
anodyne clyster are over, another with an equal or larger quantity of opium,
may ^e given; and every four or five hours a bolus with ten or twelve grains of
musk, and half a dram of the Venice treacle. In the mean time, the stomach
ought to be fomented with cloths dipped in warm water; or bladders filled with
warm milk and water, should be constantly applied to it. I have often seen
these produce the most happy effects. The anodyne balsam may also be rubbed
into the stomach; and an antihysteric plaster worn upon it for some time after
the cramps are removed, to prevent their return.

IN very violent and lasting pains of the stomach, some blood ought to be let,
unless the weakness of the patient makes it improper. When the pain or cramps
of the stomach proceed from a suppression of the menses, bleeding is of great
use. If they be owing to the gout, some of the warm cordial waters, or a large
dram of good brandy, or rum, will be necessary. Blistering plasters ought
likewise, in this case, to be applied to the ancles.

WANT OF APPETITE.
THIS may proceed from a soul stomach; indigestable food; the want of free a^r
and exercise; grief; fear; anxiety; or any of the depressing passions;
excessive heat; living much upon strong broths, or fat meats; the immoderate
use of strong liquors, tea, tobacco, opium, etc.

THE patient ought, if possible, to make choice of an open dry air; to take
exercise daily on horseback, or in a machine; to rise betimes; and to avoid all
intense thought. He should use a diet of easy digestion, avoiding every thing
that is fat and oily; he ought to choose agreeable company; and should avoid
intense heat and great fatigue.

IF want of appetite proceeds from errors in diet, or any other part of the
patient's regiment, it ought to be changed. If nausea and reachings to vomit,
show that the stomach is loaded with crudities, a vomit will be of service.
After this a gentle purge or two of rhubarb, or any of the bitter purging
salts, may be taken. The patient ought next to use an infusion in wine of any
of the stomachic bitters; as Gentian root, jesuits bark, orange peel, etc. He
may also eat orange peel or ginger candied.

THOUGH gentle evacuations be necessary, all strong purges and vomits are to be
avoided, as they tend to weaken the stomach and hurt digestion. After proper
evacuations, bitter elixirs and tinctures with aromatics may be used. The
patient may take, twice a day, a common spoonful of the stomachic tincture; or,
if he be costive, the same quantity of the bitter tincture of rhubarb. Elixir
of vitriol is an excellent medicine in most cases of indigestion, weakness of
the stomach, or want of appetite. Twenty or thirty drops of it may be taken
twice or thrice a day in a glass of wine or water. It may likewise be mixed
with the tincture of the bark, two drams of the former to a^ (...) of the
latter, and a tea-spoonful of it taken in win^ o^ ^^ater, as above.

THE chalybeate waters are of great service in this case. I ^^ver knew these
fail to sharpen the appetite, if drank in ^^^^e^ation. The salt water has
likewise this effect; but it ^ust not be used too freely. The waters of
Harrowgate, (...) ^orough, Moffat, and most other spaws in Britain, (...) used
with the same intention. We would advise (...) are afflicted with indigestion
and want of appetite, (...) ^air to these places of public rendezvous. The very
change of air, and the cheerful company will be of service; not to mention the
exercise, dissipation, amusements, etc.

OF DEAFNESS.
DEAFNESS is sometimes owing to an original fault, or wrong formation of the
car itself. It may likewise be occasioned by wounds, ulcers, or any thing that
destroys the fabric of the ear. It is often the effect of old age; of violent
cold* in the head; of fevers; of excessive noise; of hard wax in the ear; of
too great moisture or dryness of the ear, etc.

PERSONS who are born deaf are seldom cured. When deafness is the effect of
wounds or ulcers in the ear, or of old age, it is not easily removed. If it
proceeds from cold of the head, the patient must be careful to keep his head
warm, especially in the night; he should likewise take a purge or two, and
should keep his feet warm, and bathe them frequently in warm water. When
deafness is the effect of fevers, it generally ceases of itself, after the
patient recovers strength. If it proceeds from dry wax sticking in the ears, it
must be softened by dropping oil into them for a few nights, at bedtime;
afterward they must be syringed with warm milk and water, or milk and oil.

IF deafness proceeds from dryness of the ears, which may be known by looking
into them, half an ounce of the oil of almonds, and the same quantity of liquid
opod^ldoch, or tincture of asafoetida, may be mixed together, and a few drops
of it put into the ear every night at bedtime, stopping them afterward with a
little wool or cotton. I have often known this have good effects. When the ears
abound with moisture, it may be drained off by an issue or seton, which must be
made as near the parts affected as possible.

MANY medicines are recommended for the cure of deafness, some of which, in
obstinate cases, at least, deserve a trial. Some recommend the gall of an eel
mixed with spirit of wine, to be dropped into the ear; others equal parts of
Hungary water and spirits of lavender. Etmuler recommends amber and musk; and
Brooks says he has often known hardness of hearing cured by putting a grain or
two of musk into the ear with cotton-wool. But these and other application must
be varied according to the cause. We cannot conclude this article without
recommending the greatest attention to warmth. From whatever cause deafness
proceeds, the patient ought to keep his head warm. I have known more benefit
from this alone, in the most obstinate cases of deafness, than from all the
medicines I ever saw used.

OF THE NIGHTMARE.
IN this disease the patient, in time of sleep, imagines he feels an uncommon
oppression or weight about his breast or stomach, which he can by no means
shake off. He groans, and sometimes cries out, though oftener he attempts to
speak in vain. Sometimes he imagines himself engaged with an enemy, and, in
danger of being killed, attempts to run away, but finds he cannot. Sometimes he
fancies himself in a house that is on fire, or that he is in danger of being
drowned in a river. He often thinks he is falling over a precipice, and the
dread of being dashed to pieces suddenly awakes him.

THIS disorder has been supposed to proceed from too much blood; from a
stagnation of blood in the brain, lungs, etc. But its general cause is
indigestion. Persons of weak nerves, who lead a sedentary life, and live full,
are most commonly afflicted with the nightmare. Nothing tends more to produce
it than heavy suppers, especially if eat late, or the patient goes to bed soon
after. Wind is likewise a very frequent cause of this disease; for which reason
those who are afflicted with it ought to avoid all flatulent food. Deep
thought, anxiety, or any thing that oppresses the mind, ought also to be
avoided.

PERSONS afflicted with the nightmare ought to eat very light suppers. They
should never go to bed immediately after eating, nor lie upon their back with
the head low. As they generally moan, or make some noise in the fit, they
should be waked, or spoken to by such as hear them, as the uneasiness generally
goes off as soon as the patient is awake. Dr Whytt says he generally found a
dram of brandy, taken at bedtime, prevent this disease. That, however, is a
bad custom, and, in time, loses its effect. We would rather have the patient
depend upon cheerfulness, and exercise through the day, a light supper taken
early, and the use of food of easy digestion, etc. than to accustom himself to
drams. A draught of cold water will often promote digestion as much as a glass
of brandy, and is much safer. After a person of weak digestion however has eat
flatulent food, a dram may be necessary; in this case we would recommend it as
the most proper medicine.

PERSONS who are young, and full of blood, if troubled with the nightmare,
ought to purge, bleed, and use a spare diet.

OF SWOONINGS.
THE principal causes of swooning are, sudden transitions from cold to heat;
breathing air that is deprived of its proper spring or elasticity; great
fatigue; excessive weakness; loss of blood; long fasting; fear, grief, and
other violent passions or affections of the mind.

IT is well known, that persons who have been long exposed to cold, often faint
or fall into a swoon, upon coming into the house, especially if they drink hot
liquor, or sit near a large fire. This might easily be prevented by people
taking care not to go into a warm room immediately after having been exposed to
the cold air, to approach the fire gradually, and not to eat or drink any thing
hot, till the body has been gradually brought into a warm temperature.

WHEN any one, in consequence of neglecting these precautions, falls into
swoon, he ought immediately to be removed to a cooler apartment, to have
ligatures applied above his knees and elbows, and to have his hands and face
sprinkled with vinegar. He should likewise be made to smell to vinegar, and
should have a spoonful or two of water, if he can swallow, with about a third
part of vinegar mixed with it, poured into his mouth. If the fainting fits
prove obstinate, it will be necessary to bleed the patient, and afterward to
give him a clyster,

As air that is breathed over and over loses its elasticity or spring, it is no
wonder if persons who respire in it often fall into swooning or fainting fits.
They are, in this case, deprived of the very principle of life. Hence it is
that fainting fits are so frequent in all crowded assemblies, especially in hot
seasons. Such fits however must be considered as a kind of temporary death;
and, to the weak and delicate, they sometimes prove fatal in reality. They
ought therefore to be avoided with the utmost care. The method of doing this is
obvious. Let assembly rooms, and all other places of public resort, be well
ventilated; and let the weak and delicate avoid such places, particularly in
warm seasons.

A PERSON who faints, in such a situation, ought immediately to be carried into
the open air; his temples should be rubbed with strong vinegar or brandy, and
volatile spirits or salts held to his nose. He should be laid upon his back
with his head low, and have a little wine, or some other cordial, poured into
his mouth, as soon as he is able to swallow it. If the person has been subject
to hysteric fits, castor or asafoetida should be applied to the nose, or burnt
feathers, horn, or leather, etc.

WHEN fainting fits proceed from mere weakness or exhaustion, which is often
the case after great fatigue, long fasting, loss of blood, or the like, the
patient must be supported with generous cordials, as jellies, wines, spirituous
liquors, etc. These however must be given at first in very small quantities,
and increased gradually as the patient is able to bear them. He ought to be
allowed to lie quite still and easy upon his back, with his head low, and
should have fresh air admitted into his chamber. His food should consist of
nourishing broths, sago-gruel with wine, new milk, and other things of a light
and cordial nature. These things are to be given out of the fit. All that can
be done while the person continues in the fit is, to let him smell to a bottle
of Hungary water, eau de luc^, or spirits of hartshorn, and to rub his temples
with warm brandy, or to lay a compress dipped in it to the pit of his stomach.

IN fainting fits that proceed from fear, grief, or other violent passions to
affections of the mind, the patient must be very cautiously managed. He should
be suffered to remain at rest, and only made to smell to some vinegar. After he
has come to himself he may drink freely of warm lemonade, or balm tea, with
some orange or lemon peel in it. It will likewise be proper, if the fainting
fits have been long and severe, to clean the bowels by throwing in an emolient
clyster or two.

DISEASES OF WOMEN.
THE diseases peculiar to women arise chiefly from their monthly evacuations,
pregnancy, and childbirth. Females generally begin to menstruate about the age
of fifteen, and leave it off about fifty, which renders these two periods the
most critical of their lives. About the first appearance of this discharge the
constitution undergoes a very considerable change, generally indeed for the
better, but sometimes for the worse. The greatest care is now necessary, as the
future health and happiness of the female depends, in a great measure, upon her
conduct at this period. If a girl about this time of life be confined to the
house, kept constantly sitting, and neither allowed to romp about, nor employed
in some active business, which gives exercise to the whole body, she becomes
weak, relaxed and puny; her blood not being duly prepared, she looks pale and
wan; her health, spirits, and vigor decline, and she sinks into a valetudinary
for life. Such is the fate of numbers of those unhappy females who either from
the indulgence of mothers, or their own narrow circumstances, are, at this
critical period of life, denied the benefit of exercise and free air.

A LAZY indolent disposition proves very hurtful to girls at this period. One
seldom meets with complaints from obstructions amongst the more active and
laborious part of the sex; whereas the indolent and lazy are seldom free from
them. These are, in a manner, eat up by the chlorosis, or green sickness, and
other diseases of this nature. We would therefore recommend it to all who wish
to escape these calamities, to avoid indolence and inactivity, as their
greatest enemies, and to take as much exercise, especially in the open air, as
possible.

ANOTHER thing that proves very hurtful to girls about this period of life, is
unwholesome food. Fond of all manner of trash, they often eat every
out-of-the-way thing they can get, till their blood and humors are quite
vitiated. Hence ensue indigestions, want of appetite, and a whole train of
evils. If the fluids be not duly prepared, it is utterly impossible that the
secretions should be properly performed; Accordingly we find that such girls as
lead an indolent life, and eat great quantities of trash, are not only subject
to obstructions of the menses, but likewise to glandular obstructions; as the
scrophula or King's evil, etc.

A DULL disposition is likewise very hurtful to girls at this period. It is a
rare thing to see a sprightly girl who does not enjoy good health, while the
grave, moping, melancholy creature proves the very prey of vapors and
hystericks. Youth is the season for mirth and cheerfulness. Let it therefore be
indulged. It is an absolute duty. To lay in a stock of health in time of youth
is as necessary a piece of prudence as to make provision against the decays of
old age. While therefore wise Nature prompts the happy youth to join in
sprightly amusements, let not the severe dictates of hoary age forbid the
useful impulse, nor damp with serious gloom the seasons destined to mirth a^^
innocent festivity.

ANOTHER thing very hurtful to females about this p^^^od of life is strait
clothes. They are fond of a fine shape, and foolishly imagine, that this can be
acquired by strait clothes. Hence by squeezing their stomach and bowels they
hurt the digestion, and occasion many incurable maladies. This error is not
indeed so common as it has been; but, as fashions change, it may come in again,
we therefore think it not improper to mention it. I know many females who, to
this day, feel the direful effects of that wretched custom which prevailed some
time ago, of squeezing every girl into as small a size in the middle as
possible. Human invention could not possibly have devised a practice more
destructive to health.

AFTER a female has arrived at that period of life when the menses usually
begin to flow, and they do not appear, but, on the contrary, her health and
spirits begin to decline, we would advise, instead of shutting the poor girl up
in the house, and dosing her with steel, asafoetida, and other nauseous drugs,
to place her in a situation where she can enjoy the benefit of free air and
agreeable company. There let her eat wholesome food, take plenty of exercise
and amusements, and we have little reason to fear but Nature, thus assisted,
will do her proper work. She seldom fails unless where the fault is on our side.

WHEN the menses have once begun to flow, the greatest care should be taken to
avoid every thing that may tend to obstruct them. Females ought to be exceeding
careful of what they eat or drink at the time they are out of order. Every
thing that is cold, or apt to sour on the stomach, ought to be avoided; as
fruit, butter milk, and such like. Fish, and all kinds of food that are hard of
digestion, are also to be avoided. As it is impossible to mention every (...)
that may disagree with individuals at this time, we would recommend it to every
female to be very attentive to what disagrees with her own stomach, and
carefully to avoid it.

COLD is extremely hurtful to females at this particular period. More of the
sex date their disorders from colds, (...) while they were out of order, than
from all other causes. This ought surely to put them upon their guard, and to
make them very circumspect in their conduct at such times. A degree of cold
that will not in the least hurt them (...) another time, will, at this period,
be sufficient to ruin their health and constitution altogether.

THE greatest attention ought at this time to be paid to the mind, which should
be kept as easy and cheerful as possible. Every part of the animal economy is
influenced by the passions, but none more so than this. Anger, fear, grief, and
other affections of the mind, often occasion obstructions of the menstrual
flux, which prove absolutely incurable.

FROM whatever cause this flux is obstructed, unless the female be pregnant,
proper means should be used to restore it. For this purpose we would rcommend
plenty of exercise, in a dry, open, and rather cool air; wholesome diet, and,
if the body be weak and languid, generous liquors; also cheerful company, and
all manner of amusements. If these fail, the following medicines may be tried.

IF the obstructions proceed from a weak relaxed state of the solids, such
medicines as tend to promote digestion, to brace the solids, and assist the
body in preparing good blood, ought to be used. The principal of these are
iron, the jesuits bark, and other bitter and a stringent medicines. Filings of
iron may be infused in wine or ale, two ounces to an English quart, and after
it has stood in a warm place twenty four hours, it may be strained, and a small
cupful drank three or four times a day; or they may be reduced to a fine
powder, and taken in the dose of half a dram, mixed with a little honey or
treacle, three or four times a day. The bark and other bitters may either be
taken in substance or infusion as is most agreeable to the patient.

WHEN obstructions proceed from a viscid state of the blood, and the patient is
of a gross full habit, evacuations, and such medicines as attenuate the
humors, are necessary. The patient, in this case ought to be bled, to bathe
her feet frequently in warm water, to take now and then a dose of cooling
physic, and to live upon a spare thin diet. Her drink should be whey, water, or
small beer, and she ought to take plenty of exercise.

WHEN obstructions proceed from affections of the mind, every method should be
taken to amuse and divert the patient. And that she may the more readily forget
the cause of her affliction, she ought, if possible, to be removed from the
place where it happened. A change of place, by presenting the mind with a
variety of new objects, (...) often a very happy influence in relieving it from
the deepest distress. A soothing, kind, and affable behavior to persons in
this situation is also of the last importance. This would often prevent, the
fatal consequences which proceed from a harsh treatment of females, who are so
unfortunate as to be crossed in their inclinations; or who meet with
disappointments in love, etc.

THOUGH many diseases proceed from obstruction, it is not always to be considered
as the cause, but often as the effect of other maladies. When that is the case,
instead of giving medicines to force down the menses, which might be dangerous,
we ought, by all means, to endeavor to restore the patient's health and
strength. When that is effected the other will return of course.

BUT the menstrual flux may be too great as well as too small. When that is the
case, the patient becomes weak, the color pale, the appetite and digestion are
bad, and oedematous swellings of the feet, dropsies and consumptions often
ensue. This frequently happens to women about the age of forty five or fifty,
and is very difficult to cure. It may proceed from a sedentary life; a full
diet, consisting chiefly of salted, high-seasoned, or acrid food; the excessive
use of spiritous liquors; too much exercise; violent passions of the mind, etc.

TO restrain this flux, the patient ought to be kept quiet and easy both in
body and mind. If it be very violent, she ought to lie in bed with her head
low; to live upon a cool and slender diet, as veal or chicken-broths with
bread; and to drink decoctions of nettle-roots, or the greater con^^rey. If
these be not sufficient to stop the flux, stronger astringents may be used, as
alum, dragons blood, etc. As much powdered alum as will lie upon a sixpence
may b^ taken in a glass of red wine twice or thrice a day, or oftener if the
patient's stomach (...) bear it. Such as cannot take alum in substance may use
the allum-whey. Females who have frequent returns of this complaint, ought to
use the jesuits bark for a considerable time. Half a dram of bark may be mixed
in a glass of red wine three or four times a day, or it may be taken in common
water, and sharpened with spirits of vitriol.

BUT the uterine flux may offend in quality as well as in quantity. What is
usually called the fluor albus or whites, is a very common disease, and proves
extremely hurtful to delicate women. This discharge is not always white, but
sometimes pale, yellow, green, or of a blackish color; sometimes it is sharp
and corrosive; sometimes foul and foetid, etc. It is attended with a pale
complexion, pain in the spine of the back, loss of appetite, swelling of the
feet, etc. It generally proceeds from a relaxed and debilitated state of the
body, arising from indolence, the excessive use of tea, coffee, or other weak
and watery diet.

TO remove this disease, the patient must take as much exercise as she can bear
without fatigue. Her food must be solid and nourishing, but of easy digestion;
and her drink pretty generous, as red port or claret wine. These may be drank
pure or mixed with water, as the patient inclines. Tea and coffee are to be
avoided. I have often known strong broths have an exceeding good effect in this
case. The patient ought not to lie too long a bed. When medicine is wanted, we
know none preferable to the jesuits bark, which, in this case, ought always to
be taken in substance.

THAT period of life at which the menses cease to flow is likewise very
critical to the sex. The stoppage of any customary evacuation, however small,
is sufficient to disorder the whole frame, and often to destroy life itself.
Hence it comes to pass that so many women either fall into chronic disorders,
or die about this time: Such of them however as survive it, without contracting
any chronic disease, often become more healthy and hardy than they were before,
and enjoy strength and vigor to a very great age.

IF the menses cease all of a sudden, in women of a full habit, they ought to
abate somewhat of their usual quantity of food, especially of the more
nourishing kind, as flesh, eggs, etc. They ought likewise to take plenty of
exercise, and to keep the belly open. This may be done by taking, once or twice
a-week, a little rhubarb, or an infusion of hiera picra in wine or brandy.

IT often happens that women of a gross habit, at this period of life, have
ulcerous sores break out about their ancles, or in other parts of the body.
Such ulcers ought to be considered as critical, and should either be suffered
to continue open, or artificial drains should be opened in their stead. Women
who will needs have such sores dried up, are often soon after seized with acute
or chronic diseases, of which they die.

PERSONS of either sex ought to be very cautious in drying up sores which break
out toward the decline of life. We would lay it down as a rule, where ever
such sores appear, that before any attempts be made to heal them, an issue or
seton should be set in some part of the body. Few things bid fairer for
preserving health, or prolonging life, especially in persons who live full,
than an issue, or some other drain constantly kept open in the decline of life.
This is imitating Nature, who often, at this period, endeavors to relieve
herself by a fistula, the haemorrhoidal flux, etc.

OF PREGNANCY.
PREGNANCY is not a disease, but as it subjects women to several ailments, it
may not be improper to point out the methods of preventing or relieving them.

PREGNANT women are often afflicted with the heartburn. The method of treating
this complaint has already been pointed out in page 254. and the one following.
They are likewise, in the more early periods of pregnancy, often harrassed with
sickness and vomiting, especially in the morning. These complaints may
generally be relieved by carefully observing the directions contained in pages
244. and 245. The headache and toothache are also very troublesome symptoms of
pregnancy. The former may generally be removed by keeping the belly gently
open, by the use of prunes, figs, roasted apples, and such like. When the pain
is very violent, bleeding may be necessary. For the treatment of the latter, we
must refer the reader to that article page 249.

EVERY pregnant woman is more or less in danger of abortion. This should be
guarded against with greatest care, as it not only weakens the constitution,
but renders the woman liable to the same misfortune afterward. Abortion may
happen at any period of pregnancy, but it is most common in the second or third
month. Sometimes however it happens in the fourth or fifth. If it happens
within the first month, it is usually called a false conception; if after the
seventh month, the child may often be kept alive by proper care.

THE common causes of abortion are, the death of the child; weakness or
relaxation of the mother; great evacuaations; violent motion; rai^ing great
weights; reaching too high; vomiting; coughing; convulsion-fits; strokes on the
belly; falls; fevers; disagreeable smells; excess of blood; indolence; high
living; or the contrary; violent passions or affections of the mind, as fear,
grief, etc.

THE signs of approaching abortion are, a pain in the joins, or about the
bottom of the belly; a dull heavy pain in the inside of the thighs; a flight
degree of coldness or shivering; sickness; palpitation of the heart; the
breasts become flat and soft; the belly falls; and there is a discharge of
blood or watery humors from the womb.

TO prevent abortion, we would advise women of a weak or relaxed habit to use
solid food, avoiding great quantities of tea, and other weak and watery
liquors; to rise early, and go soon to bed; to shun damp houses; to take
frequent exercise in the open air, but to avoid fatigue; and never to go abroad
in damp foggy weather, if they can shun it. Women of a full habit ought to use
a spare diet, avoiding strong liquors, and every thing that may tend to heat
the body, or increase the quantity of blood. Their diet should be of an opening
nature, consisting principally of vegetable substances. Every woman with child
ought to be kept cheerful and easy in her mind. All violent passions hurt the
foetus, and endanger an abortion.

WHEN any signs of abortion appear, the woman ought to be laid in bed on a
mattress, with her head low. She should be kept quiet, and her mind soothed and
comforted. She ought not to be kept too warm, nor to take any thing of a
heating nature. Her food should consist of broths, rice and milk, jellies, or
gruels with a very little wine in them.

IF she be able to bear it, she should lose, at least, half a pound of blood
from the arm. Her drink ought to be barley-water sharpened with cream of
tartar; or she may take half a dram of powdered nitre in a cup of water gruel,
every five or six hours. If the woman be seized with a violent looseness, she
ought to drink the decoction of calcined hartshorn prepared. If she be affected
with vomiting, let her take frequently one of the saline draughts recommended
page 143.

SANGUINE robust women, who are liable to miscarry at a certain time of
pregnancy, ought always to be bled a few days before that period arrives. By
this means, and observing the regimen above prescribed, they may often escape
that misfortune.

THOUGH we recommend due care for preventing abortion, we would not be understood
as restraining pregnant women from their usual exercises. This would operate
the quite contrary way. Want of exercise not only relaxes the body, but induces
a plethora, or too great a fullness of the vessels, which are the two principal
causes of abortion.

OF CHILDBIRTH.
MANY diseases proceed from the want of due care in childbed. The more hardy
part of the sex are apt to despise the necessary precautions after delivery.
They think, when the labour-pains are ended, the danger is over; but in truth
it may only then be said to be begun. Nature if left to herself, will seldom
fail to expel the foetus; but proper care and management are certainly
necessary for the recovery of the mother. No doubt, mischief may be done by too
much as well as by too little care. Hence it is that females who have the
greatest number of attendants in childbed, generally recover worst. But this
is not peculiar to the state of childbed. Excessive care always defeats its
own intention, and is generally more dangerous than none at all.

DURING actual labor, nothing of a heating nature must be given. The woman
may, now and then, take a little panada, and her drink ought to be toast and
water, or thin groat-gruel. Spirits, wines, cordial-waters, and other things,
which are given with a view to strengthen the mother, and promote the birth,
for the most part tend only to increase the fever, inflame the womb, and retard
the labor. Besides, they endanger the woman afterward, as they often occasion
violent and mortal haemorrhages, or predispose her to eruptive and other fevers.

WHEN the labor proves tedious and difficult, to prevent inflammations, it
will be proper to bleed. An emolient clyster ought likewise frequently to be
administered; and the patient should sit over the steams of warm water. The
passage ought to be gently rubbed with a little soft pomatum or fresh butter,
and cloths wrung out of warm water applied over the belly. If Nature seems to
sink, and the woman be greatly exhausted with fatigue, a draught of generous
wine, or some other cordial, may be given, but not otherwise. These directions
are sufficient in natural labors, and in all preternatural cases, a skillful
surgeon, or man-midwife, ought to be called as soon as possible.

WE cannot help taking notice of that ridiculous custom which still prevails in
some country-places, of collecting a number of women together upon such
occasions. These, instead of being useful, serve only to crowd the house, and
obstruct the necessary attendants. Besides, they hurt the patient with their
noise; and often by their untimely and ^^pertinent advice, do much mischief.

AFTER delivery, the woman ought to be kept as quiet and easy as possible. Her
food should be light and thin; as gruel, panada, etc. and her drink weak and
diluting. To this rule however there are some exceptions. I have known several
hysteric women, whose spirits could not be supported in childbed without solid
food and generous liquors; to such a glass of wine and a bit of chicken must be
allowed.

SOMETIMES an excessive haemorrhage or flooding happens after delivery. In this
case, the patient should be laid with her head low, have ligatures applied
above her knees and elbows, and be in all respects treated as for an excessive
flux of the menses. If the flooding proves violent, linen cloths, which have
been wrung out of a mixture of equal parts of vinegar and water, should be
applied to the belly, the loins, and the thighs: These must be changed as they
grow dry; and may be discontinued as soon as the flooding abates.

IF there be violent pains after delivery, the patient ought to drink
plentifully of warm diluting liquors, as tea with a little saffron; or an
infusion of camomile flowers; and to take small broths, with carroway seeds or
a bit of orange-peel in them; an ounce of the oil of sweet almonds may likewise
be frequently taken in a cup of any of the above liquors; and if the patient be
restless, a spoonful of the syrup of poppies may now and then be mixed with a
cup of her drink. If she be hot or feverish, one of the following powders may
be taken in a cup of her usual drink, every five or six hours. Take of crabs
claws prepared half an ounce, purified nitre two drams, saffron powdered half a
dram; rub them together in a mortar, and divide the whole into eight or nine
doses. When the patient is low spirited, or troubled with hysterical
complaints, she ought to take frequently twelve or fifteen drops of the
tincture of asafoetida in a cup of pennyroyal tea.

AN inflammation of the womb is a dangerous and not unfrequent disease after
delivery. It is known by pains in the lower part of the belly, which are
greatly increased upon touching; by the tension or tightness of the parts;
great weakness; change of countenance; a constant fever, with a weak and hard
pulse; a slight delirium or raving; sometimes incessant vomiting; a hiccup; a
discharge of redish stinking sharp water from the womb; an inclination to go to
stool; a heat, and sometimes total suppression of urine.

THIS must be treated like other inflammatory disorders, by bleeding and
plentiful dilution. The drink may be thin gruel or barley water; in a cup of
which half a dram of nitre may be dissolved, and taken three or four times a
day. Clysters of warm water must be frequently administered; and the belly
should be fomented by cloths wrung out of warm water, or by applying bladders
filled with warm milk and water to it.

A SUPPRESSION of the lochia, or usual discharges after delivery, and the
milk-fever, must be treated nearly in the same manner as an inflammation of the
womb. In all these cases the ^afest course is plentiful dilution, gentle
evacuations, and fomentations of the parts affected. In the milk-fever, the
breasts may be embrocated with a little warm linseed oil, or the leaves of red
cabbage may be applied to them. The child should be often put to the breast, or
it should be drawn by some other person.

NOTHING would tend more to prevent the milk-fever than putting the child early
to the breast. The custom of not allowing children to suck for the first two or
three days, is contrary to Nature and common sense, and is very hurtful both to
the mother and child. Every mother who has milk in her breasts, ought either to
suckle her own child, or to have her breasts frequently drawn, at least for the
first month. This would prevent many of the diseases which prove fatal to women
in childbed.

WHEN an inflammation happens in the breast, attended with redness, hardness,
and other symptoms of suppuration, the ^afest application is a poultice of
bread and milk, softened with oil or fresh butter. This may be renewed twice a
day till the tumor be either discussed or brought to suppuration. Afterward
it may be dressed with yellow basilicon, or any other digestive ointment. The
use of repellants, in this case, is very dangerous; they often occasion fevers,
and sometimes cancers: Whereas a suppuration is seldom attended with any
danger, and has often the most salutary effects.

WHEN the nipples are fretted or chapt, they may be anointed with a mixture of
oil and beeswax, or a little gum arabic may be sprinkled on them. I have seen
Hungary-water applied to the nipples have a very good effect. Should the
complaint prove obstinate, the nurse ought to be purged, which generally
removes it.

THE miliary fever is a disease very incident to women in childbed. But as it
has been treated of already, we shall take no farther notice of it here than
only, with the celebrated Hoffman, to observe, that this fever of childbed
women might generally be prevented, if they, during their pregnancy, were
regular in their diet, used moderate exercise, took now and then a gentle
laxative of manna, rhubarb, or cream of tartar; not forgetting to bleed in the
first months, and avoid all sharp air. When the labor is coming on, it is not
to be hastened with forcing medicines, which inflame the blood and humors, or
put them into unnatural commotions. Care should be taken, after the birth, that
the natural excretions proceed regularly; and if the pulse be quick, a little
nitrous powder should be given, etc.

WE shall conclude our observations on childbed women by recommending it to
them, above all things, to beware of cold. Poor women, whose circumstances
oblige them to quit their bed too soon, often contract diseases from cold, of
which they never recover. It is pity the poor are not better taken care of in
this situation. But the better sort of women run the greatest hazard from being
kept too hot. They are generally kept in a sort of bagnio for the first eight
or ten days, and then dressed out to see company. The danger of this conduct
must be obvious to every one. The superstitious custom of obliging women to
keep the house till they go to church, is likewise a very common cause of
catching cold. All churches are damp, and most of them cold; consequently they
are the very worst places to which a woman can go to make her first visit,
after being confined in a warm room for a month. We make this observation from
experience, having often had occasion to attend women whose disorders were the
effect of cold caught in this way.

OF BARRENNESS.
BARRENNESS may be very properly reckoned among the diseases of females, as few
married women who have not children enjoy a good state of health. It may
proceed from various causes; but we shall only take notice of two, viz. high
living and relaxation. It is very certain that high living vitiates the
humors, and prevents fecundity. We seldom find a barren woman among the
laboring poor, while nothing is more common amongst the rich and affluent. The
inhabitants of every country are prolific in proportion to their poverty, and
it would be an easy matter to adduce many instances of women who, by being
reduced to live entirely upon a milk and vegetable diet, have conceived and
brought forth children, though they never had any before. Would the rich use
the same sort of food and exercise as the better sort of peasants, they would
seldom have cause to envy their poor vassals and dependents the blessing of a
numerous and healthy offspring, while they pine in sorrow for the want of even
a single heir to their extensive dominions.

AFFLUENCE begets indolence, which not only vitiates the humors, but induces a
general relaxation of the solids; a state highly unfavourable to procreation.
As we have the greatest reason to believe, that relaxation is one of the most
common causes of barrenness, we would recommend the following course for
removing it. First, plenty of exercise in the open air; secondly, the use of
the cold bath; and lastly, astringent medicines. It is well known, that many
women who had been long barren, have, by the use of the cold bath not only
become mothers, but have afterward enjoyed a much better state of health. This
should induce all barren women not only to try the cold bath, but to persist in
the use of it for a long time, otherwise it cannot be expected to produce any
considerable effects.

THOUGH a vegetable diet, plenty of exercise, and the cold bath, are the
medicines most to be relied upon, we shall mention (...), which has sometimes
proved effectual, viz. common alum. About the third or fourth day of the
menstrual flux the woman must take as much powdered alum at bedtime, in a cup
of wine or negas, as will lie upon sixpence. This must be repeated for three or
four nights running. If it has not the desired effect, it may be taken in the
same manner next time the menses return. I have known several women who always
conceived after taking this medicine, and never without it.

THE above observations on diet, air, and exercise, are applicable to men as
well as to women. Dr Chyne avers, that want of children is oftener the fault of
the male than of the female, and strongly recommends a milk and vegetable diet
to the former as well as the latter; adding, that his friend Dr Tailor, whom he
calls the milk Doctor of Croyden, had brought sundry opulent families in his
neighborhood, who had continued some years after marriage without progeny, to
have several fine children, by keeping both parents, for a considerable time,
to a milk and vegetable diet.

DISEASES OF CHILDREN.
THE nursing and management of children having been pretty fully treated of in
the first part of this book, we shall only here take notice of such of their
diseases as have not been already mentioned.

RETENTION OF THE MECONIUM.
THE stomach and bowels of a newborn infant are filled with a blackish
colored matter of the consistence of syrup, commonly called the meconium. This
is generally passed soon after the birth by the mere effort of nature, in which
case it is not necessary to give the infant any kind of medicine. But if it
should be retained, or not sufficiently carried off, it may occasion wind,
gripes, jaundice, restlessness, convulsions, etc.

THE most proper medicine for expelling the meconium is the mother's milk,
which is always, at first, of a purgative quality. But, if the the mother does
not gives suck, or, if her milk happens not to be sufficiently purgative, a
little of the syrup of pale roses may be given, or a small quantity of the
syrup of rhubarb diluted with water, and sweetened with honey or coarse sugar.
If these are not at hand, a common spoonful of whey sweetened with a
teaspoonful of honey may be given.

ALL kind of oils are to be avoided; they are quite indigestible by infants,
and tend only to load their stomachs and makes them sick.

THE APHTHAE OR THRUSH.
THE aphthae are little whitish ulcers affecting the whole inside of the mouth,
tongue, throat, and stomach of infants. Sometimes they reach through the whole
intestinal canal; in which case they are very dangerous, and often put* an end
to the infant's life.

IF the aphthae are of a pale color, pellucid, few in number, soft,
superficial, and fall easily off, they are not dangerous; but if opake, yellow,
brown, black, thick, or running together, they are bad.

IT is generally thought that the aphthae owe their origin to acid humors; but
we have reason to believe that these, and several other eruptive diseases of
infants, are, in a great measure, owing to too hot a regimen both of the mother
and child. It is a rare thing to find a child who is not dosed with wine,
punch, cinnamon waters, or some other hot and inflaming liquors, almost as soon
as it is born. It is well known that these will occasion inflammatory disorders
even in adults; is it any wonder then that they should heat and inflame the
tender bodies of infants, and set, as it were, the whole constitution on a
blaze?

THE most proper medicines for the aphthae are those of a cooling and gentle
opening nature. Five grains of rhubarb and a dram of magnesia alba may be
rubbed together, and divided into six doses, one of which may be given to the
child every five or six hours. These powders may either be given in the child's
food or a little of the syrup of pale roses, and may be repeated as often as is
found necessary to keep the belly open.

MANY things have been recommended for gargling the mouth and throat in this
disease; but it is not easy to apply these in very young infants; we would
therefore recommend it to the nurse to rub the child's mouth frequently with a
little borax and honey; or with the following mixture. Take fine honey an
ounce, borax a dram, burnt alum half a dram, rose water two drams; mix them
together. These may be applied with the finger, or by means of a bit of soft
rag tied to the end of a probe.

OF ACIDITIES.
THE food of children being, for the most part, of an acescent nature, it
readily turns four upon the stomach, especially if the body be any how
disordered. Hence it comes to pass, that most diseases of children are
accompanied with evident signs of acidity, as green stools, gripes, etc. These
appearances have induced many to believe, that all the diseases of children
were owing to an acid abounding in the stomach and bowels; but whoever
considers the matter attentively, will find, that these symptoms of acidity are
oftener the effect than the cause of diseases.

NATURE evidently intended, that the food of children should be acescent; and
until the body be disordered, or the digestion hurt, from some other cause, we
will venture to say, that the acescent quality of their food is seldom
injurious to them. Acidity however is often a symptom of infantile disorders,
and, as it is a very troublesome one, we shall point out the method of
relieving it.

WHEN green stools, gripes, purgings, etc. show, that the bowels abound with an
acid, the child should have a little small broth instead of milk, with light
white bread in it; and should have plenty of exercise in order to promote the
digestion. It has been customary in this case to give the pearl-julep, chalk,
crabs eyes, and other testaceous powders. These indeed, by their absorbent
quality, may correct the acidity; but they are attended with this
inconveniency, that they are apt to lodge in the bowels, and occasion a
costiveness, which may prove very hurtful to the infant. For this reason they
should never be given unless mixed with purgative medicines; as rhubarb, manna,
or such like.

THE best medicine which we know, in all cases of acidity, is that fine insipid
powder called magnesia alba. It purges, and, at the same time, corrects the
acidity; by which means it not only removes the disease, but carries off its
cause. It may be given in any kind of food, from ten grains to a teaspoonful,
according to the age of the patient. I have often known it have good effects
when given in the following manner. Take of magnesia alba two drams, fine
rhubarb in powder half a dram, pepper-mint water and common water, of each two
ounces, as much syrup of sugar as will make it agreeable. Shake the bottle, and
give the child a table-spoonful three or four times a day.

WHEN an infant is troubled with gripes, it ought not to be dosed with brandy,
spiceries, and other hot things, but should have its belly opened with an
emolient clyster, or the medicine mentioned above; and at the same time a
little brandy may be rubbed on its belly with a warm hand before the fire. I
have seldom seen this fail to ease the gripes of infants. It is often more
effectual, and always more safe than brandy taken inwardly.

GALLING AND EXCORIATION.
THESE are very troublesome to children. They happen chiefly about the groin
and wrinkles of the neck, under the arms, behind the ears, and in other parts
that are moistened by the sweat or urine.

AS these complaints are, in a great measure, owing to want of cleanliness, the
most effectual means of preventing them are, to wash the parts frequently with
water, to change the linen often, and in a word, to keep the child, in all
respects, thoroughly clean. When this is not sufficient, the excoriated parts
may be sprinkled with absorbent or drying powders; such as burnt hartshorn,
tutty, chalk, crabs claws prepared, etc. Any of these may be tied in a rag, and
the powder shook out on the disordered places.

WHEN the parts affected are very sore, and tend to a real ulceration, it will
be proper to add a little sugar of lead to the powders; or to anoint the place
with a little camphorated ointment. If the parts be washed with spring water,
in which a little white vitriol has been dissolved, it will dry and heal them
very powerfully.

STOPPAGE OF THE NOSE.
THE nostrils of infants are often plugged up with a gross mucus, which
prevents their breathing freely, and likewise renders it difficult for them to
suck or swallow.

SOME, in this case, order, after a suitable purge, two or three grains of
white vitriol dissolved in half an ounce of marjoram water and (...), to be
applied now and then to the nostrils with a linen rag. Wed^lius says, If two
grains of white vitriol, and the same quantity of elaterium, be dissolved in
half an ounce of marjoram water, and applied to the nose, as above directed,
that it brings away the mucus without sneezing.

IN obstinate cases these things may be tried; but we have never found any
thing else necessary, than to rub the nose at bedtime with a little oil of
sweet almonds, or a bit of fresh butter. This resolves the filth, and renders
the breathing more free.

OF ERUPTIONS.
CHILDREN, while on the breast, are seldom free from eruptions of one kind or
other. These however are not often dangerous, and ought never to be stopped but
with the greatest caution. They tend to free the bodies of infants from hot and
acrid humors, which, if retained, might produce fatal disorders.

THE eruptions of children are chiefly owing to the following causes, viz.
improper food, and neglect of cleanliness. If a child be stuffed at all hours
with food that his stomach is not able to digest, such food, not being properly
assimilated, instead of nourishing the body, fills it with gross humors. These
must either break out in form of eruptions upon the skin, or remain in the
body, and occasion fevers and other internal disorders. That neglect of
cleanliness is a very general cause of eruptive disorders, must be obvious to
every one. The children of the poor, and of all who despise cleanliness, are
almost constantly found to swarm with vermin, and are generally covered over
with the scab, itch, and other eruptions.

WHEN eruptions are the effect of improper food, or want of cleanliness, a
proper attention to these alone will generally be sufficient to remove them. If
this should not be the case, some drying medicines will be necessary; but they
should never be applied without the greatest caution. If drying medicines are
applied, the belly ought at the same time to be kept open, and cold is
carefully to be avoided. We know no medicine that is more safe for drying up
cutaneous eruptions than sulphur, provided it be sparingly used. A little of
the flowers of sulphur may be mixed with the white ointment or hog's lard, and
the parts affected frequently touched with it.

THE most obstinate of all the eruptions incident to children are, the tinea
capitis, or scabbed head, and chilblains. The scabbed head is often exceeding
difficult to cure, and sometimes indeed the cure proves worse than the disease.
I have frequently known children seized with internal disorders, of which they
died soon after their scabbed heads had been healed by the application of
drying medicines I SOME time ago saw a very striking instance of the danger of
substituting drying medicines in the place of cleanliness and wholesome food.

BEING consulted for the children of a certain Hospital in England, who were
grievously afflicted with scabbed heads, and other cutaneous disorders. I
found, upon inquiry, that the children were fed upon potatoes, and other crude
vegetables, through the whole year, and that cleanliness was totally neglected.
My advice was to give them more wholesome food, and to keep them thoroughly
clean. This advice however was not followed. It was too troublesome to the
servants, superintendents, etc. The business was to be done by medicine; which
was accordingly attempted, but had like to have proved fatal to the whole
house. Fevers and other internal disorders immediately appeared, and, at
length, a putrid dysentery broke out which carried off a great many of the
children.


. The cure ought always first to be attempted by keeping the head very clean,
cutting off the hair, combing and brushing away the scabs, etc. If this be not
sufficient, let the head be shaved once a-week, and washed daily with soap and
warm water, or with limewater. Should these fail, a plaster of black pitch may
be applied, in order to pull out the hair by the roots. And if there be proud
flesh, it should be touched with a bit of blue vitriol, or sprinkled with a
little burnt alum. While these things are doing, the patient must be kept to a
regular light diet, his belly should be kept gently open; and cold, as far as
possible, ought to be avoided. To prevent any bad consequences from stopping
this discharge, it will be proper, especially in children of a delicate habit,
to make an issue in the neck or arm, which may be kept open till the patient
becomes more strong, and the constitution be somewhat confirmed.

CHILBLAINS commonly attack children in cold weather. They are generally
occasioned by the feet or hands being kept long wet or cold, and afterward
suddenly heated. When children are cold, instead of taking exercise to warm
themselves gradually, they run to the fire. This occasions a sudden rarefaction
of the humors, and an infarction of the vessels; which being often repeated,
the vessels are, at last, over-distended, and forced to give way.

To prevent it, violent cold and sudden heat must be equally avoided. When the
parts begin to look red and swell, the patient ought to be purged, and to have
the affected parts frequently rubbed with mustard and brandy, or something of a
warm nature. They ought likewise to be covered with flannel, and kept warm and
dry. Some apply warm ashes betwixt cloths to the swelled parts, which
frequently help to reduce them. When there is a sore, it must be dressed with
Turner's cerate, or some other drying ointment; as the ointment of tutty, the
plaster of ceruss, etc. These sores are indeed troublesome, but seldom
dangerous. They generally heal as soon as the warm weather sets in.

OF DIFFICULT BREATHING.
CHILDREN are often seized very suddenly with a great difficulty of breathing,
which, if not quickly relieved, proves mortal. This disease is known by various
names in different parts of the country. In the East coast of Scotland it is
called the croup. On the West they call it the chock or stuffing. In some parts
of England, where I have met with it, the good women call it the rising of the
lights. It seems to be a species of asthma, attended with very acute and
violent symptoms.

THIS disease generally prevails in cold and wet seasons. It is most common
upon the seacoast, and in low marshy countries. Children of a gross and lax
habit are most liable to it. I have sometimes known it hereditary. It generally
attacks children in the night, after having been much exposed to damp cold
easterly winds through the day. Damp houses, wet feet, thin shoes, wet clothes,
or any thing that obstructs the perspiration, may occasion this disease.

IT is attended with a frequent pulse, quick and laborious breathing, which is
performed with a peculiar kind of croaking noise that may be heard at a
considerable distance. The voice is sharp and shrill, and the face is generally
much flushed, though sometimes it is of a livid color.

WHEN a child is seized with the above symptoms, his feet should be put into
warm water. He ought likewise to be bled, and to have a laxative clyster
administered as soon as possible. He should be made to breathe over the steams
of warm water, or an emolient decoction, and emolient cataplasms or
fomentations may be applied round his neck. If the symptoms do not abate, a
blistering plaster must be applied round the neck, or betwixt the shoulders,
and the child may take frequently a table-spoonful of the following julep. Take
pennyroyal water three ounces, syrup of althea and balsamic syrup, each one
ounce, mix them together.

SOME, in this case, recommend asafoetida. It may both be given in form of
clyster, and taken by the mouth. Two drams of asafoetida may be dissolved in
one ounce of Mindererus's spirit, and three ounces of pennyroyal water. A
table-spoonful of this mixture may be given every hour, or oftener if the
patient's stomach be able to bear it. If the patient cannot be brought to take
this medicine, two drams of the asafoetida may be dissolved in a common
clyster, and administered every six or eight hours, till the violence of the
disease abates.

To prevent a return of this disease, all those things which occasion it must
be carefully avoided; as wet feet, cold, damp easterly winds, etc. Children who
have had frequent returns of this disease, or whose constitution seems to
predispose them to it, ought to have their diet properly regulated; all food
that is viscid or hard of digestion, and all crude, raw, trashy fruits, are to
be avoided. They ought likewise to have a drain constantly kept open in some
part of their body, by means of a seton or issue. I have sometimes known a
Burgundy pitch plaster, worn continually betwixt the shoulders for several
years, have a very happy effect in preventing the return of this dreadful
disorder.

OF TEETHING.
DR Arbuthnot observes, that above a tenth part of infants die in teething, by
symptoms proceeding from the irritation of the tender nervous parts of the
jaws, occasioning inflammations, fevers, convulsions, gangrenes, etc. These
symptoms are, in a great measure, owing to the great delicacy and exquisite
sensibility of the nervous system at this time of life. But this natural
sensibility of the nerves in infancy is too often increased by an effeminate
education. Hence it comes to pass, that children who are delicately brought up
always suffer most in teething, and often ^all by convulsive disorders.

ABOUT the sixth or seventh month the teeth generally begin to make their
appearance; first the incisores, or foreteeth; next the canini, or dog-teeth;
and lastly, the molares, or grinders. About the seventh year there comes a new
set; and about the twentieth the two inner grinders, called dentes sapientiae,
the teeth of wisdom.

CHILDREN, about the time of cutting their teeth, slaver much, and have
generally a looseness, which is no bad sign; but when the teething is
difficult, especially when the dog-teeth begin to make their way through the
gums, the child has startings in his sleep, tumors of the gums, inquietude,
watchings, gripes, green stools, the thrush, fever, difficult breathing,
convulsions, and epilepsies, which often end in death.

DIFFICULT teething is; in all respects, to be treated as an inflammatory
disease. If the belly be bound, it must be opened either by emollient clysters
or gentle purgatives; as manna, magnesia alba, rhubarb, ^enna, etc. The food
should be light, and in small quantity; the drink plentiful, but weak and
diluting, as infusions of balm, or of the lime-tree flowers; to which about a
third or fourth part of milk may be added.

IF the fever be very high, bleeding will be necessary; but this, in very young
children, ought always to be sparingly performed. It is an evacuation which
they bear the worst of any. Purging, vomiting, or sweating, agree much better
with them, and are generally more beneficial. Harris however observes, that,
when an inflammation appears, the physician will labor in vain, if the cure be
not begun with applying a leech under each ear. If the child be seized with
convulsion fits, a blistering plaster may be applied betwixt the shoulders, or
one behind each ear.

DR Sydenham says, that in fevers occasioned by teething, he never could find
any remedy so effectual as two, three, or four drops of spirits of hartshorn in
a spoonful of simple water, or other convenient vehicle, given every four
hours. The number of doses may be four, five, or six. I have often prescribed
this medicine with success, but always ^ound a larger dose necessary. It may be
given from five drops to fifteen or twenty, according to the age of the child.

IN Scotland, it is very common, when children are cutting their teeth, to put
a small Burgundy pitch plaster between their shoulders. This generally eases
the tickling cough which attends teething, and is by no means an useless
application. When the teeth are bred with difficulty, it ought to be kept on
during the whole time of teething. It may be enlarged as occasion requires, and
ought to be renewed, at least, once a month.

SEVERAL things have been recommended for rubbing the gums, as oils, mucilages,
etc.; but from these much is not to be expected. What we would recommend for
this purpose is virgin-honey. A little of this may be rubbed on with the finger
three or four times a day. Children are generally at this time disposed to chew
whatever they get into their hands. For this reason they ought never to be
without somewhat that will yield a little to the pressure of their gums, as a
crust of bread, a wax-candle, a bit of liquorice-root, or such like. These are
far more proper than corral, ivory, silver, or any other impenetrable substance.

WITH regard to cutting the gums, we have seldom known it of any real
advantage. In obstinate cases it ought however to be tried; but as it is
generally performed by a surgeon, we shall not spend time in describing the
operation.

IN order to render the teething less difficult, parents ought to take care
that their childrens food be light and wholesome, and that their nerves be
braced by plenty of exercise without doors, and the use of the cold bath, etc.
Were these things duly regarded, few children would die of teething.

AS the limits of this performance will not permit us to treat the diseases of
infants at more length, we shall only observe, that, if properly nursed, their
diseases would be very few, and would seldom prove fatal. The nurse may, for
the most part, do the business of the physician; but the physician can never do
that of the nurse.

THE diseases of children are far less complicated than those of adults, and
consequently much easier understood; the method of curing them is likewise very
simple, and cannot readily be mistaken. In all the acute diseases of children,
cool air, diluting liquors, and gentle evacuations, are almost the only things
needful; and in their chronic diseases, restorative diet, free air, and proper
exercise, are what the cure must chiefly depend upon.

OF WOUNDS.
NO part of medicine has been more mistaken than the treatment and cure of
wounds. Mankind in general believe, that certain herbs, ointments, and salves
are possessed of wonderful healing virtues, and imagine that no wound can be
cured without the application of them. It is however a fact, that no external
application whatever contributes toward the cure of a wound, any other way
than by keeping the parts soft, and defending them from the external air, which
may be as effectually done by soft lint as by the most pompous applications,
while it is exempt from many of the bad consequences attending them.

THE same observation holds with respect to internal applications. These only
promote the cure of wounds in so far as they tend to prevent a fever, or to
remove any cause that might obstruct or impede the operations of Nature. It is
Nature alone that cures wounds; all that art can do is to remove obstacles, and
to put the parts in such a condition as is the most favorable to Nature's
efforts.

WITH this simple view, we shall consider the treatment of wounds, and
endeavor to point out such steps as ought to be taken to facilitate their cure.

THE first thing to be done when any person has received a wound is to examine
whether any foreign body be lodged in it, as wood, stone, iron, lead, glass,
dirt, bits of cloth, etc. These, if it can be easily done, ought to be
extracted, and the wound cleaned, before any dressings be applied. When that
cannot be effected with safety, on account of the patient's weakness, or loss
of blood, etc. they must be suffered to remain in the wound, and be afterward
extracted when the patient is more able to bear it.

WHEN a wound penetrates into any of the cavities of the body, as the breast,
the bowels, etc. or where any considerable blood-vessel is cut, a skillful
surgeon ought immediately to be called, otherwise the patient may lose his
life. But sometimes the discharge of blood is so great, that if it be not
stopped, the patient may die even before a surgeon, though at no great distance,
can arrive. In this case, something must be done by those who are present. If
the wound be in any of the limbs, the bleeding may generally be stopped by
applying a tight ligature or bandage round the member a little above the wound.
The best method of doing this is to put a strong broad garter round the part,
but so ^lack as easily to admit a small piece of stick to be put under it,
which must be twisted, in the same manner as a countryman does a cart-rope to
secure his loading, till the bleeding stops. Whenever this is the case, he must
take care to twist it no longer, as straining too tight might occasion an
inflammation of the parts and endanger a gangrene.

IN parts where this bandage cannot be applied, various other methods may be
tried to stop the bleeding, as the application of styptics, astringents, etc.
Cloths dipped in a solution of blue vitriol in water, or the styptic water of
the Dispensatories, may be applied to the wound. When these cannot be obtained,
strong spirits of wine may be used. Some recommend the Agaric Dr Tissot, in his
Advice to the people, gives the following directions for gathering, preparing,
and applying the agaric. -- "Gather in autumn, while the fine weather lasts,
the agaric of the oak, which is a kind of fungus or excrescence issuing from
the wood of that tree. It consists at first of four parts, which present
themselves successively: 1. The outward rind or skin, which may be thrown away.
2. The part immediately under this rind, which is the best of all. This is to
be beat well with a hammer, till it becomes soft and very pliable. This is the
only preparation it requires, and a slice of it of a proper size is to be
applied directly over the bursting open blood vessels. It constringes and
brings them close together, stops the bleeding, and generally falls off at the
end of two days. 3. The third part adhering to the second may serve to stop the
bleeding from the smaller vessels: and the fourth and last part may be reduced
to powder as conducing to the same purpose. -- That agaric which springs from
those parts of the tree from whence large boughs have been lopped, is generally
reckoned the best."
of the oak as preferable to any of the other styptics; and indeed it deserves
considerable encomiums. It is easily obtained, and ought to be kept in every
family, in case of accidents. A piece of it must be laid upon the wound and
covered with a good deal of lint, above which a bandage must be applied so
^ight as to keep it firmly on.

THOUGH spirits, tincture, and hot balsams may be used, in order to stop the
bleeding when it is excessive, they are improper at other times. They do not
promote but retard the cure, and often change a simple wound into an ulcer.
People imagine, because hot balsams congeal the blood, and seem, as it were, to
^older up the wound, that they therefore heal it; but this is only a deception.
They may indeed stop the flowing blood, by searing the mouths of the vessels;
but, by rendering the parts callous, they obstruct the cure.

IN slight wounds which do not penetrate much deeper than the skin, the best
application is a bit of the common black sticking plaster. This keeps the sides
of the wound together, and prevents the air from getting into it, which is all
that is necessary. When a wound penetrates deep, it is not safe to keep its
lips quite close; this keeps in the matter, and is apt to make the wound
fester. In this case the best way is to fill the wound with soft lint commonly
called caddis. This however must not be stuffed in too hard otherwise it will
do hurt. It may be covered over with a cloth dipped in oil, or spread with the
common wax THE wax plaster is made by melting together over a slow fire, a
pound of yellow wax; white resin, and mutton suet, of each half a pound. This
not only supplies the place of melilot plaster, formerly so much in vogue, but
makes a very proper application to ^light wounds, and to large ones after they
are nearly heal.
plasster; and the whole must be kept on by a proper bandage.

WE shall not spend time in describing the different bandages that may be
proper for wounds in different parts of the body; common sense will generally
suggest the most commodious method of applying a bandage; besides descriptions
of this kind are not easily remembered.

THE first dressing ought to continue on for at least two days; after which it
may be removed, and fresh lint applied as before. If any part of the first
dressing sticks so close that it cannot be removed with ease or safety to the
patient, it may be allowed to continue, and fresh lint dipped in sweet oil laid
above it. This will soften it so as to make it come off easily at next
dressing. Afterward the wound may be dressed every day in the same manner till
it be quite heal. Those who are fond of salves or ointments, may, after the
wound is become very superficial, dress it, twice a day, with the yellow
basilicon ointment THE yellow basilicon ointment is prepared in the following
manner. Take of olive oil an English pint, yellow wax, yellow resin, and
Burgundy pitch, of each one pound; common turpentine three ounces. Melt the
wax, resin, and pitch, along with the oil over a slow fire; after taking them
from the fire add the turpentine, and, whilst the mixture remains hot, strain
it.
; and if fungous, or what is called proud flesh, should rise in the wound, it
may be checked, by mixing with the ointment, a little burnt alum or red
precipitate.

WHEN a wound is greatly inflamed, the most proper application is a poultice of
bread and milk, softened with a little sweet oil or fresh butter. This must be
applied instead of the plaster, and should be changed two or three times a day.

IF the wound be large, and there is reason to fear an inflammation, the
patient must be kept on a very low diet. He must abstain from flesh, strong
liquors, and every thing that is of a heating nature. If he be of a full habit,
and has lost but little blood from the wound, he must be bled; and, if the
symptoms be urgent, the operation may be repeated. But when the patient has
been greatly weakened by loss of blood from the wound, it will be dangerous to
bleed him, even though a fever should ensue. Nature should never be too far
exhausted. It is always more safe to allow her to struggle with the disease in
her own way, than to sink the patients strength by excessive evacuations.

WOUNDED persons ought to be kept very quiet and easy. Every thing that ruffles
the mind, or moves the passions, as love, anger, fear, excessive joy, etc. are
very hurtful. They ought, above all things, to abstain from venery. The belly
should be kept gently open either by laxative clysters, or by cool vegetable
diet, as roasted apples, stewed prunes, boiled spinnage, etc.

OF BURNS.
IN slight burns which do not break the skin, it is customary to hold the part
near the fire for a competent time, to ^ub it with salt, or to lay a compress
upon it dipped in spirits of wine or brandy. But when the burn has penetrated
(...) deep as to blister or break the skin, it must be dressed with some
emollient and gently drying ointment, as the ointment of calamine, commonly
called Turner's cerate TURNER's cerate may be prepared by dissolving half a
pound of (...) wax in an English pint of olive-oil, over a gentle fire. As
(...) mixture cools, and begins to grow stiff, half a pound of calamine
prepared must be sprinkled into it, keeping constantly stirring them together
till the cerate is grown quite cold.
. This may be ^ixed with an equal quantity of fresh olive-oil, and spread upon
a soft rag, and applied to the part affected. When this ointment cannot be had,
an egg may be beat up with about an equal quantity of the sweetest salad oil.
This (...) serve very well till a proper ointment can be prepared. When the
burning is very deep, after the first two or three days, it should be dressed
with equal parts of yellow basilicon ointment and Turner's cerate mixed
together.

WHEN the burn is violent, or has occasioned a high degree of inflammation, and
there is reason to fear a gangrene or mortification will ensue, the same means
must be used to prevent it as are recommended in other violent inflammations.
The patient, in this case, must live low, and drin^ freely of weak diluting
liquors. He must likewise be bl^^ once and, if occasion requires, a second
time. His belly should be kept open; and, if the burnt parts become livid or
black, with other symptoms of mortification, it will be necessary to bathe them
frequently with warm camphorated spirits of wine, tincture of myrrh, or other
antiseptics mixed with a decoction of the bark. In this case the ba^k must
likewise be taken internally.

OF BRUISES.
BRUISES are generally productive of worse consequence^ than wounds. The danger
from them does not appear immediately, by which means it often happens that
they are neglected till past cure. It is needless to give any definition of a
disease so universally known; we shall therefore proceed to point out the
method of treating it.

IN ^light bruises it will be sufficient to bathe the part with a mixture of
equal quantities of vinegar and wate^, and to keep cloths wet with this mixture
constantly applie^ to it. This is far more proper than rubbing it with brandy,
spirits of wine, or other ardent spirits, which are commonly used in such cases.

IN some parts of the country the peasants apply to a recent bruise a poultice
of fresh cow's dung, with very happy effects.

WHEN a bruise is very violent, the patient ought immediately to be bled, and
put upon a proper regimen. His food should be light and cool, and his drink
weak, and of an opening nature; as whey sweetened with honey, decoctions of
tamarinds, barley, cream-tartar-whey, and (...) like. The bruised part must be
bathed with vinegar and water, as directed above; and a poultice made by
boiling crumbs of bread, elder flowers, and camomile flowers, in equal
quantities of vinegar and water, applied to it. This poultice is peculiarly
proper when a wound is joined to the bruise. It may be renewed two or three
times a day.

As the structure of the vessels is totally destroyed by a violent bruise,
there often ensues a great loss of substance, which produces an ulcerous sore
very difficult to cure. If the bone be affected, the sore will not heal before
an exfoliation takes place, that is, before the diseased part of the bone
separates, and comes out through the wound. This is often a very slow
operation, and may even require several years to be completed. Hence it
happens, that these sores are frequently mistaken for the King's evil, and
treated as such, though, in fact, they proceed solely from the injury which the
solid parts received from the blow.

PATIENTS in this situation are pestered with different advices. Every person
who sees them proposes a new remedy, till the sore is in a manner, poisoned
with various and opposite applications, and, is often at length rendered
absolutely incurable. The best method of managing such sores is, to take care
that the patient's constitution does not suffer by confinement, or improper
medicine, and to apply nothing to them but some simple ointment spread upon
soft lint, over which a poultice of bread and milk, with boiled camomile
flowers, or the like, may be put to nourish the part, and keep it soft and
warm. Nature, thus assisted, will generally in time operate a cure, by throwing
off the diseased parts of the bone, after which the sore soon heals.

OF DISLOCATIONS.
DISLOCATIONS are generally occasioned by falls, blows, or the like. They are
always dangerous, and sometimes, unless immediately reduced, they prove fatal.
A person who has the misfortune, by a fall from his horse, or the like, to
dislocate his neck, is often left to perish, while it is in the power of every
person present to do all that is necessary for his recovery. But people are
seized with a kind of panic upon these occasions, and are often so much afraid
of doing wrong, that they do nothing at all. This is, in fact, allowing a
person to die for fear of hurting him.

WHEN the neck is dislocated, or put out of joint, the patient is immediately
deprived of all sense and motion; his countenance soon turns bloated and
blackish; his neck swells; and his face is generally turned toward one
shoulder. He should immediately be laid upon his back on the ground, and the
operator must place himself behind him in such a manner, as to be able to lay
hold of his head with both his hands, while he makes a resistance by placing
his knees against the patient's shoulders. In this position, with one hand
under the chin, and the other under the hinder part of the head, he must pull
with considerable force, gently twisting it at the same time, if the face be
turned to one side, till he perceives that the joint is replaced. This is
easily known from the noise which bones generally makes upon one another in the
very act of reduction, from the patient's beginning soon after to breathe, and
from the head continuing in its proper position, etc. This operation, like many
others, is easier performed than described, and requires only common prudence
and sufficient resolution in the operator. I have known instances of its being
happily performed even by women, and frequently by men of no medical education.

THOUGH dislocations of the limbs are less dangerous, they ought nevertheless to
be reduced as soon as possible. When the operation is long delayed it becomes
very difficult, and sometimes even impractible. Besides, when a bone has been
dislocated for a considerable time, it can seldom be kept in its place after it
has been reduced. A mechanical genius, with a very slight notion of the
structure of the human body, will enable any person to reduce a dislocated
bone. All that is necessary is to make a proper exstension and at the same
time, to push the head of the bone toward the socket We intended here to have
treated of the various kinds of dislocations, and to have shown the method of
reducing them; but this the limits of our performance will not permit.
.

AFTER the bone has been reduced, a roller wet with equal parts of vinegar and
water may be applied round the joint. The member ought to be placed in the most
natural and easy posture, and kept so for some time, till the parts recover
their wonted strength and tone.

OF BROKEN BONES.
THERE are in most country villages some person who pretends to the art of
reducing fractures. Though in general such persons are very ignorant, yet some of
them are very successful; which evidently proves, that a small degree of
learning, with a sufficient share of common sense, will enable a man to be
useful in this way. We would however advise people never to trust such
operators when an expert and skilful surgeon can be had; but when that is
impracticable, they must be employed; we shall therefore recommend the
following hints to their consideration.

WHEN a large bone is broken, the patient's diet ought, in all respects to be
the same as that of a person in a fever. He should likewise be kept quiet and
cool, and his belly should be kept gently open either by emollient clysters,
or, if these cannot be conveniently administered, by food that is of an opening
quality; as stewed prunes, apples boiled in milk, boiled spinnage, etc. It
ought however to be here remarked, that persons who have been accustomed to
live high, are not all of a sudden to be reduced to a very low diet. This might
have fatal consequences. There is often a necessity of indulging bad habits, in
some measure, even where the nature of the disease might require a different
treatment.

IT will generally be necessary to bleed the patient after a fracture,
especially if he be young, of a full habit, or has, at the same time, received
any bruise or contusion. This operation should be performed as soon after the
accident happens as possible, and if the patient be very feverish, it may be
repeated next day. When several of the ribs are broken, bleeding is peculiarly
necessary.

IF any of the large bones which support the weight of the body be broken, the
patient must keep his bed for several weeks. It is by no means however
necessary that he should lie all this while, as is customary, upon his back.
This situation sinks the spirits, galls and frets the patients skin, and
renders him very uneasy. After the second week he may be gently raised up, and
may sit several hours, supported by a bed chair, or the like, which will
greatly relieve him. Great care however must be taken in raising him up, and
laying him down, that he exert no strength of his own, otherwise the action of
the muscles may pull the bone out of its place.

IT is of great importance to keep the patient dry and clean while in this
situation. By neglecting this he is often so galled and excoriated, that he is
forced to keep shifting places for ease. I have sometimes known a fractured
thigh bone, after it had lain strait for above a fortnight, misplaced by this
means, and continue bent for life, in spite of all that could be done.

BONE-SETTERS ought carefully to examine whether the bone be not shattered, or
broken into a great many pieces. In this case it will generally be necessary to
have the limb taken off, otherwise a gangrene or mortification may ensue. The
horror which attends the very idea of an amputation often occasions its being
delayed in such cases till too late. I, some time ago, saw a shocking instance
of this in a mason, who had the misfortune to fall from the third story of a
house. In one of his legs, which had struck a beam, the bones were so shattered
and split near the ^ncle, that they felt almost like a bag of small stones.
Some of their sharp points had likewise penetrated the skin. It was advised
that the leg should immediately be taken off; but to this the patient's friends
would not consent. After taking three or four days to consider of it, the
operation was at last determined upon, and was accordingly performed; but alas,
it was in vain! The mortification had already proceeded too far to be stopped,
and the miserable patient died in two days.

WHEN a fracture is accompanied with a wound, it must be dressed in all
respects as a common wound.

All that art can do toward the cure of a broken bone, is to lay it perfectly
straight, and to keep it quite easy. All tight bandages do hurt. They had much
better be wanting altogether. A great many of the bad consequences which
proceed from fractured bones are owing to tight bandages. This is one of the
ways in which the excess of art, or rather the abuse of art, does more mischief
than would be occasioned by the want of it. Some of the most sudden cure^ of
broken bones which were ever known, happened when no bandages were applied at
all. Some method however must be taken to keep the member steady; but this may
be done many ways without bracing it with a tight bandage. We are not however
against the use of bandages altogether. It is only the wrong application of
them which we find fault with.

IN fractures of the ribs, where a bandage cannot be properly used, an adhesive
plaster may be applied over the part. The patient in this case ought to keep
himself quite easy, avoiding every thing that may occasion sneezing, laughing,
coughing or the (...). He ought to keep his body in a straight posture, and
should take care that his stomach be constantly distended, by taking frequently
some light food, and drinking freely of weak watery liquors.

THE most proper external application for a fracture is oxycrate, or a mixture
of vinegar and water. The bandages should be wet with this at every dressing
before they be applied, and the part may be frequently sprinkled with it.

OF STRAINS.
STRAINS are often attended with worse consequences than broken bones. The
reason is obvious; they are generally neglected. When a bone is broken, the
patient is under a necessity of keeping it easy, because he cannot make use of
it; but when a joint is only strained, the person finding he can still make a
shift to move it, is sorry to lose his time for so trifling an ailment. In this
way he deceives himself, and converts into an incurable malady what might have
been removed by only keeping the part easy for a few days.

COUNTRY people generally immerse a strained limb in cold water. This is very
proper, provided it be done immediately, and not kept in too long. But the
custom of keeping the part immersed in cold water for many hours together, is
certainly dangerous. This relaxes instead of bracing the part, and is more
likely to produce a disease than remove one.

WRAPPING a garter, or some other bandage, pretty tight about the strained
part, is likewise of use. It helps to restore the proper tone of the vessels,
and prevents the action of the parts from increasing the disease. It should not
however be applied too tight. I have frequently known bleeding near the
affected part, in violent strains, have a very good effect.

BUT what we would recommend above all things for a strain is ease. It is more
to be depended upon than any medicine, and seldom fails to remove the complaint.

OF ULCERS.
ULCERS may be the consequence of wounds, bruises, or tumors, improperly
treated; but they generally proceed from an ill state of the humors, or what
may be called a bad habit of body.

WHEN this is the case they ought not to be hastily dried up, otherwise it may
prove fatal to the patient. Ulcers happen most commonly in the decline of life;
and persons who neglect exercise and live full, are most liable to them. They
might often be prevented by retrenching some part of the solid food, or by
opening artificial drains, as issues, setons, or the like.

AN ulcer may be known from a wound by its discharging a thin watery humor,
which is often so acrid as to inflame and corrode the skin; by the hardness and
perpendicular situation of its sides or edges, and by the time of its duration,
etc.

IT requires considerable skill to be able to judge when an ulcer ought to be
healed, and when not. In general, all ulcers which proceed from a bad habit of
body should be suffered to continue open at least till the constitution be so
far changed by proper regimen, or the use of medicine; that they seem disposed
to heal of their own accord. Ulcers which are the effect of malignant fevers,
or acute diseases, may generally be healed with safety after the health has
been restored for some time. The cure ought not however to be attempted too
soon, nor at any time without the use of purging medicines and a proper
regimen. When wounds or bruises have by wrong treatment, degenerated into
ulcers, if the constitution be good, they may generally be healed with safety.
Whenulcers either accompany chronical diseases, or come in their stead, they
must be cautiously healed. If an ulcer conduces to the patient's health, it
ought never to be healed; but if, on the contrary, it wastes the strength, and
consumes the patient by a slow ^ever, it should be healed as soon as possible.

WE would earnestly recommend a strict attention to these particulars, to all
who have the misfortune to labor under this disorder, as we have frequently
known people throw away their lives by the want of it, while they were
extolling and generously rewarding those whom they ought to have looked upon as
their murderers.

THE most proper regimen for promoting the cure of ulcers, is to avoid all
spices, all salted and high seasoned food, all strong liquors, and to lessen
the usual quantity (...) flesh meat. The belly ought to be kept gently open by
a diet consisting chiefly of cooling laxative vegetables and by drinking
butter-milk, or whey sweetened with honey or the like. The patient ought to be
constantly cheerful, and should take as much exercise as he can easily bear.

WHEN the bottom and sides of an ulcer seem hard and callous, they may be
sprinkled twice a day with a little red precipitate of mercury, and afterward
dressed with the yellow basilicon ointment. Some choose to have the edges of the
ulcer scarified with a lancet; but this operation ought to be performed by a
surgeon.

LIMEWATER has frequently been known to have very happy effects in the cure of
obstinate ulcers. It may be used in the same manner as directed for the stone
and gravel.

MY late learned and ingenious friend, Dr Whytt, strongly recommends the use of
a solution of the corrosive sublimate of mercury in brandy, for the cure of
obstinate ill conditioned ulcers. I have frequently found this medicine, when
given according to the Doctor's directions, prove very successful; but it
should never be administered without the greatest care. It is made by dissolving
four grains of the corrosive sublimate of mercury in eight ounces of the best
French brandy. The dose is a table-spoonful night and morning; at the same time
washing the sore twice or thrice a day with it. In a letter which I had from
the Doctor a little before his death, he informs me, "That he observed washing
the sore thrice a day with a solution of trible strength was very useful." This
medicine ought always to be prepared with the greatest care, and ought never to
be administered but under the eye of some person of (...) in physic.

OF IMPOSTHUMES, OR BOILS.
BOILS are generally the efforts of Nature to expel noxious humors out of the
body. Their suppuration ought therefore by all means to be promoted. I do not
remember ever to have seen one instance of the constitution being hurt by them,
but have often known it greatly mended, especially when care was taken to
promote a full and free suppuration.

IMPOSTHUMES may proceed from the use of trashy fruits, or any other
unwholesome food, from hunger, excessive labor, or the like. They are attended
with acute pain, hardness, redness of the part, and all the symptoms of
inflammation.

BLEEDING and purging will sometimes discuss these tumors at the beginning;
but as soon as it is evident that matter is collecting, it will be proper to
apply a poultice of bread and milk, with a little oil or fresh butter. This may
be renewed twice a day; and if the suppuration goes slowly on, a raw onion may
be cut into small pieces, or bruised in a mortar, and spread upon the top of
the poultice. This will promote the suppuration more in one day than a simple
poultice will do in three or four.

WHEN the boil turns soft, appears of a white or yellowish color, and is quite
full of matter, if it does not break of itself, it should be opened with a
lancet. This operation is no ways dangerous, and is very little painful, as the
skin is very thin and greatly distended. If no other instrument be at hand, it
may be opened with a large needle; but it is always better to make use of a
lancet or some instrument that will make a pretty large wound, in order that
the matter may be discharged freely.

AFTER the imposthume has broke, or been opened, it may be dressed twice a day
with yellow basilicon ointment, spread upon lint, or a bit of soft rag. It will
still however be proper to keep the poultice applied to it, till such time as
the matter be entirely discharged. After the matter has been discharged, the
patient ought to be purged.

WHEN boils return frequently, it shows a bad state of the humors, and merits
particular attention. The patient ought to be peculiarly attentive to his diet,
and, if the disease proceeds from any error in it, it should be changed as soon
as possible. Repeated purges are generally necessary in the case; and infusions
of the bitter plants, as water-trefoil, camomile-flowers, etc. ought to be
drank freely. Those who are able to afford it, should take a course of the
purging mineral waters.

OF WHITLOWS.
A whitlow is a painful tumor appearing near the end of a finger, the humor
of which is often so sharp as to corrode the tendons and nerves, and sometimes
even the bone itself.

THESE tumors sometimes proceed from the puncture of a sharp body, as a thorn,
a pin, a splinter, or the like. But their most general causes, as was formerly
observed, are sudden changes from cold to heat, or the contrary. Hence the
disease is very common among milk-maids, especially at that season of the year
when they go a milking in a cold nipping frosty morning, and, as soon as they
get home, plunge their hands into warm water, or hold them near the fire.

THE pain of a whitlow is commonly so great, as to render the patient exceeding
restless. It is attended with an inflammation and often with an evident
pulsation. When the humor lies deep, the inflammation spreads over the whole
hand, and sometimes it extends up the arm even to the shoulder. The pain,
inflammation, and fever have sometimes been so violent, in this case, as to
prove mortal.

MANY things are recommended for discussing the inflammation; as bleeding,
blistering, the patient, the holding the part in (...) vinegar, dipping it
frequently in scalding-hot water, and such like. These may sometimes succeed at
the beginning, but they do no good afterward. The safest course is to promote
the suppuration, by applying cataplasms, or poultices of bread and milk, with
boiled camomile flowers. Or, if a more active and ripening poultice be
necessary, the white lilly-root, or a little honey may be added; but these
should not be applied till there be evident signs of a suppuration.

WHEN the inflammation and fever run very high, it will be necessary to bleed
the patient, and to keep him upon a low diet, allowing him to drink freely of
diluting liquors.

WHEN the matter is lodged deep, it is not safe to wait till the tumor breaks
and discharges itself. In this case the matter must be let out by making a deep
incision, otherwise it will corrode and destroy the bone. This operation should
always be performed by a surgeon if one can be had. I have frequently seen one
bone of the finger lost by the matter remaining too long in contact with it.
Indeed whenever the inflammation beings very deep, it is hardly possible to
save the bone.

AFTER the tumor has burst, or been laid open, it may be dressed with the
yellow basilicon ointment, or some other digestive, and a poultice applied over
it. If proud flesh appears, it may be kept down by sprinkling a little burnt
alum over it.

IF any symptoms of a gangrene or mortification appear, as a black, pale or
lived color of the parts, etc. the patient must have immediate recourse to the
bark, a dram of which must be taken every two or three hours. The part must
also be scarified, and fomented with a strong decoction of the bark, or
camomile flowers; to which some spirit of sea salt or strong vinegar, may be
added.

As whitlows and mortifications of the extremities are often the effects of
violent cold, we would advise people who have been exposed to an excessive
degree of it, if their hands or feet are greatly benumbed, to wash them in cold
water, or rub them, for some time with snow, and to keep at a distance from the
fire. This would not only prevent whitlows, but is the only method of restoring
frozen limbs, and of preventing a mortification from extreme cold.

OF RUPTURES.
THIS disease happens most frequently to children and old people. Men are
greatly more liable to it than women, especially those who are naturally of a
weak and relaxed habit. In infants it is generally occasioned by excessive
crying, violent coughing, repeated efforts to vomit, etc. In adults it is
commonly the effect of blows, violent exertions of the strength, as leaping,
carrying great weights, etc. An oily or very moist diet, by inducing a general
relaxation of the solids, is commonly thought to predispose the body to
ruptures.

ON the first appearance of a rupture in an infant it ought to be laid upon its
back, with its head very low. While in this posture, if the gut does not return
of itself, it may easily be put up by gentle pressure. After it is returned, a
piece of sticking plaster may be applied over the part, and a proper truss or
bandage must be constantly worn for a considerable time. The method of making
and applying these rupture-bandages for children is pretty well known. The
child must, as far as possible, be kept from crying, and from all violent
motion, till the rupture is quite healed.

IN adults, when the gut has been forced down with great violence, or happens,
from any cause, to be inflamed, it is often very difficult to return it, and
sometimes quite impracticable without an operation which it is not our business
to describe. As I have been fortunate enough however always to succeed in my
attempts to return the gut, without having recourse to any other means than
what are in the power of every man, I shall very briefly mention the method
which I generally pursue. After the patient has been bled, he must be laid upon
his back, with his head very low, and his breech raised high with pillows. In
this situation flannel-cloths wrung out of a decoction of mallows and
camomile-flowers, or, if these are not at hand, of warm water, must be applied
for a considerable time. A clyster made of this decoction, with a large
spoonful of butter and a little salt, may be afterward thrown up. If these
should not prove successful, recourse must be had to pressure. If the tumor be
very hard, considerable force will be necessary; but it is not force alone
which succeeds here. The operator, at the same time that he makes a pressure
with the palms of his hand, must with his fingers conduct the gut in by the
same aperture through which it came out. The manner of doing this can be much
easier conceived than described. Should all these endeavors prove ineffectual,
clysters of the smoke of tobacco must be tried. These have been often known to
succeed where every other method ^ailed.

AN adult, after the gut has been returned, must wear a steel-bandage. It is
needless to describe these, as they are only to be had from the artists who
make them. They are generally uneasy to the wearer for some time, but by custom
they become quite easy. No person who has had a rupture after he arrived at
man's estate, should ever be without one of these bandages.

PERSONS who have a rupture ought carefully to avoid all violent exercise,
carrying great weights, leaping, running, and the like. They should likewise
avoid windy aliment and strong liquors; and should carefully guard against
catching cold.

OF CASUALTIES.
AS it is often impracticable to obtain even the smallest degree of medical
assistance in many of those accidents which endanger life, we shall conclude
with a few observations upon some of the most common and hazardous of them.

THE first we shall name is the stoppage of substances between the mouth and
the stomach. Though accidents of this kind are unavoidable, yet, generally
speaking, they are the effect of carelessness. Children have a strong
inclination to put every thing in their mouths which they get hold of. This
ought to make nurses careful in keeping every thing from them that they can
swallow, which would be hurtful. Even adults are far less careful in this
respect than they ought to be. Nothing should ever be held in the mouth which
it would be dangerous to swallow, as a fit of coughing, or some other accident,
may force it over. Notwithstanding the numberless accidents which are daily
occasioned by holding pins in the mouth, many women have their mouths, for the
most part, full of them through the day; and some of them even sleep with them
there all night.

WHEN a pin, or any other sharp body is swallowed, it will generally descend
into the stomach, if its head, or blunt end goes foremost; but if the point
goes foremost, it is apt to stop, and when that happens, every effort to force
it down will only serve to fix it faster in. In this case the best way is to
make the patient vomit, either by tickling his throat with a feather, or giving
him a vomit. I have frequently known pins which had s^uck in the gullet for
several days, brought up by swallowing a bit of tough meat tied to a strong
thread, and drawing it quickly up again.

ALL hard or sharp substances, which might hurt or wound the bowels, ought, if
possible, to be discharged upwards. Substances that will dissolve in the
stomach, if they cannot be brought up, may be pushed down. When a mouthful of
solid food stops in the gullet, it may often be forced up by giving the person
a blow on the back betwixt the shoulders. If this should not succeed, the
throat may be tickled with the finger or a feather. I lately saw a halfpenny,
which had stuck fast in the gullet of a boy about eight years old, thrown up by
only thrusting a finger down his throat.

PERSONS who have the misfortune to fall into the water are often given up for
dead, when it is certain they might, by proper care, be recovered. The great
intention which should be kept in view is to restore the natural warmth and
renew the circulation and breathing. Though cold is by no means the cause of the
person's death, yet it will prove an effectual obstacle to his recovery. For
this reason, after stripping him of his wet clothes, if he had any on when the
accident happened, his body must be strongly rubbed for a considerable time
with coarse linen cloths as warm as they can be made. As soon as a bed can be
got ready, and well heated, he may be laid in it, and the ^ubbing still
continued. Warm cloth^ should be laid to his stomach and bowels, and hot
bricks, or bottles filled with warm water, to the soles of his feet. He should
likewise be bled. The most proper part for this operation is in the jugular
vein, both because it is most likely to bleed, and affords the most sudden
relief to the head.

IN order to renew the breathing, a strong person may blow his own breath into
the patient's mouth with all the force he can; or, what will succeed better,
the smoke of tobacco may be blown into the lungs, by means of a pipe or funnel.
I have known a pig drowned and restored to life, two or three different times
successively, by blowing air into its mouth with a pair of bellows. It will
likewise be proper to throw up the smoke of tobacco into the intestines, in
form of a clyster, by means of a proper pipe. Strong volatile salts ought also
to be applied to the nose, or spirits of hartshorn, burnt feathers, etc. The
nose ought likewise to be tickled with a feather dipped in volatile spirits,
and warm spirits of wine should be rubbed upon the temples, pit of the stomach,
etc.

IF these do not succeed, the person may be put into a warm bath, or laid among
warm ashes. Dr T^ssot mentions an instance of a girl who was restored to li^e,
after being taken out of the water to all appearance dead, by laying her naked
body upon hot or warm ashes; by covering her with others equally hot; by
putting a bonnet round her head, with a stocking round her neck stuffed with
the same, and heaping coverings over all.

THE same method must be pursued for the recovery of persons strangled as for
those who are drowned. -- Such as have the misfortune to be stunned by a ^all,
a blow, or the like, must also be treated nearly upon the same principles.
Every method must be taken to keep up the genial warmth, and to restore the
vital functions. Nor ought we to despair too soon of success. I have been happy
enough to recover a person who was taken up for dead by a fall from a horse,
after six hours endeavors, during the greater part of which time he hardly
showed any signs of life.

NOTHING is more certain than that life, when seemingly lost, might often be
restored by persisting for a sufficient time in the use of proper means; and
that many of those unhappy persons who perish by accidents, are really lost for
want of due care. Surely all the laws of religion and humanity call upon us to
do every thing in our power to save the lives of our fellow-men. Who would not
choose to be the happy instrument of preserving an useful member of society, and
perhaps of preventing the ruin of an innocent family?

FINIS.
A DISSERTATION ON THE GOUT, AND ALL CHRONIC DISEASES, JOINTLY CONSIDERED, As
proceeding from the same CAUSES; What those CAUSES are; AND A rational and
natural METHOD of CURE proposed. Addressed to all INVALIDS.

By WILLIAM CADOGAN, FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS.

Quod petis in te est.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for and Sold by R. AITKEN, at his Book-Store, nearly
opposite the London-Coffee-house, in Front-street.

PREFACE.
TO enjoy good health is better than to command the world, says a celebrated
practical philosopher St. Evremond.
, who understood the use and value of life and health better than most men; for
in exile, with a small income, and no very good constitution, he cultivated an
uncommon length of days into a rational series of pleasures; and what is much
more, an uninterrupted course of happiness. But, as far as I can find, he was
almost the only man that did so. The generality of men seem to me not to bestow
a thought upon either, till it be too late to reap the benefit of their
conviction; so that health, like time, becomes valuable only when it is lost;
and we can no longer think of it but with retrospect and regret.

THAT men in good health, the young and gay in their career, should be
negligent of it, or abuse it, refusing to stop and listen to, or take warning
from others, is no great wonder; but it is very suprizing that mankind in
general should be mistaken and misled forever in the same perpetual round of
fruitless attempts to repair and establish it; not the ignorant vulgar only,
but the sensible, the judicious, men of parts and knowledge in other things, in
this case equally blind, should pursue, with the same vain hope, after repeated
disappointments, the thousand and ten thousand idle arts and tricks of
medication and quackery.

IT has been of great disservice, as well as discredit to the art of Physic,
and every fair practiser of it, that men's expectations have been raised by the
ignorant and presuming, or the dishonest and artful, to hope for too much from
it, more than it ever did, or can do. Respite and relief may be had in most
chronic cases; remedy, I fear, but in very few, if it be expected from art
alone. But a skilful and honest physician (unless he be sent for too late and
dismissed too soon, which is generally the case) will employ those intervals of
relief to introduce the powers of life and nature to act for themselves, and
insensibly withdrawing, all his medicines, and watching carefully over his
patient's whole conduct, leave him confirmed, from conviction of their
necessity, in such good and salutary habits as cannot fail to establish his
health for life.

POSSIBLY, if men were better informed of the real causes of their diseases,
they might be less unreasonable in their demands, and learn to be contented
with present relief, submitting with patience to that plan of life which alone
can lead them to, and preserve them in, permanent health. With this view of
engaging men's attention to their own happiness, and undeceiving them in their
vain and groundless hopes of remedy, and diverting them from the delusions of
art to the realities of nature, I have ventured to publish the following
Dissertation, which I must beg the Reader to consider as, what it really is, a
hasty extract of a much larger work, intended to take in the whole circle of
Chronic Diseases, here comprehended only in their representative the Gout. If
what I have said may seem to want farther illustration, or more demonstrative
proof, he will look upon it only as a sketch to furnish hints for his own
thoughts and reflections, either to improve mine or reject them entirely, as
may seem good unto him. If he thinks, from what I have said here, or in the
brochure itself, that I mean to impeach the practice of physic in general; I
say that it is not my intention. I would decry all quacks, from AEsculapius to
the present, either as ignorant fools, or self-convicted impostors, advertising
daily lies, whether mounted on stages, or riding in chariots. But the art of
physic fairly and honestly practiced I honor as the first of professions,
comprehending the most useful, the most extensive and universal knowledge of
nature. I think a real Physician the most liberal of characters upon earth; by
which I do not mean every Doctor that goes about taking guineas, but him who
will neither flatter the great nor deceive the ignorant, and who would prefer
the satisfaction of making one invalid a healthy man, to the wealth of Radcliff
or the vogue of Ward. But there is an evil spirit of quackery gone forth, that
has possessed all orders of men among us. I would lay it, if I could, together
with every demon of superstition and error, and restore the world to truth and
nature.

A DISSERTATION ON THE GOUT, etc.
HOWEVER common it may be for men that suffer to complain of the evils of life,
as the unavoidable lot of humanity; would they s^op but for a moment to
consider them in the light of reason and philosophy, they would find little or
no foundation for them in nature; but that every man was the real author of all
or most of his own miseries. Whatever doubts may ^e entertained of moral evils,
the natural, for the most part, such as bodily infirmity, sickness and pain,
all that class of complaints which ^he learned call chronic diseases, we most
undoubtedly bring upon ourselves by our own indulgencies, excesses o^ mistaken
habits of life, or by suffering our ill-conducted passions to lead us astray or
disturb our peace of mind. Whatever notions m^n have been taught or have
received of other causes, such as accidental colds, or particularities of
(...), this or that thing disagreeing or (...), etc. th^se are too trifling to
produce diseases that commonly last ^or life: there must be something more
substantial, something (...) constant and permanent in our daily habits, to
produce such inveterate evils. Though if you read authors or consult
practitioners, what do you find, but that you have taken cold (though you know
not how,) or that your complaints are gouty, rheumatic, bilious, nervous, etc?
words that satisfy, though they give no (...) of idea, and seem to have gained
credit and assent only by the politeness of physicians, who, while they are
taking their patients money, are too well bred to tell them disagreeable
truths, and that it is by their own faults they are ill. To enquire a little
further into this matter may be well worth our trouble; the task seems to have
been left for me, and I will perform it most sincerely.

I HAVE long had it in my mind to write upon chronic diseases in general, in
the hope of giving mankind, what most assuredly they have never yet had, a few
rational ideas about them; thinking that, if the true original causes of them
were fully and fairly set forth, men could not be so capitally mistaken to
impute them, as they do, to the false and imaginary, and therefore apply false
and imaginary remedies; nor think that the general health of mankind were to be
overset by every trifle, and the recovery of it lay hid in a few drops or
powders of any kind. Did they better understand the nature of chronic diseases
in general, and whence they proceed, they could not be so unreasonable to think
they might live as they list with impunity, expecting repeated remedy from art;
or, did they know any thing o^ the nature of medicine, they would find that,
though (...) of pain have been relieved, or sickness cured by it for a time,
the establishment of health is a very different thing, depending upon other
powers and principles: the first may be and often is done by medicine, the
other never. That their opinion of medicine is vain and ridiculous must appear,
I think, very evidently to any one who recollects that the art of physic ha^
now been practiced, more or less regularly, above two thousand years; and most
assuredly there is not yet discovered any one certain remedy for any disease.
Ought not this to make us (...) that there is no such thing? How can it be,
when different degrees of the very same diseases require various means and
methods, and the same thing that in one degree would relieve, or perhaps cure,
in another might kill? It is by plan, by regimen, and successive intention,
that diseases must be cured, when they are curable; or relieved and palliated
when they are not. The skilful in medicine, and learned in nature, know well
that health is not to be established by medicine; for its effects are but
momentary, and the frequent repetition of it destructive to the strongest
frames; that if it is to be restored, it must be by gently calling forth the
powers of the body to act for themselves, introducing gradually a little more
and more activity, chosen diet, and, above all, peace of mind, changing
entirely that course of life which first brought on the disease: medicine
cooperating a little. That this is the truth, all who know any thing of nature
or art must know: and I may safely take upon me to say, that, though I firmly
believe health may be restored in most cases that are not absolutely mortal, I
am very sure that no invalid was ever made a healthy man by the mere power of
medicine. If this be the case, how must the initiated, according as their
humanity is touched, either laugh at or pity the poor foolish world,
surrendering at discretion to the most ignorant of quacks, pretending to
infalliable remedies which are not in nature. But what is still more
ridiculous, the patient's themselves are often so ashamed to own they have been
deluded, that they favor the cheat, by pretending to relief which they never
felt.

I HAVE collected a few materials for this work which I intend to put in order,
as soon as I can find time and industry enough to set about it in earnest; and,
if I can finish it to my own satisfaction, perhaps I may some time or other
trouble the world with it. At present I think myself particularly called upon
to say something of the gout, as that disease was to make a considerable part
of my plan; and, as I see now so many, and hear of more, who are throwing away,
not only their money very foolishly, but, as I verily believe, the future
health of their lives also, in hopes of a medical cure for it, to show that
such hopes are chymerical, and contradictory to every idea of true philosophy
and common sense.

I SHALL therefore take a few extracts from this general plan, sufficient to
show the real original causes of all chronic diseases; which, though they have
been multiplied without end, and numberless causes been assigned them, are
certainly not many, and their first causes very few. I think they may very
fairly be reduced to these three: Indolence, Intemperance, and Vexation.

FROM one or more of these three causes, I have undertaken to prove that all or
most chronic diseases are produced; for different diseases may have the same
original cause, the difference proceeding from the various degrees of strength
and vigor in bodies; so that what would be gout in one, in another might be
rheumatism, stone, colic, jaundice, palsy, etc. The gout is manifestly, and I
think confessedly, a disease of the best constitution, and may therefore fairly
stand as a representative of all the rest: as such I shall consider it for the
present, and speak of these causes in their order: but it may be necessary to
say a word or two of the gout itself before we enquire into its causes.

THE gout is so common a disease, that there is scarcely a man in the world,
whether he has had it or not, but thinks he knows perfectly what it is. So does
a cook-maid think she knows what fire is as well as Sir Isaac Newton. It may
therefore seem needless at present to trouble ourselves about a definition, to
say what it is: but I will venture to say what I am persuaded it is not, though
contrary to the general opinion. It is not hereditary, it is not periodical,
and it is not incurable.

IF it were hereditary, it would be necessarily transmitted from father to son,
and no man whose father had it could possibly be free from it: but this is not
the case, there are many instances to the contrary: it is therefore not
necessarily so; but the father's having it inclines or disposes the Son to it.
This is the causa pr^egum^na or praedisponent of the learned, which of itself
never produced any effect at all; there must be joined the causa procatarctica,
or active efficient cause, that is, our own intemperance or mistaken habit of
li^e, to produce it; and accordingly, as this operates more or less, so will
the gout be. Our parents undoubtedly give us constitutions similar to their
own, and, if we live in the same manner they did, we shall very probably be
troubled with the same diseases; but this by no means proves them to be
hereditary: it is what we do ourselves that will either bring them on, or keep
us free.

IF it were hereditary, it would appear in infancy and in women, which in
general it does not. I may be told of some women who have had it. I believe
never very young, nor till they had contributed to it themselves; for women, as
well as men, may abuse a good constitution. I have heard likewise of a boy or
two out of a million that had it, or something like it; but these boys have
been suffered to sip wine very early, and been fed and indulged every way most
unwholesomely.

No diseases are hereditary but those of taint or infection, and maleformation;
the gout is none of these, and therefore is not hereditary.

IF the gout be a disease of indigestion, and therefore of our own acquiring,
we must reason very ill, or rather not reason at all, when we say it is
hereditary; for surely no man will say that indigestion is hereditary, any more
than intemperance. There are whole nations of active people knowing no luxury,
who for ages have been free from it, but have it now since the Europeans have
brought them wine and spirits.

IF the gout be thought hereditary because it is incurable by medicine, the
same may be said of every other chronic disease, none of which ever are cured
by it, I mean, so as not to return again. When was there a man who, having had
one ^it of rheumatism, stone, colic, etc. however happily relieved by art for a
time, had it not again and again, or something worse in the place of it; till
he became a confirmed invalid, and died long before his time; unless some very
remarkable alteration took place in the course of his life to confirm his
health? So it is in the gout: a man gets a fit of it, and by abstinence,
patience, time and nature, the crude acrimony producing it is subdued and
exhausted, and he is relieved for that time; (he might be so much sooner, and
very safely too, by the assistance of art, judiciously employed) he recovers
however, and in a few months is taken again. Why? Not from any thing inherent
in his constitution, but because he returned to his former habit of life that
produced it at first, and will forever produce it, while the strength of his
body lasts.

THE truth is, we breed it at first, we renew it again and again, and bring it
on ourselves by our own mistakes or faults, which we would fain excuse by
throwing them back upon our parents, that our complaints may be more justly
founded. And as bankrupts, undone by idleness and extravagance, for ever plead
losses and misfortunes; so do we inheritance to exculpate ourselves.

IT is natural enough for those who believe the gout hereditary to think it
also periodical, as if something innate and inherent in our constitutions
produced it at certain times: but this is a great mistake; for, if it were
periodical, it must be regularly so. The only periodical disease I know is the
intermittent fever, which, till it be disturbed by the bark or any other
febrifuge, is as regular as a good clock. The returns of the gout are always
very uncertain, according to the quantity or quality of accumulated indigestion
within, and the strength of our bodies.

I come now to show that the gout is not incurable. If by the cure of the gout
be meant the administering a pill or a powder or medicine of any kind to do it,
I fear the gout is and ever will be incurable. It has been long and often
attempted in vain, from the origin of physic to this day, from the first quack
to the present. Indeed there is a most glaring absurdity at first sight, that
must stop any man of common sense, who has the least insight into nature, or
knowledge of the human frame: for if the gout be the necessary effect of
intemperance, as I hope to show very evidently that it is, a medicine to cure
it must be something that will enable a man to bear the daily intemperance of
his future life unhurt by the gout or any other disease; that is, something
given now that will take away the effect of a future cause. As well might a
medicine be given now to prevent a man's breaking his leg or his neck seven
years hence. One would think the utmost that any rational man could expect from
medicine was, that it should have power to relieve and quite remove present
disorders, leaving the body free, without pretending to insure it from further
injuries. Here lies the error: men think the gout to be something latent in the
body now, which, once well eradicated would never return; not suspecting it to
be no more than each days indigestion accumulated to a certain pitch; that, as
long as the vigor of life lasts, always brings on every fit, which once well
over, the man has no more gout nor seeds of gout in him than he who never had
it; and, if he did not breed it again, most certainly would never have it
again. A proof of this is, that the gout has often been cured by a milk diet,
which, as long as it lasted, has generally kept the patient free. But this
method of cure I cannot approve, because it relaxes and enervates the man, and
does not sufficiently support the health and vigor of his body.

THOUGH I think the gout incurable by medicine, it is so far from being
incurable in its nature, that I am firmly persuaded it may be more easily and
more perfectly cured than almost any other chronic disease; and this is another
strong argument that proves it not hereditary. My reason is, that it is
confessedly a disease of the strongest and best constitution relieving itself
by throwing off harsh and bad humors from the vitals and out of the blood upon
the extremities, where they do least harm to the powers and principles of life
and health; and as these humors can be nothing more than the daily
accumulations of indigestion, if a man can live without breeding-constantly
this indigested acrimony, he may most undoubtedly live free not only from the
gout, but every other chronic disease also. And that he may live so, not in a
perpetual state of mortification and self-denial, but with great ease and
comfort to himself, in the truest, most philosophic luxury, I shall endeavor
to prove, I hope to the satisfaction of all thinking reasonable men.

I have said that Indolence. Intemperance, and Vexation, are the original
causes of all or most of our chronic diseases: perhaps a few accidents must be
excepted, to which the strongest and healthiest are most liable, and the
effects of fevers not happily ended; and which I except, to obviate all cavil
and dispute with the men of art. I believe, to every considerate man, whose
eyes have been opened so as to give him the least insight into nature, the
truth of this proposition will be so self-evident, that he must instantly
perceived it; and every invalid that will be candid enough to do it, may fairly
trace all his complaints up to one or other of these causes. But it may requite
some explanation to the generality of men, who are so short-sighted as never to
look back or forward far beyond the ken of their nose, and therefore never see
either distant causes or effects: and when they are sick seldom enquire more
than for some cold or surfeit of yesterday, and to some such trifling cause
impute diseases that last for life. An accidental cold or even debauch that
happens but seldom can have no such effect; and men otherwise healthy, living
in good habits, soon get rid of both. It is the constant course of life we
lead, what we do, or neglect to do, habitually every day, that if right
establishes our health, if wrong, makes us invalids for life.

MEN ignorant of the ways of nature in the production and support of animals,
not knowing what she requires to preserve them in health and vigor to their
utmost period, have conceived very strange and most assuredly very false ideas
of diseases in general, and seem to think every disease a distinct kind of
being or thing, and that there are medicines opposed to each that will
certainly remove and cure it. This makes them so sollicitous to know the name
of their complaint, which once ascertained, they think the remedy not far off.
Poor men! Is not the gout sufficiently distinguished? But where is the remedy?
Certainly not in the precarious skill of prescribing doctors, or the secret of
ignorant and enterprizing quacks. They fancy too that there is great variety of
constitutions, with diseases unavoidably peculiar to each: that certain times
of life must produce many, and that it is impossible to grow old without
sickness of some kind or other. There is certainly no foundation in nature for
any of these opinions, nor is there any real essential difference of
constitution, but of strong or weak, and this is produced more by habit than
nature. The strong by bad habits will become weaker, and by good the weak
stronger. But the most delicate frames may be as healthy as the strongest, for
the same reason that a sparrow may be as healthy as an elephant. There is no
disease necessarily peculiar to any time of life, however the changes into the
different stages of it may effect the valetudinary. And it is possible for men
to live to great age without any disease at all, for many have lived to upwards
of an hundred with uninterrupted health.

NOT from the natural defects of our constitutions therefore, but the abuse of
them, proceed all our chronic diseases. That is, from Indolence, Intemperance,
or Vexation.

LET us now proceed to enquire what must be the necessary effects of one or
more of these causes acting daily upon the body; whether in the strongest and
most vigorous frames it must not be the gout; in weaker, rheumatism, colic,
stone, palsy, etc. or any or all of the nervous and hysterical class.

FIRST, of Indolence, by which I do not mean insensibility, but an inactive
habit of life, taking the word in the general common sense it is now used.

Of INDOLENCE.
IT seems to have been the design of Providence, that all men should labor,
every one for himself: that some are rich enough to purchase the labor of
others is a mere accident with regard to individuals, in which the care of
Providence appears to be no otherwise concerned, than having unequally
distributed those powers and abilities by which active and fiery spirits rise
uppermost to preserve the harmony of subordination, without which society could
never exist. The rich and great have so far forgot this first principle of
nature, that they renounce all bodily labor as unworthy their condition, and
thus sacrificing health to indulgence and dignity, they do not enjoy those
advantages their superior stations and fortunes give them; but in happiness
fall often below the laboring hind. I remember to have seen a very ingenious
little book upon the origin of evil, in which labor is considered as a great
evil. The agreeable author must surely mean when it is excessive, and urged on
to the wearing and wasting the body. In general labor is the first principle
of good to mankind; I mean the laborious themselves. Does he mean that it would
be better for us all, did the earth spontaneously bring forth her fruits in
such abundance that we should no more labor or contend for them than we do for
the air, and have nothing to do but bask in ease, and riot in enjoyment? If so,
I can by no means agree with him; for soon, very soon, in such a state of
things, there would not be one healthy man upon the earth, and the whole race
must quickly perish. Indeed, I am afraid, notwithstanding all our unreasonable
and unphilosophical complainings, the utmost wit of man can not remove the
least evil out of nature, without taking with it all the good. But begging
pardon for this little digression, and to come back to my own purpose, I think
he had been nearer the truth, had he put Indolence in its stead, which is a
source of great evil. Nothing undermines the foundation of all our happiness,
the health and vigor of the body, like it, or lays such a train of diseases to
come. But I must endeavor to show in what manner.

IT is upon the minutest and almost invisible parts of the body, our best
health, strength, and spirits depend: these fine parts, commonly called
capillaries, are little pipes or tubes, the extended continuations of the
larger blood vessels, through which the finest parts of the blood must
constantly pass, not only to keep these very small channels always free and
open, but also that the particles of the blood may in their passage be
attenuated, broken, and rubbed into globules perfectly smooth and round, and
easily divisible into still less and less, till they escape the sight assisted
even by the microscope; which gives ocular demonstration of this most amazingly
minute circulation. I have observed myself, and any curious patient man may see
with a good microscope, in the pellucid membrane of any living animal, this
surprising minuteness. He may select and observe one single vessel, the
smallest of those that convey red blood, many of which would not equal the
smallest hair in size, through which the blood may be seen passing, not like a
fluid, but a number of little red solid balls pushing one another on till they
come to the extremity or ramification of the vessel where it divides into two
still less. There the first globule stopping a little, and recoiling, is pushed
on again till it divides into two, and losing its red color, passes on in the
smaller pipes fitted only to receive the circulation of serum, lymph, and
perhaps still finer fluids; which being thus prepared, escape into a minuteness
beyond all possible observation. Now the strength of the heart and arteries
alone, in a sedentary course of life, is by no means sufficient to keep up and
perpetuate this motion through these capillaries, but requires the assistance and
joint force of all the muscles of the body to act by intervals, compress the
veins, propel and accelerate the circulation of the whole mass of blood, in
order to force and clear these pipes, and to triturate, cribate, and purify the
fluid passing through, forming every particle of it into a perfect globule,
which is the form all the atoms of matter must take from much agitation.
Without this extraordinary occasional aid, the little vessels would, by their
natural elasticity, close up into fibers, or be obstructed by rough angular
particles sticking in them, and stopping all passage. Numberless evils of the
chronic kind, especially all nervous diseases, owe their origin to this cause
alone. Accordingly we see most of those who have lived for any time in a state
of indolence, grow emaciated and pale by the drying up of these fine vessels;
or if they happen to be of a lax habit, having a good appetite, and nothing to
vex them, they may be loaded with fat; but they grow pale withal, many of those
fine pipes being nevertheless closed up; so that they appear bloated, and their
fat unwholesome, having much less blood in their veins than thinner people.
Hence we may learn why these languid pale persons upon the least motion become
saint and breathless, the blood hurrying through the larger vessels yet free,
and like a crowd obstructing its own passage causing a dangerous suffocation.
Or if they have not been long in this state, nor the capillaries yet quite
closed, they glow, especially young women, with a momentary red, the fine
vessels being for that time expanded. Thus inactivity first forms obstructions
in these exquisitely fine parts, upon which the health and vigor both of body
and mind depend entirely, and lays the foundation of many diseases to come;
which other concomitant circumstances, such as a violent cold, excess of any
kind, infection from without, or a particular disposition of ^he body within,
make often fatal to many in this habit of life; and which the industrious and
active never feel.

NOW I would ask any reasonable person, capable of considering this operation
of nature with the least glimmering of philosophy, or even the attention of
common sense, and most assuredly it concerns every man to consider it well,
whether he can conceive it possible to substitute any medicine to be swallowed,
that shall act upon the blood and vessels like the joint force of all the
muscles of the body, acting and reacting occasionally in a regular course of
moderate daily labor or exercise. Unless this can be done, I will venture to
pronounce that there is no such thing as a lasting cure either for the gout or
any other chronic disease. yes, Sir, says a common practitioner, cordials,
volatiles, bracers, strengtheners, will do this, will keep up an increased
circulation. Possibly they may for a few hours, by doing mischief for many
days: but their action soon subsides, and the stimulus ceases; they must
therefore be repeated and repeated for life. Woe be to him that takes them, and
to him that leaves them off, unless it be done with great judgment. While they
act, they coagulate the juices and corrupt the whole mass of blood; and when
omitted, the patient must feel all the languors and horrors of a crapulary
fever after repeated debauch; and must have recourse to them again and again,
like a dram-drinker, who cannot bear his existence but in a state of
intoxication. No, art can ever come up to nature in this most salutary of all
her operations.

BUT these obstructions from crude particles of the blood, and this inanition
of the capillaries, are not all the evils produced by indolence. That sprightly
vigor and alacrity of health which we feel and enjoy in an active course of
life, that zest in appetite, and refreshment after eating, which sated luxury
seeks in vain from art, is owing wholly to new blood made every day from fresh
food prepared and distributed by the joint action of all the parts of the body.
No man can have these lightful sensations who lives two days with the same
blood, but must be languid and spiritless. To introduce new juices the old must
be first thrown off, or there will be no room, there will be too great a
plethora or fullness; the first cause of diseases in many cases. In a state of
inactivity the old humors pass off so slowly, the insensible perspiration is
so inconsiderable, that there is no void to be filled, consequently by degrees
the appetite, which is the last thing that decays, that is, the desire of
supply, must daily diminish, and at last be totally lost. Here art can do
wonders; it can procure evacuations; we can bleed, purge and vomit; but then,
to do any good by these, the case must be recent, before the humors are
vitiated by too long a stay in the body, which will be the case very soon, for
they are all in a perishable state, which makes their daily renewal so
essentially necessary to health: but then these artificial evacuations
discharge all alike; the new, the middle, and the old juices; that is, the
chyle, the blood, the serum, and lymph; and by this indiscriminate action make
strange confusion in those that remain: whereas in nature's course there is a
constant regular transmutation and succession, from one state to another; that
is, from chyle into blood, and blood into serum, and so on, till they are all
in their turn, like wave impelling wave, having done their office in various
shapes, elaborated and ground to such a minute subtlety and fineness, that they
pass off in the vapor of insensible perspiration. In a state of indolence they
do not pass off either so soon or so regularly as they ought, because there is
not motion, nor consequently heat enough to thr^^ off the vapor: they lodge in
the body too long, grow putrid, acrimonious, and hurtful many ways, like the
matter formed in an ulcer, which while it is yet sweet, there is no balsam the
surgeon can apply so healing, but when confined, soon becomes corrosive,
andlike a caustic eats its way all round in ^^^^ulas to find vent. This shows
the virulent acrimony of these confined and stagnating humors: hence the
breath and perspiration, what there is of it occasionally, of indolent people
is never sweet; and hence in jails, where those noxious vapors are collected
and condensed from crowded wretches languishing in indolence, very malignant
and pestilential fevers arise.

PERPETUAL blisters have been often thought, and sometimes found, to be
serviceable in draining off some of these superfluous juices before they are
much corrupted, and making, by a faint resemblance of nature's action, a little
more ^^om for new; and it is for this reason they do any good at all, by
increasing the general circulation, and forcing off a few of those humors that
had circulated too long in the body, and were becoming acrid: for the quantity
they discharge is so trifling, that there could be no physiology, nor even
common sense, in supposing the evacuation to be the benefit procured. By a
vomit or purge the discharge is a hundred fold more, but the good obtained not
always so great, because by these the humors are indiscriminately thrown off,
and much more of the new than the old. Many have used frequent bleeding to
renew their blood, and I have known it answer very well to some, especially old
people who had been long accustomed to it, whom it preserved to great age; but
then it must be begun in time, before the whole mass of humors be vitiated,
and continued for life. Is it not strange that men should seek and prefer these
violent artificial methods to the simple, easy, pleasant and constant action of
nature, and chus^ rather to take a vomit or a purge than a walk, and wear a
perpetual blister than make the least use of their limbs?

THUS indolence must inevitably lay the foundation of general disease, and
according to the constitution and a few concomitant circumstances will be the
kind of the disease: in the very best it may be gout or rheumatism; in weaker
habits colic, jaundice, palsy, etc. with all of the hysterical and
hypochondriacal class. In vain have ingenious men of reading and study, mental
labor and sedentary life, who are more subject to disease in general than the
gay and thoughtless, endeavored to obviate the evil by abstinence, an
excellent means of remedy (...) many cases, and which few practice but true
philosophers, who are not the most likely to want it. But yet even they do not
find it answer, and for the reasons which I have just given, that we cannot
live two days in health and spirits with the same blood: there must be a new
daily supply of that ethereal part of our food called up to the brain to
support its own, as well as the labor of the whole body. By this I mean the
most elaborated refined part of all our juices which constantly repairs and
nourishes the smallest vessels and fibers. Whenever this ether fails we must
necessarily feel languor and lassitude both of body and mind. With this
difference, that in weariness of the limbs from much action the lees and
coarser parts are thrown off also, and the first meal and first sleep soon
supplies the defect. In mental labor the feculence remains to obstruct all
appetite; there is no room, and therefore no call for supply; the whole man
suffers and sinks.

Of INTEMPERANCE.
I COME now to speak of Intemperance, for Indolence, blunting all our
sensations, naturally leads us to Intemperance: we want the whip and spur of
luxury to excite our jaded appetites. There is no enduring the perpetual moping
languor of indolence: we fly to the stimulating sensualities of the table and
the bottle, friend provokes friend to exceed and accumulate one evil upon
another; a joyous momentary relief is obtained, to be paid for severely soon
after: the next morning our horrors increase, and in this course there is no
remedy but repetition. Thus whoever is indolent is intemperate also, and partly
from necessity; and the evils necessarily following both these causes often
make the rich and great more wretched than the poor, and the balance of
happiness is held more equally between them; for however other things may be
distributed, happiness like water always finds its level among men. I wish this
observation might cure these of their envy, and teach the others how to enjoy
their wealth.

BEFORE I return to my subject, I fear I must make an apology for what I am
going to say, and hope no one will be offended when I venture to say that nine
in ten of all the chronic diseases in the world, particularly the gout, owe
their first rise to intemperance. Many a good man, who piques himself upon
being the most sober regular creature alive, and never eats but of one or two
plain dishes, as he calls them, nor exceeds his pint of wine at any meal; keeps
good hours, and never sleeps above eight or nine, may be surprised, if not
affronted, to have his diseases imputed to intemperance; which he considers as
a great crime. And yet he is often ill, sick in his stomach, troubled with
indigestion, and crippled by the gout. The case is, we judge of temperance and
intemperance from our own habits, without any just idea of either. What we are
used to do, and see others do, we think right, and never go up to nature for
our knowledge. The best way to explain what I mean by intemperance, may be to
enquire what is nature's law of temperance, and to deviate from that must be
considered as intemperance. And here I must beg leave to observe, that
temperance is a thing of which no Englishman has or can have the least idea, if
he judges from his own or his neighbors habits. To form some notion of it he
must have seen other countries, particularly Spain, Portugal or Italy, and
observed how men live there. What they call temperance or even tolerable
living, with us would be thought downright starving. In this view temperance is
local and comparative; but what I mean is natural temperance not depending upon
place or custom (for I do not mean fasting or abstinence, which can never be
salutary but after repletion) and we must not judge of it from countries where
a piece of bad bread and an onion with a draught of water is thought a
tolerable meal; nor from our own, where beggars live better than the nobles of
some countries, and where we riot in the choice of plenty native and exotic
every day.

To come then to my idea of it, I think there is an absolute, determined
temperance, to be measured by every man's natural unprovoked appetite,
digestion and consumption, while he continues in a good state of health, and
right habit of life. As long as a man eats and drinks no more than his stomach
calls for and will bear without the least pain, distention, eructation or
uneasiness of any kind; nor than his body consumes and throws off to the last
grain; he may be said to live in a very prudent well-regulated state of
temperance, that will probably preserve him in health and spirits to great old
age.

THIS is nature's law: and the reverse of it, or indeed any great deviation
from it, must be intemperance. When we eat without appetite, or urge beyond
moderate satiety, provoked by incentives of any kind: when we drink without
thirst for the sake of the liquor; indeed I cannot allow him to be strictly
temperate who drinks any wine or strong liquor at all, unless it be
medicinally, or now and then for the sake of society and good humor, but by no
means every day.

Now let us compare this simple idea of temperance with the common course of
most men's lives, and observe their progress from health to sickness. For I
fear we shall find but very few who have any pretensions to real temperance. In
early youth we are insensibly led into intemperance by the indulgence and
mistaken fondness of parents and friends wishing to make us happy by
anticipation. Having thus exhausted the first degrees of luxury before we come
to the dominion of ourselves, we should find no pleasure in our liberty did we
not advance in new sensations, nor feel ourselves free but as we abuse it. Thus
we go on till some friendly pain or disease bids, or rather forces us to stop.
But in youth all the parts of our bodies are strong and flexible, and bear the
first loads of excess with less hurt, and throw them off soon by their own
natural vigor and action, or with very little assistance from artificial
evacuation. As we grow older, either by nature in d^^ time, or repeated
excesses before our time, the body is less able to free itself and wants more
aid from art. The man however goes on taking daily more than he wants or can
possibly get rid of, he feels himself replete and oppressed, and his appetite
failing his spirits sink for want of fresh supply. He has recourse to dainties,
sauces, pickles, provocatives of all sorts. These soon lose their power; and
though he washes down each mouthful with a glass of wine, he can relish
nothing. What is to be done? Send for a physician. Doctor, I have lost my
stomach; pray give me, says he, with great innocence and ignorance, something
to give me an appetite; as if want of appetite was a disease to be cured by
art. In vain would the physician, moved by particular friendship to the man, or
that integrity he owes to all men, g^ve him the best advice in two words,
quaere sudando, seek it by labor. He would be thought a man void of all
knowledge and skill in his profession, if he did not immediately, or after a
few evacuations, prescribe stomachics, bitter spicy infusions in wine or
brandy, vitriolic elixirs, bark, steel, etc. By the use of these things the
stomach, roused to a little extraordinary action, frees itself, by discharging
its crude, austere, coagulated contents into the bowels, to be thence forwarded
into the blood. The man is freed for a time, finds he can eat again, and thinks
all well. But this is a short-liv^d delusion. If he is robust, the acrimony
floating in the blood will be thrown out, and a fit of gout succeeds; if less
so, rheumatism or colic, etc. as I have already said. But let us suppose it to
be the gout, which if he bears patiently, and lives moderately, drinking no
madeira or brandy to keep it out of his stomach, nature will relieve him in a
certain time, and the gouty acrimony concocted and exhausted by the symptomatic
fev^r that always attends, he will recover into health; if assisted by
judicious, mild, and soft medicines, his pains might be greatly assuaged and
mitigated, and he would recover sooner. But however he recovers, it is but for
a short time; for he returns to his former habits, and quickly brings on the
same round of complaints again and again, all aggravated by each return, and he
le^^ able to (...); till he becomes a confirmed invalid and cripple (...) with
a great deal of useless medication and a (...) to (...), he drags on, till, in
spite of all the doctors he has consulted, and the infallible quack medicines
he has taken, lamenting that none have been lucky enough to hit his case, he
sinks below opium and brandy, and (...) long before his time. This is the
course I have lived to see many take, and believe it to be the case of more
whom I have never heard of, and which any one may observe in the circle of his
acquaintance: all ^his chain of evils is brought on and accumulated by
indolence and intemperance, or mistaken choice of diet. How easily might they
have been remedied, had the real causes been known and attended to in time.

I BELIEVE I must here explain a little more fully what I mean by provoking the
appetite; which I take to be the general mode of intemperance among men, for
custom has made all kinds of incentives to excess so common, that those of
daily use, far from being considered in the class of intemperance, are by most
people thought to be not only salutary but necessary; and they never suspect
the least evil from the common decoraments of the table, salt, pepper, mustard,
vinegar; and yet, however extraordinary it may seem, I will venture to
pronounce that excess in any of these must be doubly prejudicial to health;
hurtful in themselves by their acrimony, they provoke the appetite beyond
natural satiety to receive an oppressive load, which the stomach itself would
soon feel, were it ^ot artificially stimulated to discharge it into the blood
by wine and strong liquors immediately after. Thus one error brings on another,
and when men have eaten too much, they drink too (...) also by a kind of
necessity. He will certainly be a healthier man who is very moderate in the use
of these things, than he who exceeds: they may be sometimes useful as
medicines, but can never add to the wholesomeness of our daily food. To give
some weight to what I say, there are whole nations in the world that have never
known any of them, and are healthy, strong and vigorous,

IF this be true of the common provocatives at every poor man's board, who is
there that exceeds not nature's law? who is truly temperate? What shall we say
of that studied, labored, refined extravagance at the tables of the rich, where
the culinary arts are pushed to that excess, that luxury is become false to
itself, and things are valued not as they are good and agreeable to the natural
and undebauch'd appetite, but high, inflammatory, rare, out of season, and
costly; where, though variety is aimed at, every thing has the same taste, and
nothing its own. I am sorry and ashamed that (...) professing luxury should
understand it so little as ^o thir^ (...) lies in the dish or the sauce or
multitude of either; or that urging beyond natural satiety can afford any real
enjoyment. But this they do by all the researches of culinary and medical art,
introducing all the foreign aids to luxury, every stimulative provocative that
can be found in acids, salts, fiery spices, and essences of all kinds, to rouse
their nerves to a little feeling; not knowing the more they are chafed and
irritated the more callous they still grow; and the same things must now be
more frequently repeated, increased in quantity, and exalted in quality, till
they know not where to stop, and every meal they make serves only to overload
and oppress the stomach, to foul and inflame the blood, obstruct and choke all
the capillary channels, bring on a hectic fever of irritation, that though it
raise the spirits for the evening, leaves behind it all the horrid sensations
of inanition and crapula the next morning; and but that nature is so kind as to
stop them in their career with a painful fit of the gout or some other illness,
in which she gets a little respite, they would soon be at the end of their
course.

MEN bring all these evils upon themselves, either not knowing or no^ attending
to two things; the one, that pleasure is a coy coquet, and to be enjoyed must
not always be pursued; we must sometimes sit still, that she may come and court
us in her turn; the other, that pleasure and happiness are as distinct things
as riot and enjoyment: besides, pleasure is not infinite, and our sensations
are limited: we can bear but a certain measure, and all urging beyond it,
infallibly brings pain in it is stead. Let the men of high experience bear me
testimony that this is true of all the luxuries of the table, wine music,
women, and every sensuality.

THESE men may tell me, perhaps, that I have made a mighty fine declamation
against luxury and intemperance; but what is this to the purpose? they desire
not to be told of their faults, not to hear disagreeable truths which they know
already. Have I no art or skill to reconcile health and luxury, no remedy, no
rare secret to repair and restore sensation and vigor worn to rags? no Medea's
kettle to boil anew? If not, do not describe to us a life of moderation,
temperance and exercise: it is not worth having upon these terms. I am aware of
the unreasonable expectations of many, that their demands would rise high, some
of them to the impossible. At present I am only setting forth the causes; when
I come to talk of remedy, I will endeavor to convince them that the artificial
helps they expect are not in nature, but that there are in nature ways and
means by which many gouty, broken constitutions, that have been despaired of,
might be repaired and restored to a very desirable degree of health and
enjoyment. But I must first say a word or two to the intemperate or mistaken in
the middle class of life.

IN England all degrees of men are furnished with the means of intemperance,
and therefore it is no wonder that most men are intemperate. If they are less
so in other countries, it is not that they have more virtue, but they want the
means: their oppressive governments, the precarious state of property, and
their superstitious religion, keep them so poor that luxury is not in their
power. They have however this advantage from it, that they are much less
afflicted with chronic diseases than we are. I verily believe there are more
gouts in England, than in all the rest of Europe: a proof that good living is
more universal. But not to the advocates for this good living do I wish to
address myself; I fear they will be as incorrigible as their superiors in
higher and more refined luxury. But there are some not intemperate from choice,
but example, habit, custom, mistake, not knowing their daily diet to be
unwholesome and productive of their diseases. To these it may be of some use to
have the unwholesome pointed out, and their choice directed to better things.
Men of laborious occupations, who work in the open air, can and do bear great
excesses and much unwholesome diet, without much hurt: I never knew a sick or
gouty gardener that was not a remarkable sot. But men of sedentary trades and
business, shopkeepers of all kinds, feel much sooner and more heavily the ill
effects of intemperance or mistaken choice in their meat and drink. Their first
care therefore ought to be not to add the diseases of intemperance to those of
inactivity, but proportion what they take as well in quantity as in quality to
their consumption. But let us see how well they do this. They all say they live
upon plain things, and never indulge in made dishes; but they will eat heartily
of a goose or duck, with a large quantity of sage, onion, pepper and salt, a
pig with similar preparation, and a hare with higher and more compounded
seasoning. Do they ever eat veal without stuffing, or even a leg of mutton
without caper-sauce? If ever they eat a steak or a chop, if it is sometimes
without pepper, I believe it is never without pickles, the worst of all
poisons. They are surprised that such meals should rise on their stomachs with
flatulence, sour and bitter hiccups and eructations, which if they did not keep
them down with a sufficient quantity of wine or sometimes a dram, they would be
troubled with all the time of digestion. If this method succeeds so far as to
quiet their stomachs for the present, they go on with it, regardless or
ignorant of future and distant consequences. Thus are these sharp, harsh, hot
and inflammatory things forced out of the stomach into the blood, before it has
had time to dilute and subdue, or reject them, and the superfluous load they
bring along with them. And thus is laid the foundation of every disease, that
appears when these acrid and fiery particles are accumulated in the blood to a
certain degree.

THERE are others whose pretensions to plain diet may seem better founded, but
who nevertheless eat and are very fond of things unwholesome, and very unfit
for men of sedentary lives, such as salted and smoked flesh and fish of all
kinds, hams, tongues, heavy flour puddings, toasted cheese, etc. all which are
of such hard and indissoluble texture, that they never dissolve well in the
stomach of a plowman: the same salt, seasoning, and smoke, which harden and
preserve them from putrefaction before they are eaten, keep them from
dissolution afterward, so that they never are digested at all; nor is it
possible any good nourishment should ever come from them: the salts they
contain are indeed melted in the intestinal juices, and get into the blood,
producing, in the best constitutions, those tettery, itchy, or scaly eruptions,
commonly but very erroneously called the scurvy, which is quite another kind of
disease. To this kind of food is owing the bad health of country people, and
their children's rickety heads and limbs, and big and hard bellies.

ANOTHER capital mistake many people fall into, who in other respects are very
moderate in their diet, is, that the flesh-meat they eat is always over-done;
if boiled too much* the juices are lost; if over roasted, fried, or broiled,
the action of the fire, continued too long, changes the mild animal flesh into
something of another quality; the fat is made bitter and rancid, which fire
will always do by the sweetest oil; and the scorched outside of the lean, dry
and acrimonious: the less therefore all flesh meat undergoes the power of fire,
the milder and wholesomer it is. I do not mean by this to recommend the customs
of Cannibals or beasts of prey, that devour animals alive: but it may be
observed, that the first are free from our diseases, and the other amazingly
strong and vigorous. We may learn this from them at least, that our meat cannot
be the wholesomer for being, as some call it, thoroughly done; and that we
should learn to like it with some of its red juices unspoiled by the fire. Upon
this principle the English cookery is to be preferred to the French, who s^ew
and roast to rags; and of English cookery broiling must be the best.

THIS leads me to another observation, which perhaps none but physicians, or
those who have studied well the nature of man and his aliments, are able to
make. It is this: that man being born to devour most of the fruits and animals
of the earth and water, there ought to be a certain proportion of animal and
vegetable substances in his food; the animal tending spontaneously to
putrefaction, the vegetable correcting that tendency from going too far: thus
from the due mixture of both qualities results that neutral property, equally
distant from acid as alcali, that is essentially necessary to produce good
blood. This is so manifest, that whoever will observe attentively may see,
whenever either of these prevails in the body, there is so strong a desire and
longing for things of the other sort, as well as pleasing sensation in the
palate and stomach when they are taken, as plainly indicates the natural want.
Let a man have lived long upon flesh-meat wholly, he will have a more eager
appetite for fruit and vegetables; and if kept too long without them, as is the
case with those who have lived some time at sea, will grow sick of the real
scurvy: but if before they are too far gone they reach the land, they will eat
the first common grass they can come at with more avidity than a horse or ox,
and be perfectly cured by it. In like manner they who have lived long upon
vegetables (which regimen is often prescribed to invalids, especially in the
gout) will have great craving for flesh meat. We ought to learn from all this
to attend diligently to the calls of nature, and balance the mixture with due
proportion, not only that our vitals may have the less labor in preparing and
making our juices fit for nourishment, but to prevent the diseases that are
peculiar to the predominancy of either. And here I may observe, that the error
of most men's diet in every class of life is, that the acid, crude and austere
almost always abound; not that they do not eat flesh-meat enough, but they
spoil it in the preparation and cookery, changing its animal nature into
something worse than vegetable, taking off entirely all its tendency to
dissolution and putrefaction by salting, smoking, pickling, potting, and
preserving things that in their own simple nature would soon corrupt and
dissolve; but by these preparations are hardened and embalmed to keep for years
like mummies. The same may be said of every kind of made dishes; the salts,
spices, hot herbs, and acids with which they are seasoned and compounded,
preserve and harden them to keep for ever: the sauces and gravies they swim in
have the same effect as so much pickle. The things we feed upon ought all to be
in a perishable state, or they will never furnish the materials of good blood;
and whatever is hardened or seasoned so as to keep long before it be eaten,
ought not to be eaten at all, for it will never dissolve in the stomach.

THE nature of most chronic diseases, and their first symptom heartburn, as it
is commonly called, plainly show the original causes to be the acid crudity
prevailing in the juices; producing coagulations, concretions and obstructions
of various kinds; all which are very manifest in the gout, rheumatism, stone,
and most nervous cases: the remedies also that sometimes relieve and palliate,
confirm this; such as the volatile alcalies, hartshorn, salt ammoniac,
testaceous powders, soap, etc. Many may be surprised at this, and say it cannot
be; for, though they have these diseases, they take little or no acids: but
there are many things they take that are acescent, that is, liable to (...)
acid, especially by the heat of the stomach. This they ^^e not aware of; but
they are in their nature much more prejudicial than things already sour; for,
besides that people take not these in any quantity, the acescent never become
sour but by the act of fermentation, which, being raised in the stomach where
it ought never to happen, produces strange tumults, wind, vapor, gas, that is
that fume arising from fermenting liquors of any kind, which has been known
sometimes to kill at a stroke. It may here be necessary to enumerate some of
those things called acescent. These are sweets of every kind, puddings, cakes,
pastry, creams, confections, etc. And every thing made of ^^our, especially
fermented; bread in particular, so far from being the wholesome thing many
imagine, is not only unwholesome by its acescency, but, by the strong ferment
it contains, it forces into fermentation every thing capable of it, that it
meets with in the stomach Whoever requires proof of this, may have it by the
following experiment: Put a common toast into half a pint of water, and let it
stand six or eight hours near the fire, so as to be kept in the heat of the
human stomach, and it will be sour as vinegar.
: the bread of London I fear is particularly so; partly by being robbed of its
bran, which in some degree would soften and correct it, but chiefly by having
in it, besides its usual ferment, a great quantity of sour alum, most absurdly
added to make it unnaturally white To be convinced of this, boil a pound of
common London bread in a sufficient quantity of water to make it thick as
gruel. Let it stand to subside; pour off the clear, and boil away all the
water; the alum will be found at bottom.
. In this light we must also consider most sorts of seasonings, stuffings,
force-meats, and compounded sauces. But the greatest acescent, or rather bane
of all, high and low, rich or otherwise, whoever they are that take it
constantly, is wine: wine alone produces more diseases than all the other
causes put together. All men allow that wine taken to excess is hurtful: they
see the immediate evils that follow; but distant effects, that require more
attentive and deducive observation, very few see or believe; and, judging from
present and agreeable seelings, they say that a little wine is wholesome, and
good for every one, and accordingly take it every day, give it their children,
and teach them to like it by debauching their natural taste in the earliest
infancy: thus they come to relish it by habit, and to be uneasy without it like
snuff-takers without their tobacco: the want is equally habitual and unnatural
in both cases; for the stomach wants wine no more than the nose does snuff: the
immediate sensation of both, after a little use, is pleasant; but the remote
effect of the wine taken constantly infinitely more pernicious than of the
snuff. This hurts the nose only; the other accumulating a little indigestion
every day, corrupts all the juices of the body most essentially. And though it
be often taken with a view to promote digestion and assist the operations of
the stomach, it manifestly does harm to both. Instead of digesting and
dissolving, it hardens, and prevents dissolution, and curdles and corrupts the
milky chyle and first juices produced from our food. It warms indeed and
stimulates the stomach to greater exertion than is natural or necessary, and
thereby enables it to discharge its contents the sooner; whence that agreeable
feel of warmth and comfort from its immediate action. But by this extraordinary
action it forces our food out of the stomach too soon, before it is softened,
dissolved, and properly prepared, and sends it into the bowels crude, hard, and
austere, in that case to be carried into the blood, there to produce every kind
of disease. Whatever therefore the advocates for a little wine every day may
think, or argue in favor of it, they are most undoubtedly in a very great
error, and it were certainly much better and safer to drink a bottle and get a
little merry once a week, drinking water only or small beer at all other times:
in which interval nature might totally subdue it and recover entirely. Water is
the only liquor nature knows of or has provided for all animals; and whatever
nature gives us, we may depend upon it, is best and safest for us. Accordingly
we see that when we have committed any excesses or mistakes of any kind, and
suffer from them, it is water that relieves. Hence the chief good of Bath, Spa,
and many other medicinal waters, especially to hard drinkers. It is the element
that dilutes and carries off crudities and indigestions, etc. the mineral
virtues they contain may make them tolerable to the the stomach in their
passage, but do, as I believe, little more in the body: it is the water that
cures. Wine, if it be not one of our own inventions, was given us as a cordial
in sickness, weariness, sorrow, and old age, and a most salutary charm it would
be for most of these evils, did we not exhaust its power by daily use, and
instead of taking it as such, drink it up as common draught in youth and health
to make us mad. I know this is a very tender topic to touch upon, and too
favorite a pleasure to argue against with any reasonable hope of convincing;
most men having so indulged themselves in this bewitching habit, that they
think they cannot live without a little wine every day, and their very
existence depends upon it; their stomachs require it, nature calls for it, St.
Paul advises it, it must be good. Thus men catch at every shadow of an argument
that favors their inclinations. St. Paul advises it as a medicine sometimes,
but certainly not every day. There is no medicine I know of, that taken every
day, will not either cease to act entirely, or by acting too much do harm. It
will be said, that many drink wine every day without gout, stone, or any
disease at all in consequence of it. I believe not many, or I should know some
of them. If any are so strong as to bear it to old age unhurt, they must be
very active as well as strong to subdue it. But I have nothing to say to these;
my business is with invalids who complain, and certainly ought not to measure
constitutions with those above their match. The same arguments will hold
equally in favor of every other bad habit. Your nose will want its snuff, your
palate its spices; and when the fashion was for women to be small wasted, their
galled sides grown callous by the long impression of the stays wanted their
support. Nature, like a true female, cries out at the first violence, but
submits in time, is reconciled, and grows fond of the ravisher. But it is the
business of philosophers to distinguish carefully between the real wants of
nature and the artificial calls of habit; and when we find th^se begin to hurt
us, we ought to make the utmost persevering efforts to break the enchantment of
bad customs; and though it cost us some uneasy sensations at first, we must
bear them patiently; they will not kill; and a very little time will reconcile
us to better modes of life.

THERE is another capital mistake many labor under in the choice of their
wine, preferring the strong, hot and coarse ^orts, Madeira, Port, Mountain,
etc. to the milder, more elegant, and certainly less unwholesome French and
Italian wines, accounting them better for the stomach, and good against wind,
etc. My observation has been, that they who use these strong stomach wines to
cure wind are never free from it, and all the gouty disorders of indigestion.
Indeed, it cannot well be otherwise; for there is nothing so repugnant to
natural digestion as the use of these strong liquors, which instead of
dissolving harden every thing; and thus for ever, when the first warmth is gone
off, leave a crapulary, crude, ^our load of yesterday to ferment, fret, and
irritate the stomach and bowels every day.

THUS have I endeavored to point out two of the true, primary, capital causes
of the gout, and most other chronic diseases; and most sincerely wish that what
I have said may engage those whom it mostly concerns, the gouty, the infirm and
valetudinary of every class, to observe, reflect and think for themselves upon
the hints I have thrown out; in which light what I have said, must be
considered, rather than as logical or demonstrative proof. I know the reasoning
and arguments may be much improved and carried farther, and if I had more
leisure I might have attempted it: but I am well aware of the unsurmountable
difficulty of convincing men against their will by any arguments at all. I
choose therefore at present to invite them to self-conviction from their own
observations and experience. I flatter myself they will find it well worth
their pains, to reason a little more than they do with and for themselves; and
it will be a great point gained for them, if it turns their misled opinions
from all that imaginary power of restoring health in any of that multitude of
ridiculous and most truly contemptible medicines, that are daily obtruded upon
the public, with endless lies to recommend them, by a set of the poorest, most
ignorant and paultry rogues in the nation; and engage their attention to their
true remedy, a right institution of life. In judging of which, if they find
themselves unequal to the task, they may be assisted by men of skill, abilities
and honesty.

Of VEXATION.
I COME now to the last general cause of chronic diseases, Vexation. A very
fruitful parent of many bodily evils, producing generally diseases of
inanition, much more difficult, not only to be cured, but relieved, than those
we suffer either from indolence or intemperance. But as it is not so common a
cause of the gout as the other two, it may not be necessary to consider it very
minutely at present. I shall not therefore enter deeply into the regions of
metaphysical conjecture, nor run wild after my own conceits, or theirs who have
gone astray before me in guessing at the incomprehensible union of soul and
body, and their mutual powers of acting upon each other. I shall content myself
with observing only, what may be of some use, that every great degree of
vexation, whether in the shape of anger, envy, resentment, discontent or
sorrow, has most destructive and deleterious effects upon the vitals of the
body, whether sudden and violent, or ^low and lasting long.

THE first immediate effect of violent grief or vexation is to take off the
action of the stomach entirely. Let us suppose a man, in the best health, the
highest good humor and spirits, as well as good stomach, sitting down to dinner
with his friends, receives suddenly some very afflicting news. Instantly his
appetite is gone, and he can neither eat nor swallow a morsel. Let the same
thing happen after he has made a hearty cheerful meal, as suddenly the action
of his stomach, the whole power of digestion is cut off totally, as if it were
become paralytic; and what he has eaten lies a most oppressive load. Perhaps as
the excess of weakness is often convulsion, it may be rejected with a violent
vomit, or do greater mischief. For which reason such strokes of distress are
less hurtful received upon an empty than a full stomach. But why is this? what
connection is there between a piece of bad news and a man's stomach full or
empty? whatever the cause be, the effect is certain and invariably. It is
because the animal spirits, or the action of the nerves, whatever be the secret
cause of their power, is called off to supply and support the tumultuous
agitation of the brain, and the stomach, with all its appendages and their
secretions, is left powerless and paralytic, and must therefore either act
convulsively or not at all*

BESIDES this pernicious effect of preventing the natural action of the stomach
and intestines, the whole circulation of the blood is disturbed. The
contraction and dilatation of the heart, that is, the alternate action by which
it opens to receive the blood from the veins, and closes again to force it out
through the arteries; which operation ought to be as true and certain as the
vibrations of a pendulum, are broken and uneven: the heart flutters,
palpitates; now is overloaded with blood and in danger of suffocation, now
recieve none at all: consequently all the secretions must be as irregular, some
of the glands receiving too abundant a supply that either hurries through, or
oppresses and overpowers them, others none at all. Hence that hasty gushing of
pale limpid urine in amazing quantities, those sudden bursts* of unmeaning
tears: sometimes great dryness and choking thirst, sometimes the overflowing
of the mouth with water instead of saliva, and many other nervous and
hysterical affections, fits, syncope, epilepsy, etc. All which indicate the
greatest tumults and perturbations in the inmost recesses of the nervous and
vital frame. Many kinds of diseases have sprung from this fountain, of such
unaccountable horrid and terrifying appearances, (...) formerly they could no
otherwise account for them but by the malefice of sorcery, and the immediate
possession of devils.

IN slower, more silent, but longer continued grief, the effects are similar,
but not so violent. Many little strokes repeated will do the same thing in time
that a great blow does at once. The function of the stomach will be more gently
disturbed and preverted, its juices vitiated, and all its contents will for
ever turn ^our, bitter or rancid; so that no mild milky chyle, or wholesome
material of nourishment, can ever come into the blood. The patient must
languish with cahectic inanition, universal bad habit of body, or pine and
waste with atrophy, the want of nourishing supply; whence arise complications
of various diseases succeeding each other always from bad to worse: and unless
he can subdue his anxiety, and restore peace of mind, he must in time sink
under it, and die, as it is said, of a broken heart.

WHOEVER vexes long, must certainly want nourishment; for, besides the
disturbed state of the stomach, it is broken appetite and bad digestion, from
whence what supply there is must come not only ill-prepared, but vitiated into
the blood; there can be no sleep in this state of mind: the perturbed spirit
cannot rest: and it is in sleep that all nourishment is performed, and the
finer parts of the body, chased and worn with the fatigue of the day, are
repaired and restored to their natural vigor. While we are awake this cannot
so well be done; because the incessant action of the body or mind being always
partial and irregular, prevents that equal distribution of the blood to all
parts alike, from which each fiber and filament receives that share or portion
that suits it best. In sleep, when it is quiet and natural, all the muscles of
the body, that is, all its active powers that are subject to our will, are
lulled to rest, composed and relaxed into a genial temporary kind of palsy,
that leaves not the least obstruction or hindrance of the passage of the blood
to every atom. Accordingly the pulse is always slower and more equal, the
respiration deeper and more regular, ^and the same degree of vital warmth
diffused alike through every part; so that the extremities are equally warm
with the heart.

VEXATION operating in this manner upon the organs of ^^gestion and concoction,
and disturbing and obstructing the natural progress of nutrition, must often
produce diseases similar to those of long continued intemperance; it is first
effect being indigestion with all it is symptoms, wind, eructation, heart-burn,
hiccup, etc. It is no wonder therefore it should sometimes bring on a fit of
the gout, which, as I have said is manifestly a disease of crudity and
indigestion; and often the gout in the stomach and bowels. Indeed most cold
crude coli^s are of this kind. Schirrous concretions will also be formed in the
spleen, liver, glands of the mesentery, and throughout the whole system of the
belly. Many of these indurated tumors will appear outwardly, so as to be felt
by the hand; these in time will degenerate into cancers and cancerous
ulcerations, and many fatal evils, not the least of which, in my opinion, is,
that the patient will suffer a long time before he dies.

ALL the passions when they are inordinate may have injurious effects upon the
vital frame: excessive joy has sometimes given a fatal blow, and sudden bursts
of laughter done great mischiefs, especially to delicate or weakly people, who
have often been thrown into spasms, cramps, convulsions, hysteric fits and
haemorrhages by them. But as I think the word Vexation comprehends the chief of
those passions that hurt us most, and mean not to make a metaphysical enquiry
about them, it is needless to be particular upon each. It may suffice to have
shown the immediate and remote influence of vexation upon the human body.

WHATEVER men may think of their diseases, their strange symptoms and
appearances, and their unaccountable causes, these are the three original great
sources of most of the chronic diseases of mankind; which I have endeavored to
set forth and explain in so familiar a manner, that I hope I have been
perfectly intelligible to every one who will venture to think and judge for
himself. To such rational people only I address myself; and to enable them to
do this the better, I have furnished these hints and observations, which may be
extended, improved and applied to particular cases. I want not, nor wish to
obtrude my ideas upon any man, however warranted I may think myself from the
observation and experience of my whole life: my principal aim has been only to
make men stop a little in their career, and consider with themselves whether it
may not be possible for them to be mistaken, even in that course of diet and
those habits of life which they never suspected. If they are ill, and for any
time, there must be a more substantial cause for it, than they are in general
willing to allow. It is not always catching cold, for we do not catch cold so
often as we think we do; and when a healthy robust, person takes cold, which
can happen but rarely, if this be the whole of the disease, it cannot last
long. But the truth is, when the crudity, superfluity and acrimony of an
indolent, intemperate life have accumulated to such a degree as to make us
sick, then we say we have taken cold, or complain of a bad constitution, when
we have spoiled perhaps a very good one; or with Sydenham, that the epedemic
constitution of the air has infected us, or that this or that trifle has
disagreed. I am fully and firmly persuaded, that whoever will reflect with some
degree of intelligence and sanity, be just to himself, and candid with his
physician, will in general be able to trace his complaints and diseases up to
one or other of these three causes. And whoever does this, must infallibly see
how vain and idle all his hopes and expectations of lasting remedy and
established health must be from any kind of quack medicines, or indeed the
common and too general practice of physic, when the whole is rested upon
something given to swallow; how inadequate the means are to the end proposed
and hoped for; how ill vomiting and purging can supply the place of temperance;
bleeding blistering and all artificial evacuation, of activity; cordials and
opium, of peace of mind. Is not this to fill the body with harsh and
unwholesome juices, and then tear it to pieces to get them out again? To make
artificial holes and sores in the skin to renew the blood and discharge
superfluities, instead of employing muscular motion to rub off and grind down
all the acrimony of angular aculeated particles, and make them smooth and
round, and easily divisible; and to employ intoxication and stupefaction to
take off the sense of pain, and leave the cause where it was, or fix it faster?
Can any reasonable person hope for health or long life by any of these unnatural
methods, when these only are employed? Let him look round among his neighbors
and acquaintance; and tell me whether, not only all the gouty, but rheumatic,
colicky, jaundiced, paralytic, dropsical people he has ever seen, are not
either always so, or by fits so; and whether those returning paroxysms or fits
of these disorders do not always grow worse and worse, in spite of all their
medications and quackery, till a complication or apoplexy comes on, that at
last, though long before their time, puts an end to their miserable lives.
These evils are considered as the inheritance of human nature, unavoidable and
incurable, and submitted to in absolute despair; though there has not one
rational attempt, that I know of, ever yet been made to remedy them in earnest.
All the methods hitherto employed have only been to relieve, and those often so
perniciously, that the future health has been sacrificed to obtain present
relief or ease. This must for ever be the case when in chronic cases it is
obtained by art, and nature has no share; or where the physician does all, and
the patient nothing for himself.

Of the Cure of the Gout and all other Chronic Diseases, and the Repair of a
broken Constitution.
HAVING set forth the real causes of the gout, and all it is congenial diseases.
I come now to the most essential part, to administer all possible comfort to
those whom great pain and long suffering may have made attentive and docile,
and willing to take health upon the terms it is possible to have it. To the
young and voluptuous, who are yet in their career, and declare for a short life
and a merry one, I have nothing to say but this, that a short life is very
seldom a merry one; on the contrary, it is generally made up of a few years of
riotous pleasure without happiness, to be severely paid for by as many more of
pain and sickness, regret and despair.

HAVING shown that the gout is not hereditary, not inherent in our
constitutions, but produced by the daily accumulations of indigested, unsubdued
acrimony and superfluity, which, when they abound to a certain degree, must end
either in a fit of the gout, or some other disease, according to the
constitution, as long as any vigor is left in the body: for nature will for
ever free or endeavor to free itself, and purge the blood of its impurities by
gout, by fever, by pain of one kind or other, that takes off the appetite, and
for a time gives respite, and prevents the pouring in of more and more enemies
to disturb it is operation, and make it ineffectual. Thus young people, after a
fit of the gout is happily and well gone off, are as free from it, as if they
never had it; and if they would take warning and be careful not to breed it
again, most certainly would for ever remain free. How absurd therefore, how
ridicously ignorant must be every attempt to cure the gout in futuro by
medicine, before (...) be yet formed, before it has any existence! Can such a
medicine give supernatural strength, and enable an old man living in indolence
to digest and consume, or discharge the superfluities of his daily
intemperance? that is, to give him more vigorous powers than nature gave him at
one-and-twenty, or when the gout came first upon him. The Duke of Portland's
powder promised to do something like this, and most certainly kept off the gout
for two or three years. But what was it? And what did it really do? It was a
strong spicy bitter taken in substance, in a large quantity, for a long time;
it is effect was to keep up a constant fever as long as it was taken; this kept
the gouty matter always afloat, and prevented it is fixing any where. But there
was no living long with a constant fever; accordingly many of those who took it
died very soon. I myself observed between fifty and sixty of it is advocates,
some my patients, some my acquaintance or neighbors, who were apparently cured
by it; but in less than six years time, omnes ad internecionem caesi, they
(...) died to a man.

MANY similar attempts have been made with other Medicines to cure not only the
gout, but most other chronic diseases, and with the same fatal effects.
Antimony and Mercury elaborated into poisons by chemistry have been
administered, particulary the solution of sublimate has torn many a stomach to
rags, so that it could never bear common food afterward. The deadly
nightshade, and hemlock, and many such dreadful poisons, have been given as
alteratives to restore health. The intention here seems to be, to kill or cure,
to raise a violent agitation or fever in the body, in hopes it may prove strong
enough to throw off the disease and medicine together. The effect has ever
been, notwithstanding a little apparent and deceitful relief may have been
perceived from the first efforts, that it has sunk under both loads, and
exhausted by repeated straining, much sooner than by the disease alone.

CAN any one in his senses suppose that diseases a man has been his whole life
contracting, and to which he is adding every day by perseverance in unwholesome
diet, and bad habits, are to be thus removed by a coup de main on de baguette?
or that they will not return, be they cured or conjured away ever so often,
whilst he continues the same mode of life that brought them on at first?

WHAT then is to be done? how and in what manner are chronic diseases and
cachexies to be cured, and health restored and established? I have already
shown that the causes of these evils are Indolence, Intemperance, and Vexation;
and if there be any truth or weight in what I have said, the remedies are
obvious. Activity, Temperance and Peace of Mind. It will be said, the remedies
are obvious, but impractible. Would you bid the feeble cripple, who cannot
stand, take up his bed and walk? the man who has lost all appetite, abstain?
and the sleepless wretch racked with pain enjoy peace of mind? No certainly; I
am not so absurd. These must be assisted by medicine; and if they have not
exhausted all its power already, a little respite, a favorable interval may be
obtained, that with other artificial aids cooperating, may be greatly improved
to their advantage, and if rightly employed they may get on from strength to
strength, till they recover into perfect health. But it it is not my design at
present to expatiate upon that particular kind of medical relief which every
chronic case may require; it would lead me into too wide a field, and too far
from my present purpose, which is to show that the gout, in most of its stages
and degrees, may be cured, a present paroxysm or fit relieved, its return for
ever safely prevented, and the patient established in perfect health.

LET us suppose the case of a man from forty to fifty years of age, who has had
at least twenty fits of gout; by which most of his joints have been so clogged
and obstructed, as to make walking or any ^ind of motion very uneasy to him:
let him have had it sometimes in his stomach, a little in his head, and often
all over him, so as to make him universally sick and low-spirited, especially
before a regular fit has come to relieve him. This I apprehend to be as bad a
case as we need propose, and that it will not be expected that every old
cripple whose joints are burnt to chalk, and his bones grown together and
united by anchilosis, who must be carried from his bed to his table and back
again, should be proposed as an object of medication and cure: and yet even he
might perhaps receive some relief and palliation in pain, if he has any great
degree of it, which is not very common in this case. Let us therefore suppose
the first example.

IF the point be to assuage the violent raging of a present paroxysm; this may
be safely done by giving some soft and slowly-operating laxative, neither hot
nor cold, but warm, either in small doses repeated so as to move the patient
once on twice in twenty-four hours, or by a larger dose oftener in less time,
according to the strength and exigency. This may be followed by a few lenient
absorbent correctors of acrimony or even gentle anodynes: proper cataplasms may
also be safely applied to the raging part, which often assuage pain
surprizingly; with as much mild and spontaneously-dissolving nourishment as may
keep the spirits from sinking too low: but I would wish them to sink a little,
and exhort the patient to bear that lowness with patience and resignation, till
nature, assisted by soft and succulent food, can have time to relieve him. This
easy method of treating a fit of the gout would answer in any age; and if the
patient was young and vigorous, and the pain violent, there could be no danger
in taking away a little blood. Thus in two or three days time I have often seen
a severe fit mitigated and made tolerable; and this is a better way of treating
it with regard to future consequences, than bearing it with patience and
suffering it to take its course: for the sooner the joints are relieved from
distension and pain, the less danger there is of their being calcined and
utterly destroyed. But instead of this, the general practice is quite the
reverse. Oh! keep up your spirits, they cry; keep it out of your stomach at all
events; where, whenever it rages in a distant part, it is not at all inclined
to come. As you cannot eat, you must drink the more freely. So they take
cordials, strong wines, and rich spoon-meats. By urging in this manner, a great
fever is raised, the pain enraged and prolonged; and a fit, that would have
ended spontaneously in less than a week, protracted to a month or six weeks and
when it goes off at last, leaves such obstruction and weakness in the parts, as
cripple the man ever after. All this I hope will be fairly and heartily
understood; for there are doubtless a great variety of gouty cases, but no case
that will not admit of medical assistance judiciously administered.

BUT the most capital point of all, and what is mostly desired by all, is to
prevent its return, or changing into any other disease, and to establish
health. Most men would be very well pleased and happy could this be done by any
medical trick or nostrum, with full liberty of living as they list, and
indulging every appetite and passion without control. Some poor filly
creatures, ignorant of all philosophy and the nature of causes and effects,
have been led into experiments of this kind by a few artful rogues, very much
to the prejudice of their future health, and danger of their lives also;
expecting from medicine what it never did or can perform alone, the cure of
chronic diseases.

I THINK it needless here to take any pains to show the inefficacy of all the
common modes of practice, vomiting, purging, bleeding, blistering, issues, etc.
They have been found ineffectual not only in the gout, but all other chronic
cases. All sensible practitioners must know their effects to be but temporary,
and that they are meant and used only as means of present relief. Let us see
therefore by what practicable plan or regimen the person here described, when a
fit of the gout is happily ended, may for ever prevent it is return, and so
confirm his general health that it shall not again be overset by every slight
cold or trifling accident.

I HAVE already shown that a certain degree of activity or bodily motion is
necessary at intervals every day, to raise the circulation to that pitch, that
will keep the fine vessels open and the old blood pure, and also make new from
the fresh juices. If the patient cannot be brought to this, he has no chance of
recovering to perfect health. If therefore he can neither walk nor ride at all,
he must by degrees be brought to do both by the assistance of others, which may
be given him in the following manner; Let a handy active servant or two be
employed to rub him all over as he lies in bed with flannels, or flannel
gloves, fumigated with gums and spices, which will contribute greatly to brace
and strengthen his nerves and fibers, and move his blood without any fatigue ^o
himself This may seem but a trifling prescription to those who have never tried
it sufficiently, but is of the utmost consequence, and its effects are amazing;
especially to all those who are too weak to use any muscular motion themselves.
A little friction may have little or no effect, but long continued, and
repeated often, with fumigated flannels, it will do more to recover health, and
support it afterward, than most other things or methods. It promote;
circulation and perspiration, opens the pores, forces the fine vessels, strains
and purifies the blood, and this without the assistance of any internal
stimulation. It is this that keeps horses in tolerable health with very little
exercise.
. This may take up from five to ten minutes at first, but must be repeated five
or six times a day, supposing him totally unable to help himself. But if he can
walk a hundred yards only, it will forward him greatly to walk those hundred
yards every two hours, and if he can bear a carriage, let him go out in it
every day till he begins to be tired. The first day or two all this may disturb
or fatigue him a little; but if he has patience to persevere to the fourth, I
dare promise him some amendment and increase of strength; which he must employ,
as young merchants do a little money, to get more. Thus he must go on rubbing,
walking, and riding a little more and more every day, stopping always upon the
first sensation of weariness to rest a little, till he be able to walk two or
three miles at a stretch, or ride ten without any weariness at all. This is
recommended with an intention to dislodge and throw off all remains of crude
gouty concretions that may have obstructed his joints, or lain concealed in any
of the lacunae or recesses of his body; to free the circulation in minimis and
all it is secretions, perspirations, and discharges whatever: and though this
intention can never be but very defectively answered by medicines, it may
certainly be assisted and greatly promoted by a few well-chosen mild
antimonial, absorbent or saponaceous deobstruents and sweetners, that, like
putting shot or gravel into a bottle, with a good deal of agitation will
greatly help to make it clean, but without agitation will do nothing The
Asiatics, understanding luxury much better than we do, and knowing that it is
not to be had without some degree of delicate health, do just enough to keep
them in this languid effeminate state free from pain. Those who are rich among
them employ people called Champers to rub, chafe and pat them all over at least
twice a day, to move their blood and keep their vessels free without any labor
or exertion of their own powers. This daily practice in hot countries, where
they live in the most slothful indolence, is not only necessary to them, but a
great luxury. The Greeks and Romans too, when they became luxurious, fell into
habits of this kind, and were strigill'd and curried, and bathed and oiled,
almost every day.
.

WHILE we are thus endeavoring to resolve all old obstructions, to open the
fine vessels, and strain and purify the blood, and by degrees to enable the man
to use a certain degree of exercise or labor every day; great care must be
taken in the choice of his diet, that no new acrimony be added to the old, to
thwart and frustrate this salutary operation. His food must be soft, mild, and
spontaneously digesting, and in moderate quantity, so as to give the least
possible labor to the stomach and bowels; that it may neither turn ^our, nor
bitter, nor rancid, nor any way degenerate from those qualities necessary to
make good blood. Such things are, at first, new-laid eggs boiled so as not to
harden the white creamy part of them, tripe, calves feet, chicken, patridge,
rabbits, most sorts of white mild fish, such as whiting, skate, cod, turbot,
etc. and all sorts of shell fish, particularly oysters raw. Very soon he will
be strong enough to eat beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork, venison, etc. but these
must all be kept till they are tender, and eaten with their own gravies without
any compounded sauces or pickles whatever: instead of which boiled or stewed
vegetables, and sallads of lettuce and endive, may be used: and the luxury that
is not unwholesome may be allowed, light puddings, custards, creams, blanc
manger, etc. and ripe fruits of all kinds and seasons. But because I have made
what enquiries I could upon this capital article from living witnesses; for I
do not always pin my faith upon books, knowing it to be no uncommon thing for
authors, instead of framing their system from observation and experience, to
wrest and explain both to support their opinions. I have been assured by a
physician who practiced above thirty years in Turkey, that from the Danube to
the Euphrates he never had seen a gouty Turk. I have also been informed by some
of our ministers who had resided many years in Constantinople, that the gout,
and other diseases of the same class, were not uncommon at court; but the
courtiers, it seems, were not as good Mahometans as those who lived in the
country; for they drink wine, drams, liquers of all sorts, without restraint.

I have also been very credibly informed, that the Gentoos or Marratas, a
people of India living in the most temperate simplicity, chiefly upon rice,
have no such thing as the gout or indeed any other chronic disease among them.


wine undoubtedly produces nine in ten of all the gouts in the world, wine must
be avoided, or taken very sparingly, and but seldom. How is this to be done?
Can a man used to it every day, who thinks he cannot live without it, and that
his existence depends upon it, leave it off safely? If he thinks he must die of
the experiment doing it all at once, he may do it by degrees, and drink but
half the quantity of yesterday till he has brought it to nothing. But the
danger of attempting it in this manner is, that it will never be done; and like
a procrastinating sinner he will forever put off his penitential resolution
till tomorrow. If he did it all once, I would be hanged if he died of the
attempt; he would be uneasy for three or four days, that is all. He may change
his liquor, and drink a little good porter, and by degrees come to small beer,
the wholsomest and best of all liquors except good soft water. But I do not
mean that this rigorous abstinence from wine is to last for life, but only
during the conflict with the disease. As soon as he has recovered health and
strength to use exercise enough to subdue it, he may safely indulge once a
week, or perhaps twice, with a pint of wine for the sake of good humor and
good company, if they cannot be enjoyed without it; for I would not be such a
churl as to forbid, or even damp, one of the greatest joys of human life.

If any man should say it is better to have a little gout than take all these
pains, and submit to this discipline; this is not the alternative: perhaps it
may be more eligible to live at large, and have but a little gout now and then,
that goes off well, and leaves no trace behind; but this is very seldom the
case. The misfortune is, that a little gout most commonly comes again and again
more severely, till it becomes a great gout, till it cripples the man, and
shortens his life at least twenty years, embittering all the latter part of it.
If any one thinks this description of it, which is the real state of the case
nine times in ten, preferable to that gradual exertion of his own powers and
strictness of regimen, or rather attention to himself with very moderate
abstinence or self-denial for a year or two, as here recommended; I have no
reply to make him, but must give him up to his own choice.

The severity of these efforts and this abstemious care need be continued no
longer than the disease or the effects of it remain. When by perseverance in
the practice of them, together with the medical aids here recommended, the
patient shall have recovered his strength and locomotive powers, he may
preserve and perpetuate them, and his title to longevity, upon the following
plan.

HE must never lose sight of the three great principles of health and long
life, Activity, Temperance, and Peace of Mind. With these ever in view, he may
eat and drink of every thing the earth produces, but his diet must be plain,
simple, solid and tender, or in proportion to his consumption; he must eat but
of one thing or two at most at a meal, and this will soon bring him to be
satisfied with about half his usual quantity: for all men eat about twice as
much as they ought to do, provoked by variety: he must drink but little of any
liquor, and never till he has done eating: the drier every man's diet is, the
better. No wine oftener than once or twice a week at most; and this must be
considered as a luxurious indulgence. If he be sometimes led unawares into a
debauch, it must be expiated by abstinence and double exercise the next day,
and he may take a little of my magnesia and rhubarb as a good antidote: or if
he cannot sleep with his unusual load, he may drink water, and with his finger
in his throat throw it up. I have known some old soldiers by this trick alone,
never taking their dose to bed with them, live to kill their acquaintance two
or three times over. One moderate meal a day is abundantly sufficient;
therefore it is better to omit supper, because dinner is not so easily avoided.
Instead of supper, any good ripe fruit of the season would be very salutary,
preventing costiveness, and keeping the bowels free and open, and cooling,
correcting, and carrying off the heats and crudities of his indigestion.

HIS activity need be no more than to persevere in the habit of rubbing all
over night and morning for eight or ten minutes, and walking three or four
miles every day, or riding ten, or using any bodily labor or exercise
equivalent to it. In bad weather I can see no great evil in throwing a cloak
round his shoulders and walking even in the rain; the only difficulty is to
summon resolution enough to venture out; and a little use would take off all
danger of catching cold, by hardening and securing him against the possibility
of it upon that and all other occasions. If he dares not risque this, some
succedaneum must be used within doors; more especially when bad weather
continues any time. I recommend it to all men to wash their ^eet every day, the
gouty in particular, and not lie a-bed above seven hours in summer, and eight
in winter.

WHOEVER thinks there cannot be luxury enough in this course of life, I am
persuaded will not find more in any other: for good health, with all its
natural appetites and sensations in perfect order, is the only true foundation
of luxury. And whoever cultivates it upon the false principles of culinary or
medical art, urging to excess by stimulating provocatives of any kind, instead
of pleasure and enjoyment will meet with pain and disgust.

Some perhaps may be reasonable enough to observe and say, This plan of yours
is very simple; there is nothing mavelous in it; no wonderful discovery of
any of the latent powers of medicine: but will a regimen so easy to be complied
with as this, cure the gout, stone, dropsy, etc? Will it repair broken
constitutions and restore old invalids to health? My answer is that if I may
trust the experience of my whole life and above all the experience I have had
in my own person, having not only got rid of the gout, of which I have had four
severe fi^s in my younger days, but also emerged from the lowest ebb of life,
that a man could possibly be reduced to by cholic, jaundice, and a complication
of complaints, and recovered to perfect health; which I have now
uninterruptedly enjoyed above ten years: I say, if I may rely upon all this, I
may with great safety pronounce and promise that the plan here recommended,
assisted at first with all the collateral aids of medicine peculiar to each
case, correcting many an untoward concomitant symptom, pursued with resolution
and patience, will certainly procure to others the same benefits I received
from it, and cure every curable disease. If this be thought too much to
promise, I beg it may be considered, that a life of bad habits produces all
th^se diseases: nothing therefore so likely as good ones long continued to
restore or preserve health.

WHAT can the best physician do more than discover and point out to his
patients the real causes of their diseases? You will say, he must find a
remedy: this he will do for you also as long as he can. But I will ^ell you a
secret: his remedies are chiefly evacuations; and as long as your body can bear
scouring and cleansing Paracelsus was a good chemist, but a miserable
physician: he invented that medicine which he most ridiculously called Elixir
propriet^tis; and from its efficacy, sot as he was, promised himself the years
of Methusalem. At first it did wonders, scoured and carried off all his
crapulary indigestions, and kept him some time in health and spirits; but
trusting to it too long, and repeating it too often, it no only lost all it is
power of doing good, but hurt him greatly, and he died I think at
six-and-thirty, nothwithstanding his Elixer.
he will do you some temporary, apparent service: but when it begins to wear
out, his remedies will last no longer; you must try better methods; you must
not repeat the cause so often; for the cannot for ever build up as fast as you
can pull down. In short, you must reform your life, and change all your bad
habits for good ones; and if you have patience to wait the slow operations of
nature properly assisted, you will have no reason to regret your former
luxuries.

WE are all so much the creatures of habit, which forms and fashions us to good
or ill almost as much as nature itself, that we ought to be very attentive and
careful that our daily habits may ever tend to the confirmation not the
destruction of health. It is not what we do now and then that can injure us
greatly, but what we do every day must either do us great good or harm; either
establishing our health, or fixing our diseases, for life.

IF, after all, any man should say, these restraints, this care in choosing
what is wholesome, this constant watching over all we do, would make life so
grievous, that health were not worth having upon these terms; I wish him to
stop a little, and consider them well before he rejects them entirely; and
whether there be any better for him. It can do him no great harm to try a month
or two; if he does, I flatter myself he will find that custom will take off the
greatest part of the grievance, and perseverence make them not only tolerable
but pleasant. If he thinks health may be enjoyed upon easier terms, I fear he
will be miserably deceived; for health, like beauty, may be won by our own
attention, efforts and assiduities, but cannot be had by purchase. Whoever
thinks to buy either, will have the misfortune to find it not long his own,
though he has paid for it.

BUT there may be others whom long suffering has made ^^re patient and
reasonable; these may be glad to hear that a little health is to be had on any
terms; and it may be very comfortable to them to know that there is scarcely
any state of weakness so low, supposing the vitals not mortally hurt, from
which they may not recover into very desirable health and strength, and by
these means, exerted with persevering patience. I say this to invalids in
general: for thus may be cured not only the gout, but very bad rheumatisms,
ischiaticas, rickets, stone, jaundice, dropsy, asthma, cachexies, and
complications of many kinds. Whatever chronic diseases will not give way to
this system of medication, will be found, I greatly fear, too hard for any
other. And should there be a particular case, in which some fortunate violence
or chance may have apparently succeeded for a time, the return of the evil* or
change to something worse, can no way be so well guard^d against and prevented,
as by some such rational and natural institution of life.

THUS have I endeavored to set forth the real causes of chronic diseases in
general, and the true principles of convalescence, health and longevity. If I
have hazarded any thing new or contrary to received opinions, it has been from
a thorough conviction of it is truth, however dangerous to fame and fortune;
both which I know are more easily acquired by complying with the world, than
attempting to reform it: but it must be somebody equally indifferent to both,
as I am, who will venture to tell such truths as are more likely to recoil and
hurt the author, than to convince and conciliate the bulk of mankind.

THE END.
BOOKS bound and sold at R. AITKEN's Book-store.
FOLIO, Quarto, Octavo and Twelves Bibles, Prayer Books, New Testaments,
Henry's Commentary on the Old and New Testament, 6 vols. Dodd's Common Place
Book to the Bible, Dodderige's Family Expositor. 6 vols. Burkit, Patrick,
Whitby and Lowth's Commentaries, Pool's Annotations. Gravesend's Philosophy,
Switzer's Hydrostatics, Shaw's Travels, Astru^ on the Venereal Disease, Wood's
Coveyancing, 3 vols. Folio, Mortimer's Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, 2
vols. Folio, Cruden's Concordance to the Bible, Gill's Body of Divinity. 3
vols. -- on the Song of Solomon, Whitby on the New Testament, 2 vols. Brown on
the Romans, Watson's Body of Divinity, Ritchie D. M. on the Revelation,
Morgagni on Diseases, 3 vols. Lee on Botany, Farr's Animal Motion, Friend's
History of Physic, Allen's Synopsis, 2 vols. Haller's Physiology, 2 vols.
Sharp's Critical Enquiry, -- Surgery, Schomberg's Van Swieten abridged, 2 vols.
Goldsmith's, Smollet's, and Kennrick's Histories of England, Piscatory Eclogues
by Fletcher, Price on Annuities, Johnson's, Fennings's, Bailey's Entick's and
other English Dictionaries. Davidson's Virgil, 2 vols. Horace, Cornelius Nepos
et Terence Delphini, Hall's Contemplations, 3 vols. Hale's Contemplations, 2
vols.
With a very large Collection of Books in Divinity, History, Poetry, Plays,
Novels, Pamphlets, Music, etc. by wholesale and retail.

A neat Assortment of Stationary. Books exchanged, Ready Money for old
Libraries.


