TWO TREATISES, CONTAINING REASONS WHY The People called Quakers DO NOT PAY
TITHES AND OTHER Ecclesiastical Impositions.

PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN THIRD-STREET, MDCCLXXI.

REASONS WHY The People called QUAKERS DO NOT PAY TITHES.

LONDON Printed: And, PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
THIRD-STREET, MDCCLXXI.

REASONS WHY The People called QUAKERS do not pay TITHES.
1. BECAUSE Tithes were appointed by God, only under the Mosaical Law, for the
Portion of the Levites in lieu of their Inheritance in the Land of Canaan, as
well as for their Service in the Temple, which being long abolished and
destroyed, all Obligation to pay Tithe, as of God's Appointment, ceased
therewith.

2. Because being a Part of the ceremonial Law, which was abrogated by our
Savior's offering himself once for all a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins
of the whole World, to pay or receive Tithes now, is to continue that in Part,
which he came to abolish.

3. Because we are of the Judgment, all compulsory Maintenance of Ministers is
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ Jesus our great Lord and Lawgiver, who
first and above all others should be heard in this Matter, and whose Injunction
we are of Opinion virtually prohibits the Practice under the Gospel, as the
same is expressed in his Charge to the first Ministers thereof, Matthew. x. 8.
Freely ye have received, freely give.

4. Because we find no Precept nor Precedent in the New Testament for the
receiving or paying of Tithes: But on the contrary we understand the Payment of
Tithes, and all forced Maintenance of Ministers to be in direct Opposition to
the Apostolical Doctrine and Practice, as the same are recorded in the sacred
Writings of that Age, Acts xx. 33, 34, 35.
and evidently appears from the following concurring Scriptures. I have, says
Paul, coveted no Man's Silver or Gold, or Apparel; yea, you yourselves know,
that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and to those that are with
me, I have showed you, that so laboring you ought to support the Weak, For ye
remember, Brethren, 1 These. ii. 9.
our Labor and Travail, for laboring Night and Day, because we would not be
chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the Gospel of God. For we
behaved not ourselves disorderly among you, 2 These. iii. 7, 8.
neither did we eat any Man's Bread for naught but wrought with Labor and
Travail Night and Day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you; and
again, What is my Reward then? 1 Cor. ix^. 18, 19.
verily that when I preach the Gospel I may make the Gospel of Christ without
Charge that abuse not my Power in the Gospel. And the Apostle Peter who well
understood his great Master's Mind herein, writes thus to those who had been
called to the spiritual Oversight of the Churches. Feed the Flock of God which
is among you, taking the Oversight thereof, not by Constraint, 1 Pet. v. 2.3.
but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being
Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock.

5. Because by Ecclesiastical History, particularly Selden's History of Tithes,
it appears that Tithes were not claimed, or said in the Christian Church for
the three first Centuries.

6. Because Tithes were one of the many Innovations and Impositions introduced
in the Church, in the Night of gross Darkness and Apostasy from the original
Purity, and as such to be rejected, withstood and testified against in the
Reformation or Return from the Apostasy.

7. Because Tithes for the sole Use of the Parish Priest obtained not till
about the 13th Century, when they were appointed to be so paid by a decretal
Epistle of Pope Innocent III.

8. Because the Ordinance of the Pope, directing the Payment thereof, appears a
plain Contradiction to the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, whose Ordinances in point
of Conscience, we are bound to obey.

"But we find it is urged against us, that the Clergy do not now claim Tithe by
Divine Right, but as the Provision for their Support appointed by the Laws of
the Land; that although they were formerly granted by Princes or People
bigoted to Popery, and blinded by misguided Zeal, or paid in Compliance with
the Ordinances of Popes or Popish Councils: Yet being now the Grant of the
Parliament, and the Payment thereof by the Legislature ordained and made a Part
of the Laws of the Land; it is the Duty of all, as Subjects to comply
therewith, and to pay or set out their Tithe as the Law directs."

To this we answer, that we pay all due Respect to the Laws of the Land, and
where for Conscience Sake, we cannot actively comply with the Law, we have
patiently submitted to the Penalties annexed to the Noncompliance therewith:
And when these Penalties become grievous, we have, with proper Respect, not
thought it unreasonable or unbecoming us, to lay our (...) Case before
Parliament, in order to seek Redress.

But this Objection appears to us more specious than solid: The National Laws
in this Particular are grounded on Considerations inadmissible by us, they
enforce the Payment of Tithes on the Supposition of Divine Right, as Preamble
to the Act 32 Hen. VII.
due to God and holy Churh, whoever therefore claims Tithe by the Laws,
virtually claims them as due by Divine Right, for the Law, as far we
understand, grants them on no other Considerations, and therefore our Reasons
against paying them are not invalidated by the Reasoning of such as urge the
Law of the Land against us.

Yet further our Scruple is really conscientious, we think our Savior has
utterly abolished Tithes, with the ceremonial Law to which they belonged, and
has virtually prohibited all extorted Maintenance to Gospel Ministers; that
his immediate Followers so believed and so acted is evident to us from the
whole Tenor of their Writings: that his Authority in his Church is superior to
every human Authority, we presume will be universally allowed; that no Man or
Body of Men as Men are infallible, is a Protestant Principle; and that neither
the Magistrate nor the Legislature, more than any other Men can answer for our
doing or omitting, what in Conscience we believe to be our Duty.

On these clear Principles we think ourselves justified in not paying Tithes,
in withholding our active Compliance with the Laws of the Land whieh enjoin us
to pay them, and, declining voluntarily to contribute in any Way to the forced
Support of Ministers: On the same Principles, we allow no Stipends for the
Support of our own.

We admit the Power of the Civil Magistrate and the Obligation of human Laws
their full Scope in Civil Society, as far as they regard merely Civil Matters,
and so far we pay full Submission thereto, reserving to God the Things which
are God's, particularly the sole Dominion over the Conscience; whoever will
carry his Reasoning from the Force of human Laws farther than this, in our
Apprehension, will extend it beyond the Limits of Scripture, of the Principles
of the Christian Religion, and those of the Reformation.

From Scripture, where human Laws contradicted the Divine Law in the
Conscience, we have sundry Instances of Divine Approbation attending the
preferring of the Divine Law.

First, in the Case of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who refused Compliance
with the King's Decree in falling down to worship the golden Image. 2dly, Of
Daniel, who in Disobedience to the Law of the Medes and Persians, with his
Windows open toward Jerusalem, prayed and gave Thanks before his God, as he
did aforetime. 3dly, In that of Peter and John, who, when commanded by the
Rulers of the Jews to speak no more in the name of Jesus, durst not yield
Obedience to their Command, reasoning thus: "Whether it be right in the Sight
of God to hearken unto you more than to God, judge ye^" Acts iv. 19. On this
Principle the Christian Martyrs sealed their Testimony with their Blood; and on
this Principle the Protestant Reformers expired in the midst of the Flames.

We trust this Objection is now fully answered on incontestible Principles, and
that no injurious Insinuations can be fairly drawn from our Reasoning, as if we
meant any Parallel between the Rulers of those Times, and our own: We are fully
sensible of our Obligation to the present Government, for their Indulgences to
us: Our Conduct bespeaks our Disposition: To Facts as the best Witnesses
thereof we appeal for the Uprightness of our Intentions: To those entrusted
with the Sword of Magistracy, we dare refer ourselves for a Testimony of our
peaceable Demeanor and ready Obedience to the Legal Rule.

FINIS.
BRIEF REMARKS ON THE COMMON ARGUMENTS Now used in Support of diverse
Ecclesiastical Impositions In this NATION, Especially as they relate to
DISSENTERS.

By J. PHIPPS.

Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them. Mat.
vii. 12. NORWICH Printed: And, PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
THIRD-STREET, MDCCLXXI.

BRIEF REMARKS, etc.
THE modern Advocates for Ecclesiastical Impositions allege,

1. That Tithes are become in this Nation, a Demand of a civil Nature, because
they are given by the Laws of the Land.

2. That they are a Debt justly due to the legal Claimants, for the same Reason.

3. That they are equitable Demands, because every Tenant in the Kingdom, of
whom they are required, is allowed the Value of them by his Landlord, in the
Rent of his Farm.

4. From these Premises they infer, that such as refuse actually to pay them
when demanded, whether they be of the same Communion with the Claimants, or
conscientiuos Dissenters from them, act contrary to moral Honesty, and the
Precepts of the Gospel which command Submission to the higher Powers.

The first of these Allegations appears to be founded upon a supposition, that
Laws made by a civil Power render the Subjects of those Laws of a civil Nature.
But certainly spiritual Matters do not change their Nature, and become civil,
through any Exertion of human Authority concerning them.

Tithes were exacted in this Nation formerly upon Principles wholly
superstitious, as particularly appears from the Grant of King Stephen; the
Preamble to which runs in this manner: Because through the Providence of Divine
Mercy, we know it to be so ordered, and by the Church's publishing it far and
near, every Body has heard, that by the Distribution of Alms, Persons may be
absolved from the Bonds of Sin, and acquire the Rewards of heavenly Joys. I
Stephen, by the Grace of God King of England, being willing to have a Part with
them who by an happy kind of Trading, exchange heavenly Things for earthly, and
smitten with the Love of God, and for the Salvation of my own Soul, and the
Souls of my Father and Mother, and all my Forefathers and Ancestors, etc. He
then proceeds to the Confirmation of Tithes and other Grants, for the peculiar
Emolument of Ecclesiastics.

To claim Tithes as civil Dues because they have obtained the Sanction of the
civil Power, is not according to the Sense of those Laws upon which that Demand
is founded. See Stat. 27th and 37th of Hen. viii. which after supposing them,
in the Phrase of those Times, due to God and holy Church, and that withholding
the Payment of them, is acting against right and good Conscience, do not make
an Assignment of Tithes to the Clergy, de novo, as a new Grant, but taking it
for granted, that they are due to them by Divine Right, ex officio, or by
virtue of their office, do therefore enforce the Payment of them. And
accordingly, both these Statutes, and that of Edward vi. which is grounded upon
these, restrain all Suits and Trials on account of Tithes to the ecclesiastical
Courts; which demonstrate they were not enacted as Dues of a civil Nature.
Thus, these very Laws which are said to render this Demand of a civil Nature,
evidently imply the contrary, by presuming it is of Divine Right; and as the
Clergy claim Tithes upon the Authority of these Laws, they must claim them upon
that Presumption. If they have no Divine Right, they have therefore no Right at
all. The Truth is, they have procured Power, by Laws grounded on erroneous
Principles, to demand and force them out of the Hands of the Owners.

Tithes are not imposed in the manner of a civil Tax. They are not paid to
civil Officers. They are founded on religious Considerations. The Intent of
imposing them is, to support religious Ministers in the Pursuit of religious
Duties. Being not required for a civil, but a religious Purpose, the Payment of
them is to be treated as a Matter of religious Concern.

I with pleasure acknowledge, that I am well assured, diverse of the Clergy
appear tender of exacting upon Dissenters from the legal Establishment, being
neither willing to use Force upon Conscience, nor to claim any Part of the
Property of those who receive no Obligation at their Hands. Yet the Conduct of
many sufficiently evidence, they have not yet laid aside the Practice of
reaping where they have not sown, and gathering where they have not strawed.
Notwithstanding which, it is a certain Truth, that no other Ministry upon Earth
but that of the Tribe of Levi, who were allowed no landed Inheritances, appear
to have been Divinely authorized to receive Tithes of the People. These
therefore having a Divine Command for them, had a Divine Right in them; yet
were not empowered to take them by Force, but to receive them as an Offering
from their Brethren. 1 Samuel ii. 16, 17.
The just Condemnation of Hophni and Phinehas is a standing Sentence upon all
who succeed them in forcible Practices. In the fullness of Time, CHRIST, Romans x.
4.
who is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, by
the Introduction of Christianity, abolished the Jewish Law and its Priesthood,
Heb. vii. 12, 13.
with all the Services and Appropriations thereunto belonging. Since that Time,
no Set of Ministers upon Earth can show a Divine Right to the Tenth of other
Men's Produce, on account of their Ministry.

The Command of Our Lord to his Messengers is, Mat. x. 8.
freely ye have received, freely give. This clearly intimates, his Ministry is
not a scholastic, or human Acquisition, that a Man may be expensively and
externally bred to, or that he ought to be bred to for a Livelihood, but the
free gift of GOD for the People, and that it ought to be as freely dispensed to
them by his Ministers. Yet seeing it is just and necessary these should be
provided for, when called from their proper Employments at Home, to attend the
Service of the Gospel Abroad, Ver. 10.
for the Workman is worthy of his Meat; therefore they have a Right to partake
of what is set before them, and to accept such Requisites as are freely
communicated to them, by those who receive them and their Doctrine, whose Duty
it is to minister to their Necessities. Yet the Servants of CHRIST are not
authorized by him to demand, much less to force any Thing from those who reject
their Testimony. They are not by the Scriptures allowed, either Dominion over
their Faith, or over their Purses. This has been the Usurpation of after
Times, under the grand Apostasy.

II. As the Foundation upon which Tithes are exacted is not of a civil Nature,
neither can they be a just Debt upon those who are of distinct Societies in
point of Religion from that of the Demanders. The Quakers in particular, have
no Connection with the legally established Clergy, but in a natural or in a
civil Relation. They are not of the same religious Society with them, therefore
these are no Ministers to them, and by consequence, can have no equitable
Demand upon them as such.

The freeborn People, or civil Body of this Nation, since Protestantism gained
the Ascendant, consists not of any one Sort of Professors, whether more or less
in Number, but of many different religiously-connected Societies, each of whom
has its own peculiar Ministers. The Ministers of any one of these Societies,
are not Ministers to any other of these Societies; therefore no one particular
Set of these Ministers can, with Propriety, be called the Clergy, or Ministry
of the Nation, nor any Demand be justly made upon the whole civil Body by them
as such; for they are Ministers to no other Part of the Community, but that one
religious Society they are joined to, and adopted by. And every Person freed
from the Shackles of Prejudice, and really disposed to Uprightness and
Impartiality, must easily discover the Reasonableness of every such Society's
supporting their own Ministers, who think they ought to be maintained, without
seeking to save their own Pockets, by forcibly obliging those of other
Societies to assist in defraying the Expenses proper to themselves only. And as
it is reasonable, it would not be less honorable, in that large religious
Body, out of whom the Legislature and Magistracy are selected, to maintain
their own Ministers, without putting them upon, or allowing them in the
disagreeable and disreputable Practice of distressing others for that Prupose.
The Enjoyment of all the lucrative Advantages of Government amongst themselves,
added to their own Possessions, would certainly well enable them to afford it.
This would also contribute much to the Peace of the Community, and the Security
of private Familes, as it would prevent all future Occasion to gratify a Spirit
in the Clergy injurious to themselves as well as others, by entrusting them
with a Power of an oppressive Nature, over the Liberty and Properties of those
who conscientiously dissent from them.

The encroaching Part of the Clergy have always adopted, with peculiar
Fondness, the Words Right, Dues, and Property; and constantly style their
Demands by these Names, in order to impress them upon others as such, and too
many have been taken with the Snare. These Terms are justly applicable to
Inheritances fairly descended, to Possessions honestly acquired, or uprightly
purchased. For in these the Proprietors have a just and moral Right, was there
no external Law in Being to confirm it. To them just Law gives no Right, it
only adds Security to Possession. If by any Law this Property be rendered
insecure, or any Part thereof alienated from the Proprietor against his Will,
or without yielding him an Equivalent, such Law is a Violation of Equity, which
is GOD'S standing Law, and must therefore be in its Nature null and void; for
no human Authority is divinely warranted to dispense with the Law of Equity.
And as an Ingenuous Writer observes, Animadversions on a Pamphlet, entitled,
'The Rights of the Clergy of Ireland,' etc. Page 25.
As I derive not my Property from the Laws, but only the Security thereof, the
Legislature cannot properly reassume it, as they never gave it; unless my
Possession thereof interfere with the public Good, and then not without an
Equivalent. But this cannot be said of such Possessions as are only given to
any by Law, to which there is a prior or juster Claim in others.

An erroneously founded Law may authorize a Person to commit wrong with legal
Impunity, but it cannot sanctify the Act of wrong, nor justify the Actor in
reality. If it could, there would be no Necessity to render an Equivalent to
private Possessors, for the Damage done to their Estates in order to the
public Service. But certainly the Legislature judges Right, in impowering the
Commissioners and Trustees it appoints to erect public Buildings, or to lay
out Roads, to make Compensation to the Owners of private Property, for the
Injury their Estates may suffer thereby. And why the Clergy should be indulged
with a Prerogative to act as if Wrong was Right in their Hands, is what the
rest of Mankind want a Reason for. It Is natural from their Station and
Pretenses, rather to expect a better, than a worse Example from them than from
others. But their Predecessors, by taking advantage of the People's Ignorance,
and the Superstition themselves had introduced, in Popish Times, craftily
obtained Laws in favor of their lucrative and ambitious Views; and though
these Laws still remain in Being, yet their Foundation being wrong, they cannot
be binding upon Conscience so as to compel active Obedience; because thereby
those in Prejudice to whom they are enacted, would of Right be obliged to
become Parties to Injustice even in their own Wrong.

We have often been amused with an artificial Distinction between legal Justice
and moral Righteousness. But how can it be right to consider Law as separate
from Equity, and yet call it Justice? It Is paying too great a Compliment to
Power, at the Expense of Truth and Righteousness; for what Justice can there be
in Iniquity? If in any case legal Injunction differs from moral Right, it
appears to me so far from being right, that wherein it differs, it is wholly
wrong; and no human Power has Authority from GOD to supercede any Law of his,
whether that which he writes in the Heart of Man, or that which is fairly
gathered from the Precepts of the New Testament. All the Laws of Men
inconsistent with either of these, are naturally void and of (...) force,
because they are against a prior preceding indispensable Obligation, which all
Men are under to their supreme Lord and Lawgiver. And, it is unquestionably the
Duty of Christian Legislators, to make the Laws agreeable to the Precepts and
Doctrines of the Gospel; otherwise the real practical Christian, who cannot
yield actual Obedience to them, must be proportionably excluded from the
Benefit of the Laws, whilst the Time-serving Sycophant, the occasional
Conformist, and the inequitable Oppressor, reap the full advantage of them.

III. It is alleged, that Tithes are equitable Claims, because every Tenant is
allowed the Value of them by his Landlord, in the Rent of his Farm.

Were this a real Fact in the Case of others, it has no relation to the Quaker,
who makes no such Bargain with his Landlord, nor who could accept of no such
Conditions, were they proposed to him. He takes the Land simply as he finds it,
and where it has the Encumbrance of Tithes upon it, he comes under no
Obligation with his Landlord actively to pay them, because it is against his
Conscience to do it; but for Conscience Sake he peaceably suffers them to be
taken from him. But this will not always content the Parson. If he cannot force
the Quaker into the Sin of Hypocrisy, by an active and voluntary Delivery of
Tithe against his Conscience, he will sometimes absurdly complain he is
defrauded. Thus his Demand is not only for what he improperly styles his Due,
but also for what cannot possibly be due to any Man: the Sovereignty of other
Men's Conscience.

Our Compliance against Conscience has frequently been urged by Clerical
Advocates, as a point of Gratitude necessarily due to the Government, and
expected by it, in return for the Relief it has in other Respects afforded us.
As to the Government, we have not been wanting affectionately to acknowledge
our Obligations, and to render it any Service in our Power, consistent with our
religious Duty, and we cannot in reason imagine, that its View in easing our
Consciences in some Particulars, is to lay us under Obligation to violate them
in others.

The Pretense of Tithes being paid by the Land, and therefore allowed by the
Landlord to his Tenant, that he may pay the Demand for him, is fallacious. For
though the Proprietor may be obliged to let his Land for less than he might do,
was not the Burden of Tithe upon it, it is not because of any voluntary Contract
between Landlord and Tenant, that the latter shall pay Tithe for the account of
the former; nor is the Value left in the Tenant's Hands for that Purpose. Every
considerate Person must readily discover, it is not the Land, but the Increase
that Tithes are taken out of; and that their Amount is more or less, according
to the Variation of the Increase: And if the Landlord is a Loser by reason of
this Exaction, the Tenant is more so, the Tithe being taken out of his
Increase, and in proportion thereto.

Anthony Pearson, in his great Case of Tithes, has long since showed, that it
is not the Land which pays the Tithe, where there is Land in the Case, but the
Produce which is raised by the Skill, Care, Expense, and Labor of the
Occupier, in whose Power it is to make it much, little, or nothing, at his
pleasure. If he sows it with Corn, it may happen, as it has frequently done,
that the Tithe is worth three times the Rent of the Land it grows upon. If he
pastures it with Sheep, the Tithe will be less; and less still if he feeds it
with Cows, or breeding Cattle. If he eats up his Grass by Horses, or barren
Cattle, an inconsiderable Rate is required. If he plants Wood, and lets it
stand for Timber, or stocks it with Beasts which are ferae Naturae, of a wild
Nature, or lets his Land lie waste, or eats his Meadow, or Corn standing, no
Tithe can be required. These Instances evince, that Tithes are paid by the
Stock, or personal Estate of the Occupier, and not by the Land, for which the
Tenant has not an Equivalent allowed him.

Though the Quaker pay less Rent for a Farm with the Burden of Tithes upon it;
than he might was it free from that Disadvantage, it is not by way of Agreement
with his Landlord to pay Tithes for him, as will clearly appear by-and-by, but
because his Landlord cannot let it higher to any Tenant, as every one is
sensible the Tenth of the Produce, raised upon such Land, will be taken from
him.

But was the Argument under Consideration a good one in any respect, it reaches
not the Case where Quakers are the Land-Owners, nor where Land is out of the
question, as in Cities, corporate Towns, and other Places where no praedial
Tithe arises, and therefore a Modus, or certain Value in stead of Tithe, is
demanded of the Householders as such, for the Maintenance of the Clergy, as by
Law established.

We have already seen, where Tithes are taken, it is entirely from the Produce
of every Husbandman's and Housholder's Estate, whether real or personal, from
whence this Portion of their Property is alienated merely by Law. And if when
private Property is thus alienated from the right Owner, however unjustly, it
is then become the equitable Right of those the Law has assigned it to, the
Law in such case does not confirm and defend Right where it properly is, but
changes Wrong into Right, and may upon the same Foundation, overturn all the
private Property in the Kingdom, and cause it to change hands at pleasure, to
the Ruin of the Right Owners, and for the peculiar Emolument of those, in a
separate Interest, who may have Address and Influence sufficient to procure the
Enaction of such Laws in their favor. But surely this would be contrary to
Equity, and that which would be totally wrong if wholly done, must be wrong in
part so far as it goes, and will remain to be wrong so long as it is continued,
If an Encumbrance imposed upon Land, or the Produce thereof, continue till it
lessens the Value of the Land, such Encumbrance, can never by that Continuance,
equitably become the Property of its Procurers, though it may be forcibly
possessed by them. If we put the Case fairly, we may readily perceive in whom
the Right centers.

A Person stands possessed of an Estate in Land, either by just Inheritance, or
fair Purchase, clear of all Encumbrance: A member of artful Men, in combination
for their own particular Interest, by untrue Pretenses procure a Law to empower
them to demand, and upon refusal to seize a part of the Increase arising from
the Occupation of this Land, without rendering the Occupier any thing adequate
for it: In consequence of this Imposition the Value of the Land becomes
lessened; so that during the Continuance of this Burden, if it happens to be
sold, it must be disposed of for less than its real Worth. Who in this Case is
the Loser? Certainly the Seller, and his rightly succeeding Heirs. If therefore
the Purchaser stands justly indebted to any Person on account of the Abatement
in Price, occasioned by the Encumbrance, it cannot be to the Tithe-Claimer, who
has no equitable Right in the Estate, but to the Seller who has. But if the
Tithe-Claimant annually takes from the Purchaser to the exact Amount, of the
Seller's Loss, in point of Equity, he stands indebted to the Seller for it. If
he take more than that Amount from the Purchaser, he stands indebted both to
the Buyer and Seller. And if the Land-Owner, is obliged to let his Land at a
Rent below its real Value, by reason of such Imposition, the Tithe-taker stands
Debtor to him for the Amount of the Difference in his Rent; so he also does to
the Tenant, or Occupier, for all that is taken out of his Produce above this
Difference. It is theirs in Equity, and must ever remain to be their Right, and
the Right of their proper Heirs and Successors, unless by Gift, Sale, or
Demise, they alienate it by their own Act, or Consent, and can never equitably
revert from one Imposer to another, by virtue of human Law, which whenever it
differs from, and enforces against Equity, is unequal, and what is unequal is
immoral, and by consequence antichristian.

It has been alleged, that Because the Buyer paysless for the Purchase of an
Estate, the Produce of which is subjected to the Demand of Tithes, than he
might do if it were not so, that he therefore consents to the Payment of them
by making the Purchase; wherein he also avails himself of the Law, by the
Abatement he receives in the Price.

That he who purchases an Estate, the Produce of which is Titheable, pays less
for it than if it had remained free from that Demand, is true; but why? Because
he cannot make a Rent of it answerable to the full Value: therefore it is worth
no more to him than he gives for it. If a piece of Land is Tithe-free, the
Buyer pays the full Value for it, and fixes a Rent accordingly. If it is liable
to the Demand of Tithe, he pays less for the Purchase, and receives a Rent
proportionably lower to the difference in Price: So that the Matter squares
with the Landlord without his being affected with the Tithe. How then does he
avail himself of the Law, in the Purchase, and bring himself under Obligation
to pay Tithe, which in reality he does not pay? If any Person receives the
Benefit of the Abatement, it is not the Landlord, but the Tithe-Exactor, who
takes it from the Occupier; and the Loss which accrues in the Abatement, falls
upon the original Seller under the Encumbrance, and his Heirs. And where the
Land-Owner occupies his own Estate, he is liable to that Demand, not as
Land-Owner, but as Occupier; and if he stands equitably indebted to any Person,
for the Abatement in the Purchase, it must be to those in whom the Right,
according to Equity, remains; that is, to the original Seller abovementioned,
or to his rightly succeeeding Heirs; and not to those Demanders whose Claim is
founded on untrue Pretensions, and exacted by Law against Equity.

To those who plead the Gift of Tithes from former Possessors of the Land, or
that allege the Length of Time, the successive Claimants have been in
Possession of these Impositions; I answer,

1. No Ancestor of mine had a Right to give away from me the Fruits of my
Labor and Expense, which never could be his, for Purposes I cannot in
Conscience and Equity comply with. My misled Predecessor never could be
entitled to dispose of my Conscience and Properly for me, before I existed, in
support of the prevailing Errors of his Age.

2. No length of Time, or term of Possession, can abolish the eternal Law of
Equity, nor render that right which stands upon a wrong Foundation. Right and
Wrong are not convertible Terms; nor is it in the Power, of Time, either to
reverse, or reconcile their contrary Natures, which must always necessarily
remain in their true Distinctions.

We have also been told, that by voting for Representatives to sit in
Parliament, we give our Consent to all the Laws they make, and ought therefore
to yield active Obedience thereunto without reserve.

Though I cannot acquiesce in this Position, yet I am subject upon Principle,
to whatever is enjoined by the Legislature, yielding active Obedience, when
according to my Conscience and passively submitting when opposite thereto. But
though I submit to these Injunctions, I cannot esteem them as my Act and Deed,
when in my Conscience I believe them to be wrong. That Elector who by giving
his Voice for Representatives, obliges himself actively to obey every Thing
they may enact, especially in religious Matters, makes too full a surrender of
his just Rights, to be warranted either by the Laws of God, or the Rules of
right Reason; both which determine the perfect Resignation of the Conscience to
be due to God only.

By diverse of the same Arguments, which I have already considered, is the
Demand upon us, for those called Church-Rates, endeavored to be defended. I
shall therefore now, just briefly add the Grounds of our Scruple against the
Payment of them.

We cannot look upon these, any more than the Stipends of the Clergy, as a
civil Tax: Because they are for the Support of Buildings pretended to be made
holy by the Bishop's Consecration, and where such a manner of Worship is
practiced as we cannot join with; for buying, washing, and mending Surplices;
for purchasing Bells, Organs, and Books to pray and sing by; for defraying the
Expense of Entertainments for Priests, Churchwardens, etc. at Visitations; and
for Fees to Registers, Apparitors, and the like Attendants on such an
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as the Doctrine of the Gospel does not authorize.

IV. The Submission required in the New Testament to the higher Powers of the
Earth, is not a Resignation of the Rights of Conscience, nor of that
unalienable Sovereignty therein which belongs to GOD only, into the Hands of
Men. 1 Pet. i. 13.
' It Is a Submission to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, either
actively when agreeable to the Conscience of the Subject, or passively when
against it. This was the Subjection our Savior led into, both by Precept and
Example, and that his Apostles and true Followers practiced through all Ages;
of which the Persecutions they suffered are so many Proofs.

Whilst therefore in Matters of religious Concern, Things remain to be imposed
on us, which we conceive to be contrary to moral Equity, and the Precepts of
the Gospel, we must in Duty to the sovereign Lord of all, continue to bear our
Testimony against them, by our Noncompliance with them. For our Constancy in
this respect, we are often reflected upon with Asperity as unjust and
obstinate, and assumingly called upon either to resign our Principles, or to
counteract them in Practice; and so to render ourselves either Cowards, or
Hyprocrites.

With regard to the Charge of Injustice, I have already shown to whom it
properly belongs, in these Cases. And respecting Obstinacy, what the Warmth of
our Misinterpreters calls by that opprobrious Name, when applied to us, we
think, in propriety should be styled Firmness, or Constancy. Obstinacy is an
Inflexibility in the Wrong, against sufficient Evidence. Firmness or Constancy,
is a Perseverance in the Right, through all the Attacks of Opposition. The
first arises from Ignorance, or Humor; the last from Principle. Upon this our
Conduct respecting the Demands I have considered is founded.

Our Principles, in brief, touching the Christian Ministry, are, that the true
Ministers of CHRIST are the Messengers of CHRIST, therefore must be sent by
himself; that the Dispensation of the Gospel is the Ministration of the holy
Spirit, either primarily by its immediate Influence, or secondarily by
instrumental Means; therefore the instrumental Dispensers of it must be
Ministers of the Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 6.
and not of the Letter only, that consequently their prime and essential
Qualification is that of the Spirit, in order to enable them to declare the
Mind of GOD to the People, 1 Pet. iv. 10, 11.
and to speak profitably to their present Conditions; and that, as they at
Seasons freely receive this true Qualification for the Ministry, they must in
Duty administer it as freely, without any Stipulation for, or View to temporal
Interest whatsoever. How then can we consistently receive, or actively support
a Ministry different from all this? An Order of Men who upon their Entrance,
pretend to receive the Holy Ghost as a necessary Qualification to the Ministry,
and declare they trust they are inwardly moved by it to take that Office upon
them, yet afterward, in their Speeches and Writings, at least too generally,
deny that the Holy Ghost is either necessary to the Qualification of a
Minister, or that it is now to be expected, or experienced, and even deride the
very Profession of it. Romans viii. 9.
Yet it is undeniably true, that if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ he is
none of his; and consequently cannot be a Minister of his.

If it be our Duty to walk in Sincerity, and to act in all things consistent
with our religious Principles, how can we actively contribute to the
Maintenance of a Ministry which denies and opposes them? How can we in
opposition to the true Prophets, CHRIST, and his Apostles, actually support
such as they concurrently declared against? Those who run, Jer. xxiii. 21 xiv.
14. 1. Pet. iv. 10, 11. Mat. vii. 7. Mic. iii. 11.
yet are not sent of GOD, but one by another; who speak not as the Oracles of
GOD, but after their own Imaginations, or the Traditions and Injunctions of
others; who make use of their Ministry as a Means to supply their Wants, or to
gratify their Avarice or Ambition, and have too frequently been found imposing
and oppressing under the Sanction of Law, against the true Intent and Tenor of
the Gospel? Would not our actual Contribution to the Maintenance of such,
indicate an Approbation of them, and be a Confirmation of their Practices?

And how can we coherently assist in the Support of those Formalities and
Usages in Religion and Worship, which we are conscientiously concerned to
disuse? We profess it to be our indispensable Duty, faithfully to follow that
heavenly Principle which is Divine and unchangeable in its Nature. Can this
admit us to pull down, what it led our Predecessors to build, with the Loss of
their Liberty and Properties, and diverse of them with that of their Lives also?
Is CHRIST divided? Or, can he who is the same Yesterday, Today, and For-ever,
change with the Times, and fluctuate with the unstable Imaginations, and
corrupt Interests of Men? To differ with the World in Profession, and to
coincide with it in Practice, is irreconcilable with the Stability of Truth.
If we are led by the Spirit of Truth into a professed Dissent, we surely disown
the Truth by a contrary Conduct; and whilst our Friends are pained for us, to
see our Weakness, our Adversaries must despise us, to behold our Inconsistency.

Seeing therefore, we cannot actively comply with these Demands, without
setting human Authority above Divine, without joining hands with things against
our Consciences to practice, and without falling into the Absurdity of acting a
Self-contradiction; notwithstanding the Abuses we receive from our Opposers, we
must still choose rather patiently to suffer, than meanly to comply, or
hyprocritically to conform.

FINIS.

