Mr. Tucker's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 29. 1771.

A SERMON PREACHED AT CAMBRIDGE, BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire;
GOVERNOR: HIS HONOR ANDREW OLIVER, Esquire; LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, THE HONORABLE His
MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE PROVINCE
OF THE Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 29th. 1771.

BEING the Anniversary for the ELECTION of His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL for said
PROVINCE.

By JOHN TUCKER, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in NEWBURY.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
Governor, and the Honorable His Majesty's Council.

MDCCLXXI.

Province of MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In COUNCIL, May 30. 1771.
ORDERED, That HARRISON GRAY, GEORGE LEONARD, and BENJAMIN GREENLEAF, Esquires,
be a Committee to wait on the Rev'd Mr. JOHN TUCKER, with the Thanks of this
Board for his Sermon preached Yesterday, before his Excellency the Governor,
and the General Assembly, being the Day for the Election of His Majesty's
Council; and to desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

THO'S FLUCKER, Secr'y.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
1 PETER II. 13, 14, 15, 16. SUBMIT yourselves to every ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake: Whether it be to the King as supreme; or unto Governors, as
unto them who are sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men: As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.


THE great and wise Author of our being, has so formed us, that the love of
liberty is natural. This passion, like all other original principles of the
human mind, is, in itself, perfectly innocent, and designed for excellent
purposes, though, like them, liable, through abuse, of becoming the cause of
mischief to ourselves and others. In a civil state, the genius of whose
constitution is agreeable to it, this passion, while in its full vigor, and
under proper regulation, is not only the cement of the political body, but the
wakeful guardian of its interests, and the great animating spring of useful and
salutary operations; and then only is it injurious to the public, or to
individuals, when, through misapprehension of things, or by being overballanced
by self-love, it takes a wrong direction.

CIVIL and ecclesiastical societies are, in some essential points, different.
Our rights, as men, and our rights, as christians, are not, in all respects,
the same. It cannot, however, be reasonably supposed, but that this useful and
important principle, must, in its genuine influence and operation, be friendly
to both: For although our Savior has assured us, his kingdom is not of this
world; and it be manifest from the Gospel, which contains its constitution and
laws, that his subjects stand in some special relation, and are under some
peculiar subjection to him, distinct from their relation to, and connection
with civil societies, yet we justly conclude, that as this divine polity, with
its sacred maxims, proceeded from the wise and benevolent Author of our being,
none of its injunctions can be inconsistent with that love of liberty, he
himself has implanted in us, nor interfere with the laws and government of
human societies, whose constitution is consistent with the rights of men.

CHRIST came to set up a kingdom diverse, indeed, from the kingdoms of this
world, but it was no part of his design to put down, or destroy government and
rule among men. He came to procure liberty for his people, and to make them
free, in the most important sense, yet not to exempt them from subjection to
civil powers, or to dissolve their obligations to one another, as members of
political bodies.

As to things of this nature, all ecclesiastical constitutions and laws, as
coming from GOD, must leave men just as they were; because all civil societies,
founded on principles of reason and equity, are, as well as the peculiar laws
of Chistianity, agreeable to the Deity, and certainly, intimations from the
all-perfect mind, cannot be contradictory.

THESE things, seem not to have been rightly apprehended, and well understood
by men, at all times and in all places. The Jews, some of whom were early
proselyted to the christian faith, had imbibed high notions of their liberty,
and superiority to all others, as the peculiar people of GOD; and were loath to
own subjection to the Romans, as a civil state, when they were actually under
their dominion. And some converts from among the Gentiles, though they had not
these national prejudices. yet from their subjection to Jesus Christ, as their
King and Ruler, and, as it is probable, from mistaking the meaning of some
apostolic declarations, asserting their freedom, as christians, disclaimed
likewise all human authority over them.

MEN of this cast, gave no small trouble both to Church and State, in the early
days of the Gospel. Of such the Apostle Peter speaks where he says -- They
despise government: Presumptuous are they. Self-willed, they are not afraid to
speak evil of dignities. 2 Pet. II. 10.


SUCH men as these, and their seditious, turbulent behavior, I doubt not, this
same Apostle had in view, when he delivered the instructions in my text, by
which he endeavored to guard christians against their evil practices.

BUT, as all authority, demanding submission, and all submission, due to such
authority, are likely to be best understood, by having these things reduced to
their first principles; -- by having the foundation of such authority fairly
produced, and its just boundaries, which must be the measure of submission due
to it, clearly marked out: And as such submission is most likely to be duly
yielded, by having the reasons and motives thereof plainly exhibited, so these
are things which seem here aimed at by the Apostle. Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the King as supreme; or
unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by him for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God,
that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: As
free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God.

IN these words he gives us a compendium of civil government; representing its
origin and great design; that submission, or obedience which is due to it; and
the true principles from which such obedience should flow.

UPON this general view of the subject, it is obvious, that if handled with any
degree of propriety, it may offer useful instructions, both to Rulers, and
those under their government. -- A modest attempt to do this, will not, it is
hoped, be disagreeable to this respectable audience, by whom I ask to be heard
with patience and candor.

THE FIRST thing offered to our consideration is, the ORIGIN of civil
government, from whence all authority in the state must take its rise. And this
is said to be from man. Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, etc. More
intelligibly, perhaps, it might be rendered, "to every human Institution or
appointment." And this may be justly understood, as having respect to every
kind of civil government, under whatever form it is administered: -- It is the
ordinance, -- the institution or appointment of man.

THIS does not imply, however, that civil government is not from God; for thus
it is sometimes represented, and is expressly said to be the ordinance of God.
So St. Paul declares. -- There is no power but of God. The powers that be, are
ordained of God. Who ever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God. Romans XIII. 1, 7.


CIVIL government is not, indeed, so from God, as to be expressly appointed by
him in his word. Much less is any particular form of it there delineated, as a
standing model for the nations of the world: Nor are any particular persons,
pointed out, as having, in a lineal descent, an indefeasible right to rule over
others.

BUT civil government may be said to be from God, as it is he who qualifies men
for, and in his overruling providence, raises them to places of authority and
rule; for by him Kings reign: -- As he has given us, in his word, the character
of Rulers, and pointed out both their duty, and the duty of those under their
authority; which supposes, not only the existence of civil government, but that
it is agreeable to his will: And especially and chiefly, as civil government is
founded in the very nature of man, as a social being, and in the nature and
constitution of things. It is manifestly for the good of society: -- It is the
dictate of nature: -- It is the voice of reason, which may be said to be the
voice of God.

IT being only thus that civil government is the ordinance of God, there is no
impropriety in asserting likewise that it is the ordinance of man. For though
it is founded in the nature of man, and in the constitution of things, which
are from God, yet nothing is plainer, than that it proceeds immediately from
men. It is not a matter of necessity, strictly speaking, but of choice. This is
the case, as to government in general: -- This is most evidently the case, as
to any particular form of government.

ALL men are naturally in a state of freedom, and have an equal claim to
liberty. No one, by nature, nor by any special grant from the great Lord of
all, has any authority over another. All right therefore in any to rule over
others, must originate from those they rule over, and be granted by them.
Hence, all government, consistent with that natural freedom, to which all have
an equal claim, is founded in compact, or agreement between the parties; --
between Rulers and their Subjects, and can be no otherwise. Because Rulers,
receiving their authority originally and solely from the people, can be
rightfully possessed of no more, than these have consented to, and conveyed to
them.

AND the fundamental laws, which are the basis of government, and form the
political constitution of the state; -- which mark out, and fix the chief lines
and boundaries between the authority of Rulers, and the liberties and
privileges of the people, are, and can be no other, in a free state, than what
are mutually agreed upon and consented to. Whatever authority therefore the
supreme power has, to make laws, to appoint officers, etc. for the regulation
and government of the state, being an authority derived from the community, and
granted by them, can be justly exercised, only within certain limits, and to a
certain extent, according to agreement.

To suppose otherwise, and that without a delegated power and constitutional
right, Rulers may make laws, and appoint officers for their execution, and
force them into effect, i. e. according to their own arbitrary will and
pleasure, is to defeat the great design of civil government, and utterly to
abolish it. It is to make Rulers absolutely despotic, and to subject the people
to a state of slavery; because it will then be in the power of Rulers, by
virtue of new laws and regulations, they shall please to make, to subvert and
annihilate the present constitution, and to strip the subject of every kind of
privilege.

THIS may be briefly evidenced by a single instance.

IT is essential to a free state, for without this it cannot be free, that no
man shall have his property taken from him, but by his own consent, given by
himself or by others deputed to act for him. Let it be supposed then, that
Rulers assume a power to act contrary to this fundamental principle, what must
be the consequence? If by such usurped authority, they can demand and take a
penny, by the same authority they may a pound, and even the whole substance of
the subject, so as to make him wholly dependent on their pleasure, having
nothing that he can call his own; and what is he then but a perfect slave? Men
in society having property, they have such a right to the goods, which by the
law of the community are theirs, that nobody has a right to take their
substance, or any part of it from them, without their own consent: Without this
they have no property at all; for I have truly no property in that, which
another can by right take from me when he pleases against my consent. Hence it
is a mistake to think, that the supreme or legislative power of any
commonwealth, can do what it will, and dispose of the estates of the subject
arbitrarily, or take any part of them at pleasure. Lock on civil Government.


THIS, at first view, is manifestly inconsistent with all just conception of
freedom; and is the very essence of arbitrary and tyrannical power.

Now, all Rulers in a state, and all power and authority with which they are
vested; -- the very being, and form of government, with all its constitutional
laws, being thus from the people, hence civil government, is called, and with
great propriety, the ordinance of man, -- an human institution.

THIS is the case, as to the British government in particular, under which we
have the happiness to live. Its constitutional laws are comprised in
Magna-Charta, or the great charter of the nation. This contains, in general,
the liberties and privileges of the people, and is, virtually, a compact
between the King and them; the reigning Prince, explicitly engaging, by solemn
oath, to govern according to these laws: -- Beyond the extent of these then, or
contrary to them, he can have no rightful authority at all.

IF the preceding positions, and the reasonings from them are just, the
following things may be noticed, as deducible therefrom, or closely connected
therewith, -- That it is highly requisite, for the good of the state, that both
Rulers and people be well acquainted with, and keep in mind the constitutional
laws of government -- Rulers, that they may be directed and guided thereby, and
not depart from, or counteract the design of their institution, to the injury,
or disquietude of the people. -- And people, that knowing the bounds of
submission, and the extent of their privileges, they may be guarded against
transgression, and yield a ready and full obedience.

EQUALLY requisite it must be likewise, for the same end, that there be no
mysteries in the governing plan: -- That all laws and rules of government, be
as plain as possible, and easy to be understood, to prevent contentious
disputes between Rulers and their subjects; -- to preclude the former, from
tyrannical oppression, under color of lawful authority, and the latter from
rebellious disobedience, under pretense of privilege.

FOR, it follows from what has been said, that as all disobedience in subjects,
to constitutional authority, is rebellion against government, and merits
punishment adequate to the crime, so all assumed power in Rulers, not granted
them by the constitution, is without just authority, and so far forth, can
claim no submission.

"As usurpation," says the great and judicious Mr. LOCK, "is the exercise of
power which another has a right to, so Tyranny is the exercise of power beyond
right, which no body can have a right to." And again. "Wherever law ends,
Tyranny begins, if the law be transgressed to another's harm. And whosoever in
authority exceeds the power given him by law, and makes use of the force, he
has under his command, to compass that upon the subject, which the law allows
not, ceases in that to be a magistrate: And acting without authority, may be
opposed as any other man, who by force invades the right of another."

AND though it may not always be prudent and best, to resist such power, and
submission may be yielded, yet that the people have a right to resist, is
undeniable; otherwise the absurd and exploded doctrines of passive obedience,
and non-resistance, must be admitted in their utmost extent, and their
consequences patiently borne. And it must be granted finally, that the people
as well as their Rulers, are proper judges of the civil constitution they are
under, and of their own rights and privileges; else, how shall they know when
these are invaded; -- when submission is due to authoritative requisitions, and
when not?

BUT we are now to consider

SECONDLY, THE great design of Civil Government, and the end for which Rulers
are appointed; and that is the good of the community, or political body. --
Whether it be to the King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them who are
sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well.

RULERS are not appointed, indeed, for the happiness of the people, exclusive
of their own, as if these things were inconnected. But, as it would be
unreasonable, that some should be advanced above their brethren, -- be clothed
with authority, and honorably supported, merely for the sake of their own ease,
dignity and grandeur, so it would be equally unreasonable, that Rulers should
be slaves to the people, and watch and labor for their welfare, without
sharing in it.

BUT the happiness of Rulers and of their Subjects, are not thus exclusive of
each other, but perfectly coincident. They are both parts of the same body, --
their true interests are interwoven, and their happiness inseparable. Rulers,
acting agreeable to their institution, and attending on that very thing, are
justly entitled to esteem and reverence, and an honorable support from the
people, though these are not the things they ought to have chiefly in view.

THEY are to consider themselves as raised above their brethren, and invested
with authority, for more noble and generous purposes; -- for the peace and
welfare of the Community, committed to their care: Hence it is said, of the
civil Ruler, he is the minister of God to thee for good. Romans XIII. 4.


NOR can any other end be imagined, worthy of reasonable beings, why men should
put themselves out of a state of natural freedom, and subject themselves to the
authority and rule of others, but for their greater good; -- for the securing,
more effectually, their just rights, liberties and privileges.

THIS is the great end of their forming into society; -- of their establishing
certain laws, as the general measures of right and wrong, and giving power to
some, to govern the whole community by such laws.

THIS being the design of civil government, good Rulers are justly considered
as benefactors to the people. They are placed as watchmen and guardians over
the state, whose special business it is, both in their legislative and
executive capacity, to consult and promote its welfare. To curb and restrain
the unrighteous and factious, from acts of fraud, rapine and violence, and to
protect others in the peaceable enjoyment of their rights. To punish
transgressors, -- to relieve the oppressed, dispensing, with an equal and
impartial hand, justice to all.

FOR, it is necessary for the support of government, and that the great and
salutary ends of it may be answered, not only that its laws be just, but that
they be enforced by proper sanctions; fitted to affect the human mind, and to
engage obedience; and that Rulers have power to execute such laws, in the
punishment of evildoers, and for a praise, -- for the support and
encouragement of them that do well.

FROM this view of our subject, it appears of high importance, to the good of
the state, that they who are vested with power to make laws for the Community,
as there shall be occasion, and to appoint officers for their execution, have
qualifications answerable to their high places of power and trust. -- That they
be men of superior knowledge and wisdom; -- well acquainted with the civil
constitution; -- with the just boundaries between the prerogative of Rulers,
and the liberties of the People, that their laws may be duly framed, and
adjusted to the political system. -- Men able critically to examine the
complexion of the state; -- to search out its disorders, and to apply proper
remedies: -- Able to judge of the natural course and tendency of things, and to
foresee, beyond what is common, the operation, and consequences of their own
acts; -- how the rights of individuals -- how the common good will be affected
thereby.

THEY should be men of great ingenuity and candor; -- ready to receive light
when offered, -- to redress grievances, when convinced of them, and to amend,
(...) ^epeal their own Acts, when found inju^^^^^, or not answering the good
intentions designed. Pretenses to perfect wisdom and knowledge, and
inerrability of judgment, in civil, as well as ecclesiastical matters, ill
become the highest mortal; and are likely to produce unhappy effects, when
found in Rulers, especially if accompanied with an obstinate adherence to their
own measures.

THEY should be men of great goodness and benevolence of heart, who will
naturally care for the welfare of their brethren, and treat them with
condescension and kindness. Such a behavior, corrected and managed by
prudence, is perfectly consistent with their maintaining the dignity of their
character, and will greatly endear them to the people. That council of the old
men, to king Rehoboam, was wise and good, and agreeable to the sentiments and
feelings of human nature. If thou will be a servant to this people this day,
and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they
will be thy servants forever. 1 Kings, XII. 7.


Again, RULERS should be men free from a sordid covetous temper, which has
self-interest like the pole star ever in view, and endeavors to steer all
things by that direction. As they are designed to act for the public good, they
should be men of liberal and generous souls; -- ready to prefer the common
safety and happiness, to their own private emolument.

THEY should be likewise men of great resolution and firmness of mind; -- not
easily dismayed and overcome by difficulties, or intimidated by threatened
dangers: -- Able to maintain a calmness of mind, and to guide with a steady
hand, in tempestuous seasons: -- Able to bear with the unpolished plainness of
some honest men, and with the weaknesses and follies of others: -- Not apt, in
a pet, to desert the common cause, and to sacrifice the public happiness to
their own passionate resentments.

And, finally. IT must be of great importance, to the good order and welfare
of the state, that Rulers be men of distinguished piety and virtue, who will be
likely to rule by example as well as law. It was an act of prudence, as well as
piety in Nehemiah, -- his appointing one to a place of high trust in
government; Nehem. VII. 2.
because he was a faithful man, and feared God above many. A firm belief of
Revelation: -- A strong impressive sense of the divine and everlasting things
declared in the Gospel, -- this will secure the good conduct of Rulers,
especially when under temptation to do wrong, above every thing else. True
religion inlarges, and strengthens the mind, -- fixes deep in the heart, the
principles of right action, and gives steadiness and uniformity of behavior.

MEN of this character will act with fidelity and zeal in the service of the
public, considering themselves as accountable to God, as well as to men. They
look beyond the present state of things, and view their conduct as connected
with futurities of a most interesting nature; and will aim at approving
themselves, not only to the people, but to their own minds, and to God the
Judge of all.

SUCH Rulers will best answer the great ends of their institution. They will be
to the people, as the directing, -- as the chearing and comforting light of the
Sun. -- As the refreshing rain, -- as the firm, unshaken pillars of the state,
-- the shield of its defense and safety, and the source of constant blessings.
Nor can they fail of engaging the esteem and love, and submission of the people.

WE may now in the THIRD place, consider that submission which is due to
government; and take some particular notice of the nature and extent of it.
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, etc. Similar to which is that of St. Paul, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. -- Put them in mind to be subject
to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, etc.

THE duties of Rulers and Subjects are reciprocal, and mutually imply each
other. If some are to govern, others are to submit to their government, and to
be obedient to their authority; otherwise Rulers are but an empty name; -- the
constitution is dissolved, and anarchy ensues.

NOR is this submission due only to the Supreme Ruler, but to all in lawful
authority under him, down to the lowest officer in the state. Not only to the
King, but to those who are sent by him, to carry on the various parts of the
administration. Disobedience to inferior officers, while acting by lawful
authority, is disobedience to the highest power, as it is by authority derived
from thence, that all in subordinate places of civil trust, execute their
offices. Submission is likewise due to all constitutional laws, whether, they
suit the present interest of individuals, or not. A man is not to disobey a
just law, calculated for the public good, because, in certain circumstances, it
operates against his private interest.

UNLIMITED submission, however, is not due to government, in a free state.
There are certain boundaries, beyond which, submission cannot be justly
required, nor is therefore due. These limits are marked out, and fixed, by the
known, established, and fundamental laws of the state. These laws being
consented to by the governing power, confine, as well as direct its operation
and influence, and are the connecting band between authority and obedience.

AND no wise and just Ruler, we may suppose, would aim at wantonly leaping over
these bounds, and acting beyond them, as this would be, not only acting without
lawful authority, and injuriously robbing the people of their rights, but would
tend to create unhappy jealousies, and to stir up broils and contentions in the
state, which might give him much uneasiness, if no worse consequences should
follow.

IT was a fine expression of a Spartan Ruler, and indicated the freedom and
happiness of the state, who, upon being asked, "who governed at Sparta?
answered the laws, and the magistrates according to these laws." The
constitutional laws of the state, are, properly, the supreme power, being
obligatory on the whole community, -- on the highest officer, as well as the
lowest subject.

HERE then, we have the just measure and extent of submission. It is due to all
decrees and requisitions of the legislature, which are consistent with the
known, and fundamental laws of the state, by which fundamental laws, the very
law-making power itself is limited, and beyond which it cannot pass.

AND it seems immaterial, as to the present point, whether such authority in
Rulers, and submission in subjects, result directly and wholly from the
original constitution and frame of government, or from subsequent compacts
between them, mutually agreed to.

ALL such compacts, whether under the name of charter-grants, or however
denominated, must be supposed agreeable to the fundamental laws of the state,
and grounded thereon. i. e. Such as the ruling power has authority to make, or
enter into, and the people freely accept of.

UPON such agreement, a particular kind of government, in some respects new,
may take place; but, so far as it is new, or variant from the original
constitution, this subsequent agreement between Rulers and people, ought to be
the invariable measure of administration. -- This bounds the authority of
Rulers, and the submission of subjects. -- The people, while they owe
obedience, have an undoubted right to their granted, or stipulated privileges;
and may justly claim, and insist upon them, unless, by misconduct, they are
forfeited.

UPON the whole therefore. Proper submission, in a free state, is a medium,
between slavish subjection to arbitrary claims of Rulers, on one hand, and a
lawless license, on the other. It is obedience in subjects to all orders of
government, which are consistent with their constitutional rights and
privileges. So much submission is due, and to be readily yielded by every
subject; and beyond this, it cannot be justly demanded, because Rulers and
People are equally bound, by the fundamental laws of the constitution.

THE state of the world, and temper of mankind, may render these observations
necessary and highly important; -- important and necessary as a check upon
Rulers of a despotic turn; and a restraint upon the licentious among the
people; that neither, by breaking over their just bounds, may disturb the
peace, and injure the happiness of the state.

FOR there have been Rulers, and may be such again, who look with wishful eyes
on the liberties and privileges of the people. Who consider them as a prey,
worthy to be seized, for the gratification of their pride and ambition, -- of
their cruelty or covetousness Such, under one pretense or other, will be
stretching and enlarging their power, and grasping at more and more, 'till, if
not obstructed, civil government will be converted into absolute tyranny, and a
free people into slaves.

A PEOPLE in love with liberty, and sensible of their right to it, cannot but
be jealous of such Rulers; and ought to be on their guard against unjustifiable
and arbitrary claims. Tamely to submit, would be highly unworthy of them as
free men, and show they deserved the yoke, under which they so readily put
their necks.

ON the other hand. There are found among the people, persons of a querulous
and factious disposition. -- Ever restless and uneasy, and prepared to raise
and promote popular tumults. From the mere love of wrangling, or from ambitious
views, -- to rise from obscurity, to public notice, and to an important figure,
they find fault with Rulers, and point out defects in the administration. --
Small mistakes are magnified. -- Evil designs are suggested, which, perhaps
never existed, but in their own heads. They cry up liberty, and make a mighty
stir to save the sinking state, when in no danger, but from themselves, and
others of a like cast.

THERE are ambitious and designing men, in the state, as well as in the church;
and there are fit tools to serve the purposes of both. As some make heretics
in the church, and raise an ecclesiastic posse to demolish them, chiefly with a
view to render themselves distinguished, as sound in the faith; so others make
traitors in the state, and raise the popular cry against them, to gain to
themselves the name of Patriots.

THE wise and prudent will make a pause, before they inlist under such
political zealots. They will judge for themselves of the faulted conduct of
their Rulers. They will make reasonable allowances for human frailties, and be
as ready to yield submision where it is due, as to defend their liberties where
they are in danger.

WE proceed now in the LAST place. -- To take notice of the principles from
which submission and obedience to government should flow. And these are, a
sense of our duty to God, as well as to civil Authority, connected with, and
animated by a sense of liberty. Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake. -- As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

TRUE religion: -- A sacred reverence of the Deity: -- The love of virtue and
goodness, are as necessary to make good subjects, as good Rulers: And a spirit
of liberty is requisite, to render obedience true and genuine both to God and
man.

EVEN the supreme Ruler of the world, is not a despotic, arbitrary Monarch, nor
does he require obedience by mere authority. His sacred laws, -- all framed
agreeable to the perfect rectitude of his nature, and resulting from his
infinite goodness, and righteousness, are wisely adapted to the human system,
and calculated for its good.

THEY recommend themselves to the reason of our own minds, and manifestly tend
to our happiness: -- We see our interest as well as our duty in them, and that
these are closely connected.

AGREEABLE to the nature and tendency of these divine mandates, the obedience
God requires of us, is not that of slaves, to a tyrannical master, but that of
children, to a wise and benevolent father. It must be free, -- a matter of
choice, and not of force, driving us on against a reluctant mind.

LIKE to this, is the obedience we owe to civil government. Supposing its laws
founded, as they ought to be, in reason and equity, and calculated for the good
of society, they demand our approbation. And being under their authority, as
members of the political body, both duty and interest require our submission.

BUT as all earthly Rulers, as well as all human institutions, may be supposed
to be imperfect; and submission may be required, inconsistent with our just
rights and privileges, there is a liberty, of a somewhat different nature,
respecting civil government, we have a claim to, and which should have
influence on our conduct, i. e. a liberty to withold, as well as to yield
submission.

FOR, even a christian people, who, from their character, as servants of God,
are bound to submit to the higher powers, and to obey Magistrates, are not, out
of courtly complaisance to their Rulers, or from a mean, timorous, and slavish
temper, to resign up their just rights, when imperiously demanded, or craftily
sought after. Remembering they are freemen and not slaves, they should act as
free.

THEY have an undoubted privilege to complain of unconstitutional measures in
government, and of unlawful encroachments upon their rights; and may, while
they do it with becoming decency, do it with that noble freedom and firmness,
which a sense of wrong, joined with the love of liberty, will inspire.

EVEN under great and manifest oppression, a prudent regard to their own, and
the public safety, may forbid, indeed, violent means of resistance; but should
never lead them, tamely to yield to unlawful claims.

CHALLENGING their right, and pleading for it, though this should not prevail to
the immediate redress of grievances, yet may be of high importance, to keep
alive, -- to cherish and strengthen, -- not a spirit of faction and discontent,
but that spirit of liberty, which is, as it were, the animating soul of a free
state; -- which being once gone, every thing valuable will become an easy prey,
and a state of abject slavery ensue, to live in which, may be far worse, than
to be free among the dead.

BUT still, on the other hand: -- While a people consider themselves as free,
and are zealous to maintain their liberty, they should remember also their
subjection to civil authority, and to God, the righteous Judge of all; and be
careful not to carry liberty beyond its just bounds: -- Not to use it for a
cloak of maliciousness: -- Not, under color and pretense of this, to refuse
just obedience; -- to be disorderly, factious and tumultuous. As the servants
of God, and accountable to him, they should render unto all their dues, and
seek, not only their own, but the welfare and happiness of all.

WOULD people, in general, possess their minds of such sentiments, and act
under their direction and influence, how much would this tend to the peace and
happiness of society! Many groundless and unreasonable complaints, from
restless and ambitious, or from ignorant and peevish men, would be
discountenanced and suppressed, and the community, by a general steady course
of well-doing, would, agreeable to the will of God, put to silence the
ignorance of such foolish men.

AND in case of real and grievous oppression from unrighteous Rulers, such
principles as these, would be likely to produce the most happy effects. They
would unite the members of society, as one body. -- They would guard them
against rash and unlawful measures of defense; -- lead them to such as are
prudent and justifiable; and engage them to act with that determined resolution
and firmness, resulting from reason and virtue, which is most likely to hold
out, and to prevail, in time, over every species of injustice and oppression.

AND would both Rulers and Subjects imbibe such sentiments, and, under their
direction and influence, discharge with fidelity the duties of their respective
places, what a prosperous and flourishing condition might they hope for!

THE springs of government, acting with vigor, and under a right direction; and
the members of society, yielding a correspondent and uniform submission, a
general harmony and happiness must ensue.

THE political state would be like a body in full health. The constitutional
laws, preserved inviolate, would, like strong bones and sinews, support and
steady the regular frame. Supreme and subordinate Rulers duly performing their
proper functions, would be like the greater and lesser arteries, keeping up
their proper tone and vibrations; and justice, fidelity, and every social
virtue, would, like the vital fluid, run without obstruction, and reach,
refresh, and invigorate the most minute and distant parts: While the multitude
of subjects, yielding, in their various places and relations, a ready and
cheerful obedience, would, like the numerous, yet connected veins, convey back
again the recurrent blood, to the great fountain of it, and the whole frame be
vigorous, easy, and happy.

UPON that view of Civil Government we have now been taking; and while feeling
in our own breasts a warm sense of liberty, and the blessings of it, can we
help dropping a tear over the multitudes of our fellow creatures, who are
groaning under the iron yoke of tyranny and oppression -- subjected to the
arbitrary will of their imperious and despotic Lords, -- and to all the
wretchedness, which lawless pride and ambition; -- which wanton cruelty and
unbridled lust can inflict upon them?

How much to be pitied are such miserable objects! -- How ardently is it to be
wished, that the principles of civil liberty may prevail through the earth, to
the breaking in pieces the power of oppressors every where, and the restoring
the oppressed to freedom and happiness!

FROM such scenes of human wretchedness and woe, we naturally reflect, with
gratitude to heaven, on our own happy condition, as subjects of the British
Empire: -- A constitution founded in the law of God, and of nature; -- on the
principles of reason and equity: -- A form of government admirably contrived
for the due support of authority, and the security of the rights and privileges
of the people.

MAY this excellent constitution, formed and established by the experience and
wisdom of ages, be preserved inviolate, the source of blessings to this and
future generations: And his present Majesty, our most gracious Sovereign (whom
may God long preserve) ever esteem it his glory, and find it his happiness, to
reign over a free and loyal people.

THE form of Government, in this Province, is similar to that of our mother
country, so far as the circumstances, of a dependent state will admit; -- the
legislative power being lodged in the hands of the King's Representative, -- of
his Majesty's Council, and, -- of persons deputed by the people, to act for
them, in General Assembly.

OUR Commander in chief, who is at the head of this legislative body, is not
indeed, elected by ourselves, but appointed by the Crown; which, perhaps, all
things considered, is not to our disadvantage. The other branches of the
legislature, being chosen by ourselves; and consisting of those who are our
neighbors and brethren, -- this we esteem an important privilege, and great
security of our invaluable liberties.

AND, as it was once promised as a blessing to the people of God, that their
nobles should be of themselves, and their Governor should proceed from the
midst of them, Jerem. XXX. 2^.
so we are naturally led to view it, as a circumstance peculiarly favorable,
that the Gentleman, now at the head of administration, is also from among our
brethren; -- one born and educated in the midst of us.

For, while we feel in our own breasts, a warm affection toward him, as being
our bone and our flesh, we persuade ourselves he must have a correspondent
tenderness for us, and will naturally care for our state.

AND, though it has not been the standing custom of late, yet on this first
public occasion, Your Excellency will permit me to address myself particularly
to you, as an expression of dutiful respect, and to solicit your kind offices
for this people.

WE congratulate you, SIR, on the honor done you by the great Ruler of the
world, and by our most gracious Sovereign, in raising you to the head of this
Government; and we ardently wish your advancement may be to the honor of the
crown, increasing the dignity of your own character, and -- best welfare of
this people. And though the present perplexed (...) state of the Province, which
keeps awake in our minds some gloomy apprehensions, may occasion anxiety and
trouble to you, whose burden we wish not to see increased, we flatter
ourselves, it may be in favor to this people, that in such an unhappy situation
of affairs, the overruling Providence of God, has committed the reins of
government to your hands.

THAT equable temper, and firmness of mind, with which the great Father of
Spirits has formed you; and fitted you to bear, and go through difficulties; --
your superior acquaintance with our political constitution; and the experience
we have had of your wisdom, and fidelity in lower offices of government, which
you have filled with honor to yourself, and to general satisfaction and
applause, -- these things naturally lead us to confide in you, and to hope for
great and good things from you; while your relation to us, as a native of the
Province, and having a common interest with us, strengthens and confirms this
confidence and hope.

WERE we able, SIR, so to influence your mind, as to make you partial in our
favor, to the disadvantage of the crown, and of the true interest of
Great Britain, we would not attempt it -- we do not so much as wish for it.

As becomes faithful subjects to our rightful Sovereign, we desire not, but
that the royal prerogative be maintained in all the just extent of it. But,
while you are true and faithful to his Majesty, you will be just to this
people; and tender of those rights and privileges, to which they are entitled,
as British Subjects, and by virtue of the Royal Charter; and be ready, we hope,
to use your influence for their protection and defense, when in danger; and to
preserve so invaluable an inheritance, for this and future generations.

SHOULD you fail of success in your friendly endeavors, yet such generous
exertions, must give you an home-felt satisfaction of mind, while your
succeeding, to the common good of this people, will lead them to bless you, as
their friend and patron, and occasion the thanksgivings of thousands unto God.

YOUR full acquaintance, SIR, with the grounds, on which our illustrious
ancestors left their native land, and, through many difficulties and hardships,
made a settlement for themselves, and posterity in this country -- your having
been educated in, and so long ^^proved of, their religious principles, and
manner of worship -- your own exemplary regard for religion; and the sense, we
doubt not, Your Excellency has, of its high importance to the welfare of the
people, assure us you will remain a particular friend to these churches; while
a liberal and catholic disposition, will lead you to protect all honest and
peaceable men in their just rights, and engage your endeavors to promote the
interests of pure and undefiled religion.

NOR will we doubt, SIR, of your warm, and filial affection to that
neighboring Seat of learning, Harvard-College.
where you yourself, among the sons of this country, received the blessing of a
liberal education. That society will be cared for, and smiled upon by you. And
may it flourish under Your Excellency's patronage, and continue an ornament to
this land, and a rich blessing to Church and State.

IT is our fervent prayer for Your Excellency, that you may have the divine
presence and direction in your administration. -- That by a faithful discharge
of your important trust, you may engage the esteem and love of this people, --
enjoy the smiles of your Royal Master, and the approbation of the supreme Ruler
and Judge of all.

As the choice of his Majesty's Council, considering their weight and influence
in government, is a matter of great importance to our welfare, the return of
this Anniversary, in which this elective power is to be exercised, will mind us
of the goodness of God, in still preserving to us our civil constitution, --
the basis of our common freedom, and common happiness.

THANKS to indulgent heaven, that we are still, thus far, a free people, and in
a capacity to consult, and act for the common good.

WITH gladness we see our political Fathers, the immediate guardians of our
liberties, and whose happiness is the same with our own, assembled with their
brethren in the house of God, to seek direction from him, in the momentous
affairs of this day. Such an acknowledgement of the Deity, and of his
superintending providence, well becomes us as a christian people.

THE Gentlemen, who are to be immediately concerned in this business, will be
pleased to consider how weighty a trust is reposed in them by the community,
and be solicitous to act a proper part. And, if what has been offered in this
discourse, be agreeable to reason and the word of God, it may suggest some
things that will be useful.

YOU are sensible, Honored Gentlemen, that it is a time of peculiar difficulty,
with the British Colonies, in general, on this continent, and with this
Province in particular.

THE claims of prerogative, and the liberties and privileges of the people,
engage our attention -- engross our conversation, and agitate our minds with
hopes and fears.

IT might be deemed arrogance in me, to pretend to run the line exactly between
these, in reference to our present disputes, and to determine whether, or how
far, prerogative has been overstrained, and whether, or how far, our
constitutional rights have been infringed.

BUT this, all will allow me to say, that in such a time of perplexity, -- of
uneasiness, and distress, men of the best heads, and of the best hearts are to
be fought for, to fill so important a seat in government, as that of the
Council Board.

MEN of a benevolent, generous, and public spirit, who will care for the
welfare of their brethren, and act above all sordid and selfish views.

MEN, best acquainted with our civil constitution, and the just boundaries
between lawful authority in Rulers, and that submission in subjects which is
due to it.

MEN of a cool and dispassionate temper, joined with great firmness of mind: --
Able to weigh things with calmness, -- to judge with impartiality, and to act
with deliberation: And who, when satisfied what is right, and best to be done,
will have courage to speak their minds, and to act a proper part: -- Not apt to
be wro't upon, and rendered ductile and obsequious by flattery. -- Tempted by
proffered favors, or awed by menaces.

COOLNESS of temper, and unshaken firmness of mind, often meet in the same
person, and when under the direction of a wise and knowing head, and the
influence of a good and benevolent heart, they must go far toward forming the
great Statesman, and true Patriot.

MEN of a different cast, indeed, have sometimes, by a kind of lucky rashness,
succeeded well in difficulties; -- just as an hurricane, when it happens to
blow the right way, may drive the Ship from rocks and shoals, and save the
cargo; yet these Tornadoes are not so eligible, as a more gentle and steady
gale.

SUCH hot and passionate men are not fit to guide in difficult times. The
populace, indeed, when fired by them with the ^^me zeal, may sometimes admire
and applaud even their rashest measures; but when they come to cool, and see
the ill effects of their ungoverned fury, they will be ready to sacrifice them
to their disappointed hopes, and wish they had been guided by cooler heads.

Demosthenes and Phocion, were both Statesmen, and eminent Orators at Athens,
but men of very different tempers. Demosthenes, full of fire, often urged the
people to bold and daring enterprises. Phocion, calm and sedate, persuaded to
methods more practicable. Meeting one day, after having harangued the people;
says Demosthenes, -- "These Athenians, Phocion, will murder you, in some of
their mad fits. The same, replied Phocion, may fall to you, if ever they come
to be sober."

BUT, with every other qualification, you will consider that of religion, as of
great weight. -- Religion, -- in which is included the true fear of God, and a
prevailing concern to be approved of by him. This raises the mind above the
frowns, and smiles, and alluring blandishments of the world. -- This takes hold
on conscience, and powerfully seizes and governs the great springs of action in
the soul; -- and is the strongest barrier against temptations to do wrong, as
well as most urgent stimulus to right action.

AND you will keep in mind, Honored Gentlemen, that you are going to act, not
merely for yourselves, but for all your brethren. -- That they have placed
their confidence in you, and committed their interests into your hands. -- That
their eyes are upon you, -- that the minds of the whole Province are turned
toward you. -- That the fate, not only of this people, but of the Colonies, in
general, may have some dependence on the choice you make: -- And above all,
that you are under the all-seeing eye of God, and accountable to him for what
you do.

MAY these considerations deeply penetrate and warm your hearts; -- cause you
to lay aside all sinister views, and banish from your breasts a party spirit.
-- May they carry you above all personal connections, and private piques; --
collect and fix your thoughts to this single point, the public good; and lead
you sincerely to aim at it, by choosing such men as are best qualified for, and
most likely to pursue it.

AND may he who stands in the congregation of the mighty, and judges among
the Gods, overruled to the best purposes.

WHEN the weighty affairs of this day are over, and you proceed to business in
your respective departments, you will remember, we trust, your continued
connection with your brethren, and the capacity in which you act, viz. as their
Trustees, -- as the Guardians of their liberties; and do all in your power,
consistent with your duty to his Majesty, to secure and promote their welfare.

SHOULD their just rights and privileges be invaded, (a case that may happen
under the best constitution, as all men are imperfect, and liable to
misconduct) it will lie with you especially, our Honored Fathers, to oppose
such invasion; and in every respectful, -- in every loyal, -- in every suitable
and lawful way, to endeavor their protection and defense.

YOU will not, we trust, from sordid, -- selfish, and lucrative views; or from
mean and cowardly fears, give up so rich a treasure, if unjustly demanded; but
with a manly, unshaken firmness, becoming freemen, -- becoming freemen,
conscious that they have right on their side, oppose, and continue to oppose,
every attempt of such a nature; and stand fast in that liberty, wherewith God,
and the British Constitution have made us free.

I MEAN not, Honored Gentlemen. -- I mean not, my respectable Hearers, to prove
an Incendiary among you; a character, under which, it seems, the Clergy of this
country have been, though very unjustly represented by some, on the other side
the water.

DEEPLY penetrated, as I am, with a sense of Liberty, and ardently in love with
it; and tenderly concerned for the prosperity and happiness of my native land,
I abhor a licentious and factious spirit; -- I detest the baneful principle.

I HEARTILY wish the universal peace of societies, on the foundation of reason
and righteousness. I wish, in particular, that all distrustful jealousies, with
the grounds of them, between Great Britain and these Colonies were removed. --
That all unhappy disputes between them, were equitably and amicably settled. --
That their former confidence in each other was fully restored. -- I wish their
connection with each other may be perpetual, and their happiness mutual.

BUT certainly, SIRS, it is not necessary in order hereto, that if our
constitutional rights and privileges should be demanded, we should readily
yield to the unrighteous claim.

SHOULD we thus meanly resign them up, and take, in exchange, the chains of
slavery for ourselves and children, -- could we forgive ourselves? Would our
unhappy posterity forgive us? Should we not deserve the punishment, while we
felt the guilt of assassins, for having stabbed the vitals of our country?

THE interior state of the Province, Honored Gentlemen, -- the common
prosperity and happiness of the people, are things that will lie near your
hearts, and be cared for by you at all times. Their true welfare you will have
in view, and endeavor to promote it, in framing any new laws, which the
exigencies of the state may require; and concerting any farther measures that
may be needful, for the suppression of vice and wickedness; and for the
encouragement and promotion of Religion, in the knowledge and practice of piety
and virtue: -- For banishing idleness and luxury; -- for encouraging labor,
industry and frugality; -- for the better cultivating and improving our lands:
-- promoting manufactures, and trade; and for the general procurement of those
things, which tend to make a people happy in themselves, and to establish and
confirm their freedom.

AND of high importance it is to the good of the state, and worthy of your
particular care, that the good and wholesome laws now in being, as well as
others that may be enacted, have their full force and efficacy, according to
the spirit and intention of them. -- That Government be maintained in all the
just extent of it, as a necessary restraint on the lawless and disobedient, and
a protection and defense to others. Without this we cannot continue a free, nor
be a prosperous and happy people. If our liberties are not wrested from us, in
any other way, we shall soon destroy them ourselves, and prove tyrants and
oppressors to one another.

THIS matter, I conceive, claims the attention, and is humbly offered to the
consideration, of the Honorable the Judges of our courts, -- of his Majesty's
Justices of the peace; and of all to whom the execution of the laws is
committed: -- of all persons likewise, who are specially appointed as
inspectors of the morals of the people; whose business it is to make
presentiments of disorderly practices, tending to the dishonor of God, and to
the disquietude and hurt of society.

IT is of great consequence to the public weal, that gentlemen in such
stations, faithfully discharge the duties of their respective places, and that
the laws have their free course, and proper operation. And it is certainly the
duty of the people readily to submit to Government, in all the just extent and
exercise of it; and under its due administration, to lead quiet and peaceable
lives, in all godliness and honesty.

CIVIL government, my hearers, is one of the greatest outward blessings of
which we are possessed. It is our protection from fraud and injustice -- from
rapine and violence. It is the security of our lives, -- of our properties, and
of every thing that is dear to us in the world. It becomes us therefore, not
only to submit to it ourselves, but to do all we can to maintain and support it.

WHILE we are zealous for liberty then, let us take care we do not despise
government, and weaken the springs of it, by running into licenciousness, of
which some seem not to be out of danger in the present day.

LET us, my Fathers and Brethren, -- let us act as free: -- Let us stand up for
our just rights; but consider ourselves, at the same time, as servants of God;
and submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. Let us never use our
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; -- never imagine, that under pretense of
this, we can have a right to do wrong.

LET us, upon all occasions, discountenance, and endeavor to banish from among
us, such licencious principles; and by well-doing, put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men.

To CONCLUDE. MAY this whole Assembly: -- May the people of this Province in
general, both Rulers and others, be concerned that they act a proper part, in
the stations assigned them by Divine Providence; faithfully discharging the
duties of their respective places. While fond of freedom, from the tyrannous
and oppressive power of man, let us all see to it that we are free from a much
more dishonorable, and destructive tyranny, -- that of our own lusts, and of
Satan, that great enemy to our highest and best interests. While we glory in
the name of freemen, let us see to it that we are the Lord's Servants; and live
in a willing and hearty subjection to his sacred laws and government.

THEN may we expect the smiles of that Almighty Being, whose favor is life.
Then may we expect that, in his gracious and overruling Providence, he will
scatter the dark clouds that hang over us, and make us yet a prosperous and
happy people. -- Then may we indulge the supporting, chearing hope, not only of
seeing good days here, but of obtaining, through Jesus Christ, eternal peace and
blessedness.

FOR, in a short time, we shall all finish our course in this world. In a few
days, -- a very few, we shall be called off this stage of action. -- Our
relation to civil society will soon cease. -- Our connection with one another,
and with this world, will be dissolved. -- Presently we shall all, however
distinguished in this life, stand upon a level before our common Judge, to
receive our final sentence and reward.

O! HOW happy for us, if having maintained our integrity, and conducted well
through this tempting, and ensnaring world, we then receive that supporting, --
that life-giving sentence, -- well done, good and faithful servants!

WITH what unutterable joy shall we be filled; -- with a joy inexpressibly
greater, -- more noble, and excellent, than can arise from the greatest honors
and riches of this world, if then we are admitted, with all the virtuous and
good, into the full and glorious liberty of the Sons of God!

WHICH may God, of his infinite mercy, grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


