A SERMON, Preached at the OPENING of TRINITY-CHURCH, In POMFRET

THE SANCTITY OF A CHRISTIAN TEMPLE. Illustrated in a SERMON, At the OPENING of
TRINITY-CHURCH in Pomfret, On Friday, April 12, 1771.

By JOHN TYLER, A. M. MISSIONARY from the venerable Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, at NORWICH, in CONNECTICUT.

Reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord.

JEHOVAH. O come, let us worship, and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord,
our Maker.

K. DAVID. With one Mind, and one Mouth, glorify God.

Glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's.

St. PAUL. PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeare's Head. M,DCC,LXI.

TO Simon Pease, Esquire Of NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND.
SIR,
THE laudable and pious activity you have shown, among the many and very worthy
benefactors at Newport, by whose ^^^^^ous assistance the Church at Pomfret was
principally erected, has induced me to offer this discourse to your acceptance,
in compliance with the desires of the members of it, as a monument of their
sincere thanks to you and them, and an acknowledgment of their gratitude for
that noble piety and zeal for goodness, which, from your first appearance among
men, have ever been visibly predominant in you, and eminently conspicuous in
promoting the building of their edifice, to the honor of God, and their very
great comfort and relief.

They also acknowledge their obligations for the few helps they have received
elsewhere; and promise that nothing, on their parts, shall be wanting to afford
the most convincing proofs, by their earnest and devout attachments to
religion, that their pious contributions have not been ill-placed.

I now beg (...) Almighty GOD, that he may be pleased to make this Church
effectual to his own honor and service; and to bless you, and all its other
promoters, in the practice and continuance of all virtuous excellencies in this
world, until ye may all finally receive your never-ending reward in that which
is to come.

I have the honor to be, with very great esteem and respect,

Sir, your most obedient, And very humble Servant, JOHN TYLER.
Norwich, Dec. 1771.
THE SANCTITY of a Christian Temple.
2d CHRONICLES vi.40, 41. Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine Eyes be open,
and let thine Ears be attent unto the Prayer that is made in this Place.

Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting Place, thou, and the Ark of
thy Strength: Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be clothed with Salvation, and let
thy Saints rejoice in Goodness.


THIS house being built to the honor of God's holy name, with much unanimity
and dispatch, through the favor of divine providence; and it being, from this
time forward, to be devoted, set apart and dedicated, to the more solemn,
public and immediate worship and service of the one supreme Lord of the
universe, was the reason of my choosing these words of the wise King Solomon
(uttered on a like occasion) for your consideration at this time. -- My text is
a part of that solemn and excellent prayer, which the wise man offered up to
his maker, when he consecrated to his sacred service an elegant and beautiful
edifice, even that rich and magnificent Temple, which he had erected to that
noble purpose. And although the workmanship and ornamental glory of the house,
in which we are now assembled, are incomparably beneath those of Solomon's
Temple; yet the words under consideration, may be as properly used at the
dedication of this House, as they were at the consecration of that Temple. For
the presence of God is as necessary in this Sanctuary, as in that of Solomon:
You (...) really need God's favorable attention to your prayers offered in
this Church, as the Israelites did in their Temple. And if you worship in
spirit and in truth, with sincere devotion and hearty affection; the God of
heaven will as mercifully hear, and answer with as bountiful a blessing, those
prayers you offer in this Church, and as readily afford you his gracious
presence and acceptance in this House, as he did the Israelites in that
splendid Temple, which was adorned with all the wealth and art of a potent
empire. For, under the Christian economy, Wherever two or three are gathered
together in Christ 's name, there will he be in the midst of them. A^^
notwithstanding heaven, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain God; yet he
will afford his presence to the faithful, in those Houses which are built for
his honor, and devoted to his sacred worship and service. For, thus says the
high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the
high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary, says the royal Psalmist. So that,
although the magnificence of this House will not compare with that of Solomon's
Temple; yet if you are properly qualified for the divine favor, and in these
courts offer up unfeigned, pure and holy worship, God will in a peculiar and
glorious manner be present with a blessing. And since the occasion of our being
now assembled together, is similar to that upon which the words of my text were
first used; let us consider them, and attend to the peculiar instruction which
they are proper to afford.

Solomon entreats the Lord God, that in case his people, for their sins,
should be distressed by their enemies -- by drought -- by dearth -- pestilence
-- blasting -- mildew -- locusts -- caterpillars -- or any kind of sickness,
and should repent and pray to God, in or toward that house, he would hear and
except their prayer, forgive their sin, and deliver them out of their calamity.
And then, the wise King, drawing toward a conclusion, desires that God would
be ready to hear, and graciously answer, all the faithful prayers, which should
be offered up in that House upon any occasion whatsoever: Now, my God, let, I
beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be attent unto the prayer
that is made in this place. And then he requests of God to accept of that House
for his Sanctuary; his resting place, where he might at all times be graciously
present: That he would direct and bless the endeavors of the priesthood for
the good of the people; and grant his faithful worshippers great occasion to
rejoice in his mercy, favor and protection: Now therefore arise, O Lord God,
into thy resting place; thou, and the ark of thy strength: Let thy priests, O
Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

This text is one remarkable instance of the religious custom among God's
people, in former ages, of setting apart, and dedicating Houses to the solemn
worship of their maker. This custom, among the Jews, was under the direction
and approbation of God: And performed by Solomon, with the immediate assistance
of the divine spirit. And this has been almost the universal custom of
Christians, ever since they have been suffered to erect decent houses of
worship. Hence we may infer from the text,

I. That God affords his more peculiar presence in those Houses which are
devoted to his sacred worship; and has a greater regard for them than for
other places.

II. That God is treated with greater respect, honor and reverence, by the
public worship of his people; and will more graciously hear and answer their
grateful praises, and sincere prayers, when offered up in his Sanctuary, than
elsewhere. And,

III. The respect which is due from you to this House, considered as the Temple
of God; and how you ought always to behave when you tread the courts of the
Lord's House.

First, then, we learn that God affords his more peculiar presence in those
Houses which are devoted to his sacred worship; and has a greater regard for
them than for other places. Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength.

That allwise providence of the supreme Lord of nature, which surveys, and
constantly presides over the whole universe, does nevertheless fix its peculiar
attention upon some particular places Vide South in eundem.
. God has loved the gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob; says
the Psalmist. Again, the Lord has chosen Zion; he has desired it for his
habitation. This is my rest for ever: Here will I dwell; for I have desired it.
And accordingly, in the first ages of the Church, to have places set apart for
religious worship, was the care of divine providence. The Patriarch Jacob was
admonished from heaven to build an altar to the Lord, in that place where he
had before appeared to him in a dream, where the Patriarch had set up a stone
for a pillar, and vowed, that if God would be with him, -- that stone should be
God's house: -- This, said he, is the gate of heaven. -- How particular were
the directions which God gave to Moses concerning the Tabernacle! And how exact
was he about the Temple! Though David was a man after God's own heart, and had
made a prodigious preparation of materials, yet, because he had shed blood,
though it was the blood of the open enemies of the true God, he was not
suffered so much as to lay the foundation of that sacred building: But the
whole glory of the work devolved upon Solomon; whose heavenly wisdom, shining
forth in a blessed time of uninterrupted peace and plenty, rendered him a more
pleasing and unexceptionable instrument for so noble a purpose.

Again, when the Temple, for the sins of the people, was levelled with the
ground, by an Assyrian army, yet, after the chastisement of a long captivity
had fitted the Jews for the precious enjoyment of God's peculiar presence among
them again, how wonderfully did God influence the heart of Cyrus, though a
heathen Prince, to set forward the building of another Temple! And was not that
shining miraculous cloud, which was often seen in and over the Tabernacle and
Temple, called, by the Jews, Shekina, or majestic divine presence? -- Was not
this, I say, a most sensible and wonderful token of God's peculiar regard for,
and special presence in that House, which was devoted wholly to his solemn
worship?

Neither the horrible schism and rebellion of Corah, and his company, nor the
sudden and awful vengeance of heaven upon them, could desecrate or unhallow
their centers, because they had been devoted to the service of God. Said the
Lord to Moses, the censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make broad plates for a covering of the altar; for they offered them before the
Lord, therefore they are hallowed. And the case is just the same with respect
to places which are consecrated to the worship of God.

Again, that God is peculiarly present in, and has a greater regard for Houses
and other things which are devoted to his service, than for those which are
not, appears by the exemplary vengeance of God, executed upon the profaners and
impious violators of them.

Sacrilegious depredations have ever been attended by the secret curse of God,
and the invisible vengeance of heaven Vide South in eundem.
. This kind of wickedness has consumed the families of Princes, demolished
thrones, and laid whole kingdoms waste. When the Philistines routed the armies
of Israel, and took from them the ark of God, what a dreadful curse was it to
them, like a devouring plague in their very bowels! -- The vengeance of heaven
struck Uzzah dead in a moment, for touching the ark; because, though he was
zealous for its preservation, yet he had no right to meddle with it. When God
delivered the law to Moses at Sinai, any beast that touched the mountain, was
to be struck through with a dart; and to fall a sacrifice for a crime, which it
was utterly unconscious of. We read that in the reign of Rehoboam, King of
Judah, Shishak, King of Egypt, came up to Jerusalem, and took away the
treasures of Solomon's Temple, even those utensils which had been devoted to
sacred use: And we are told by Josephus what happened to him, after this
sacrilegious robbery. -- When he returned to Egypt, great mischiefs befell his
family; he burnt to death two of his children; his brother conspired against
him; and his son, who next possessed the throne, was struck blind. Afterward
the great Nebuchadnezzar robbed God's Temple: And we also read what judgments
followed his sacrilege. -- For being puffed up with his own greatness, and what
he had done, we are told that his kingdom was taken from him; and he himself,
by a judgment before unheard of, driven from human society, and made to feed on
grass with the beasts of the field; his impiety rendering him more proper to
associate with brutes, than with those who were capable of religion. -- And
when his son Belshazzar became King, at an impious feast, he sent for the
sacred vessels, which had been taken from God's Temple in Jerusalem, and made
use of them to drink out of, in derision of their being devoted to the
religious service of the God of Israel: And while he was profaning and
polluting them with his sensuality, he saw part of an hand upon the wall of his
apartment in the palace, and the fingers writing his doom there in legible
characters, viz. God has numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. -- Thou art
weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. -- Thy kingdom is divided, and
given to the Medes and Persians. And the prophet Daniel, immediately before he
interpreted the sentence, told him what this judgment was for: He declared to
him, that though he knew the impiety of his father, yet he had not humbled his
heart; but thou have lifted up thyself, said the prophet, against the Lord of
heaven, and they have brought the vessels of his House before thee, and thou
and thy Lords, thy wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them. -- And we
are informed that the sentence was speedily executed upon him; for that very
night, Cyrus with his army broke into the city of Babylon, and took from
Belshazzar both his kingdom and his life. And many other remarkable instances
of the execution of divine vengeance, upon the profaners, and sacrilegious
violators of those things which were sacred to God, under the Jewish economy,
might be produced.

Under the Christian dispensation also, history abounds with accounts of the
same thing. There is nothing (says an ingenious Dr. South.
author) that the united voice of all history proclaims so loud, as the certain
unfailing curse, that has pursued and overtook sacrilege. All this shows that
God has a peculiar regard for Houses, and other things, that are religiously
devoted to his worship and service.

I will now just mention some of the reasons why God affords his more peculiar
presence in those Houses which are devoted to his sacred worship, and has a
greater regard for them, than for other places.

One reason is, Vide Johnson in eundem.
that God esteems himself peculiarly honored by his people, when they pay him
that respectful reverence, which the meeting together of considerable numbers
in one place, and uniting in religious homage, does express. And therefore he
is pleased to be more peculiarly present among them at such times.

Another reason is, that in Houses wholly devoted to the worship of God, the
minds of men, being in some measure separated from all worldly objects, and
removed from their temporal concerns, are less subject to be diverted from
devotion.

Another reason is, that Houses devoted to God, and used only in his service,
do naturally inspire the minds of men with reverence for God and religion;
which tends to fit them for the divine presence and blessing.

Another reason why God so peculiarly regards his House, as commonly to punish
the profaners and violators of it with exemplary vengeance, is because that
such proceedings tend to the disrepute of religion, and are a daring insult
upon the majesty of the invisible God: For assaulting a man's house, is
insulting his person.

The last reason I shall mention (and that not the least of them) why God
manifests a Vide South.
particular regard for Houses and other things which are devoted to his
service, is because they are peculiarly his property. There is no holiness in
these things, considered in themselves, that occasions his regard for them; not
even the most holy place in Solomon's Temple had inherently any more sanctity
than any other place; but it was relatively holy, being in a pecular manner
God's property. Not but that God is the absolute proprietor of all things; yet
nevertheless those things, which men have no right to use, except in his
immediate service, may be peculiarly called his property; while he has granted
to them the free use of all other things which come in their way, for their
temporal comfort and support.

These things are peculiarly the property of God, which he has chosen, and set
apart for his own use and service. Of every tree of the garden thou may
freely eat, said God to Adam; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat. -- Thus also God chose the gates of Sion, and the tribe of
Levi.

That is likewise the peculiar property of God, which men set apart and devote
to his immediate service. In this case, men give, or more properly return, as
an offering to God, that which he has first given to them. They relinquish,
quit and deliver up to God, all their right or liberty to use those things as
their own property, as for any worldly purpose, which God has freely granted
to them, for their own secular use. Upon which donation or dedication, the
property of the things given, and the use of them, are alienated and absolutely
changed: So that men have no manner of right to the use of them, except in that
immediate service of God, to which they were appropriated. And God will endure
no rival or competitor in them: But the man who profanes, invades or violates
them, is guilty of a sacrilegious usurpation; for which the vengeance of heaven
is armed against him, and the curse of God will consume him. Man's giving up,
and devoting to the immediate service of God, Houses, or other things, is now,
under the Christian economy, the foundation of his peculiar property in them.

That man who takes upon him the office of a priest in Christ's Church, does so
give himself up to God and to his service, that he has no more right to
dispose of himself to any other employment, than he has to command the service
of one who is superior to, and absolutely independent of him. And Houses given
up to God, and devoted to his immediate service, are peculiarly his property.
And men have no more right to appropriate them to any other use, than they have
to dispose of other men's estates: Nay, the crime is, almost beyond comparison,
greater and more aggravated, because it is sacrilege -- an hostile robbery,
perpetrated against the supreme ruler of the universe, who is an infinite
benefactor, in open contempt of his authority, and the instituted means of his
grace.

And considering with what bold and undaunted confidence men are sometimes apt
to invade the property of an invisible, though almighty avenger, a religious
and public dedication of Houses to the sacred worship and service of God, as it
does impress a more sensible respect and reverence, a deeper awe and veneration
upon the minds of the people, is certainly a matter of no small importance.

And for dedicating Houses to the public worship of God, and imploring his
presence and favorable acceptance of the prayers and praises offered up in
them, we have the express warrant of scripture; particularly in the account of
Solomon's dedicating the Temple: For when Solomon had made an end of praying
(as a testimony of divine approbation) the fire came down from heaven, and
consumed the burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the LORD
filled the House.

Now, some of the reasons (besides those already mentioned) why God has
required, and is more especially pleased with public worship, are these; Vide
Johnson in eundem.
that as we are made social beings, and are sensibly affected by each other, so
we are commonly more zealously affected with what we transact in society and
fellowship one with another. -- Again, as we all enjoy the same common
blessings, both temporal and spiritual; so these enjoyments do most certainly
demand a common and social return of praise. And as we all, in general, have
the same necessities; so for the attainment of what we all equally need, it is,
in all reason, most fitting we should make our joint addresses and
supplications to God. And as public worship is our most reasonable service, and
is expressive of peculiar respect and veneration; so nothing on earth is more
beautiful and amiable, than an assembly of rational creatures, joining together
with one heart, and one voice, in offering up their grateful homage to their
supreme Lord and benefactor; as St. John, in the Revelations, represents the
worship of heaven, performed in the most perfect manner, before the throne of
God. -- Such social and public worship tends to knit our hearts together in
Christian love and unity.

On such accounts as these, God does require, and is, in an especial manner,
pleased with the public and united worship of his creatures: And this is what
occasioned holy David to say, that one day spent in the House of God, was
better than a thousand elsewhere. -- Indeed that our Maker is to be worshipped
publicly, -- that the more solemn, general and unanimous, our adorations and
acknowledgments of him are, the more are they for his honor, and the more
becoming our duty; is not only the voice of revelation, but even of nature and
reason: Which appears by the universal consent of mankind, in every age and
nation; so that there never have been any communities of men, who did not
cultivate some kind of public religious worship. And from the earliest ages of
Christianity, it has ever been the practice of its professors (as appears from
their constantly meeting on the first day of the week, to break bread)
unanimously to join, in devoting themselves to God, in his solemn worship and
service. Accordingly St. Paul exhorts Christians, not to forsake the assembling
of themselves together. -- And we read that the Apostles lifted up their voice
to God with one accord; and our Church is so happy as to follow their excellent
example. St. Paul exhorts us, with one mind, and one mouth, to glorify God.

But then public worship requires some particular place for the performance of
it. Private devotions may be performed in any place; though some are more
convenient than others. We read that God is about our path, and about our bed:
And the more solitary the place, the better we may perform such addresses. But
public worship demands a decent House, a convenient reception for numbers to
resort to, at stated times; a building set apart and distinguished from common
use, to which we may retreat from the world and its cares. And such Houses
being given up by us, as an offering to God, and devoted to his immediate
service, ought to be as commodious, elegant, and magnificent, as our abilities
will admit of.

But if any are inclined to blame the custom of the professors of the Church of
England, for expensively adorning their Houses of public worship, where they
are able, I would ask them, whether being sparing in our offerings to God, does
not manifest, in us, as ungrateful, sordid narrowness of soul, and as great
disrespect to our Maker, as was shown by those Jews of old, who offered up for
sacrifice the blind and the lame, whose offerings God abhorred? And is not a
liberal offering to God, an indication of respect to him, and regard for the
honor of religion? Did God, who changes not, ever disapprove of the
prodigious magnificence, and costly ornaments of Solomon's Temple? And did he
not, by the mouth of his prophet Haggai, severely reprove his people for their
sparing contributions to the second Temple? Is it time (said he) for you, O ye,
to dwell in your ceiled houses, and this House lie waste? Build the House, and
I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord.

That the House of God should be at least commodious, decent, clean, and
comely, is what we might reasonably expect everyone would approve of, who
pretends to any reverence for God or religion. Says the pious and worthy Dean
Stanhope, Far from us be all ornaments, misbecoming the worship of a spirit, or
the gravity of a Church. But sure it has a very ill aspect, for men to be
contentedly and sordidly frugal, and to think that well enough in God's House,
which they would not endure, even in the meanest apartments of their own.
Religion should not be dressed in the habit of a wanton; but do not deny her
that of a matron. -- Let her be modest in her garb; but withal comely and
clean; and allow her enough, not only to protect her from shame and contempt,
but to draw some respect too. If some have injured her by a false and too
artificial beauty, this is no reason why we should think it a virtue, to turn
pious clowns and slovens, by running into the contrary extreme, and, instead of
worshipping the Lord in the beauty of holiness, address him "in the dirt and
deformity" of slovenliness. If we are contented with meanness and ugliness in
the House of God, and being able, are however penuriously unwilling to provide
what is honorable for his worship, though it be under pretense of regarding
only spiritual worship, heart worship, and the like; yet do we not tempt, nay,
even provoke mankind to distrust and ridicule our professions of piety, and to
despise the service of God? And do we not also incur the peculiar indignation
of heaven? If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if ye offer
the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person? says the Lord of hosts. If we are
willing to enjoy the best of every thing ourselves, and think any thing good
enough for God's service, we may call him Father, Lord, or Master, or what we
please; yet these sentiments and proceedings are plain indications, that he is
not the supreme object of our love and reverence.

In the next place, as no reason can be given, why God should not be as
graciously present in each House, that we now dedicate to his worship, as he
was in the one Jewish Temple; so these words of the Lord, uttered by the
Prophet Isaiah (among many other testimonies of scripture) seem fully to evince
it: My House shall be called the House of prayer for ALL people. By which the
introduction of the Gentiles into the Church of God, is plainly foretold; and
that whatsoever House they should devote to his service, and assemble in for
worship, should be called God's House of prayer, as the Jewish Temple was. And
agreeable to this, St. Paul wrote to Timothy, who was then at Ephesus, hoping,
said he, to come unto thee shortly; but if I tarry long, that thou may know
how thou ought to behave thyself in the House of God, which is the Church of
the living God. These words of the Apostle are a sufficient explanation of
those recorded by the Prophet Isaiah, which were just now mentioned.

Accordingly it is the custom of the Church of England, when Houses are built
and resigned up to God for the purposes of his worship, to assemble in them,
and to join, with one accord, in public prayers and praises; to have sermons
preached suitable to those occasions, in which public declarations are made,
that those Houses are devoted to God, -- dedicated to his religious worship and
service, and from that time forward are to be esteemed sacred to God and
religion. The peculiar presence of God is invoked, and his favorable attention
to, and especial blessing upon those persons, who shall faithfully seek him in
those places. This tends to make such places venerable in the eyes of men, and
to draw down a divine blessing on worshipping assemblies.

If any should be inclined to cavil, and say, notwithstanding what has been
offered, that such formal dedications are either needless or superstitious; I
would recommend to their consideration, the grand solemnity of dedicating
Solomon's Temple, and the miraculous testimony of divine approbation,
consequent thereupon. And why are such dedications less proper now? Vide South
in eundem.
Eusebius (the first Christian historian, after the Apostles) mentions the
dedication of Churches, as generally practiced by the primitive Christians. He
tells us the particular manner in which this ceremony was performed, and styles
it a custom of the Church becoming God. In a word, all nations who have
retained any venerable sentiments of God and religion (whether Christians,
Jews, or even heathens) have ever practiced solemn, formal dedications, when
they set apart Houses for religious worship and service.

But though, after our Churches are dedicated, we attribute no inherent
holiness to them, but only relative, as being set apart from worldly uses, and
devoted wholly to religious purposes, yet some are apt to accuse us of having a
superstitious regard for the Houses themselves. Are they not wood and stone,
say they, as well as other buildings? I answer; this cavil is the language of
that recent kind of refined and spiritualized piety, to which Jesus Christ and
his Apostles were utter strangers. Our Lord had such zeal for the honor of
God's House, that he himself drove out of it the buyers, sellers, and other
invaders of it. And St. Paul reproved the Corinthians, for profanely eating or
feasting in their Churches. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? Or despise
ye the Church of God? said he. -- I have now done with the first general head
of discourse, and proceed to show,

II. That God is treated with greater respect, honor and reverence, by the
public worship of his people; and will more graciously hear and answer their
grateful praises and sincere prayers, when offered up in his Sanctuary, than
elsewhere. Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine
ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place, said Solomon, when
he dedicated the Temple. And soon after God answered him, saying, now mine eyes
shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.
And no reason can be given, why God should not be as well pleased now, with
public worship in his own House, as he was under the Jewish economy; for
numbers publicly to assemble, in order to worship God, is evidently a token of
respect and reverence for him: But it is still more so, when they wait on him
for that purpose, at his own House. And consequently God will more graciously
hear and answer prayers and praises, when offered up in his Sanctuary, than
elsewhere. Public worship, for several reasons, is extremely necessary and
becoming, (as I have shown under the preceding head of this discourse) and so
is peculiarly entitled to the divine attention and blessing.

I have already proved that God is peculiarly present in Houses which are
devoted to his worship: But what other valuable purpose can his peculiar
presence there answer, or what else can be meant by it, but his being
peculiarly ready to hear, answer, and bless those who worship him, as they
ought to do, in his own House? What else can the special presence of God
signify? The author and governor of all worlds is not a corporeal being: He
cannot be confined within any place, or contained within any particular limits;
for heaven, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain him: But universal extent
is filled with the immensity of his presence and existence. The special
presence of God, in any particular place, must therefore signify, that he is,
in that place, peculiarly gracious and merciful. Hence David prayed that God
would send help from the Sanctuary -- and declared that his way is in the
Sanctuary -- that from Mount Zion, the Lord commanded his blessing, even life
for evermore. -- And Christ has told us, that where two or three are gathered
together in his name (for public worship, in acknowledgment of him) there he is
in the midst of them. -- From these observations it plainly appears, that God
is treated with greater respect, honor, and reverence, by the public worship
of his people; and will more graciously hear and answer their prayers and
praises, when offered up in his Sanctuary, than elsewhere. But I proceed to
show, in the

III. And last place, the respect which is due from you to this House,
considered as the Temple of God; and how you ought always to behave when you
tread the Courts of the Lord's House.

There is something so great and affecting, so beautiful and solemn, in the
appearance of a congregation, when united in religious worship, each one
joining both with heart and voice, in paying homage to the Almighty King of
glory in his own Sanctuary; that nothing on earth besides can so nearly
resemble the transcendently glorious exercises of heaven. For the blessed
angels are represented as jointly paying, with united voices, their grateful,
solemn, and joyous addresses, to the supreme governor of the universe, in such
a language as this, holy, holy, holy LORD GOD of hosts, which was, and is, and
is to come; heaven and earth are full of thy glory: Great and mavelous are
thy works, O LORD GOD Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints. -- Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits
upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. -- What can be more
delightful at present, than to imitate the worshipping choirs of heaven, and to
make that our pleasing employment now, which hereafter is to be our business
and delight for ever? If we hope to enjoy the company of pure and holy spirits
above, is it not extremely proper and necessary for us to learn their blessed
practice while here on earth, by habituating ourselves to those religious
exercises, in which the happiness of heaven consists, and by which we shall
become more and more fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light, until we are ready to join our kindred spirits above?

And as this House is built for the honor of the Deity, and given up to these
religious exercises, so let it be devoted entirely to this use. And as it is
now set apart for the convenience of public worship and religious service, so
take notice and remember, that it is dedicated to this holy purpose, and
resigned up to the supreme Majesty of heaven. Let it therefore be, from this
time forward, sacred to ALMIGHTY GOD, by the name of TRINITY-CHURCH.

Now then let us all heartily and devoutly address the throne of grace, as
Solomon did on a like occasion. -- Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place:
Let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints
rejoice in goodness. Let, we beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine
ears be attent unto all the prayers that are made in this place. May the holy
spirit of God attend the exercises of this House, and the means of grace be
ever successful here. May the reading of the word of God, and the preaching of
the gospel in this House, through the rich blessing of God, produce the
heavenly fruit of holiness, and lead many souls to eternal life. May all those,
that shall here be taken into the covenant of grace, by baptism, be sanctified
and constantly led by the blessed influences of the divine spirit: May they
steadfastly adhere to their sacred engagements; ever remain in the number of thy
faithful and elect children; and be everlastingly rewarded by thee, O heavenly
Father. And may all those who shall here devote themselves to God, in the
participation of the Lord's supper, in commemoration of the death of their dear
Redeemer, receive plentiful communications of the divine spirit; never disgrace
their holy profession, but faithfully perform their sacred obligations, and
grow up in holiness and comfort through faith, unto eternal salvation.

And grant, O heavenly Father, that thy people who shall wait upon thee, and
devoutly offer up pure and holy worship, in this House of prayer, may enjoy all
the privileges, and blessings of the covenant of grace, which is in all things
well ordered and sure. -- And when thy judgments are abroad in the earth, to
punish the wickedness of men, and thy people in this place shall be distressed
with mortal sickness, or any other sore calamity, if they shall repent and turn
to thee, then, whatsoever prayer or supplication shall be made by any man, or
by all thy people, in this place, when any, or every one shall know his own
sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this House: Hear
thou from heaven, thy dwelling place, and forgive; deliver them out of their
calamity, send forth thy blessing upon them, grant thy mercy and favor unto
all those who implore it, through the atonement of thy Son; and cause the
hearts of the disobedient to turn unto the wisdom of the just; that thy people
in this place may fear thee, and walk in thy ways. And being planted in the
House of the LORD, may they flourish in the courts of thy House, O God, bring
forth the fruit of thy spirit, even goodness, and righteousness, and truth; and
enjoy both the blessings of thy House here, and life for evermore!

Grant that this people may speedily be supplied with an able, spiritual guide,
who shall profitably explain to them the word of truth; be an ornament to his
profession, a worthy Ambassador of God, and Messenger of Christ, a bright
shining light in this Sanctuary: And give thy people in this place occasion to
cry out, how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace,
and bring glad tidings of good things! Grant this, O Lord God, for Jesus
Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Redeemer* Amen.

And now, my brethren, you are to consider this House, as it truly is, the
Temple of the living God: And to behave in it, at all times, as under God's
more immediate presence and observation. How dreadful is this place! surely
this is none other than the House of God; this is the gate of heaven, said the
astonished Patriarch Jacob, when he arose from his dream or vision, in which
the divine presence appeared in a glorious view. What can be expressed with a
more majestic solemnity than this sentence which he uttered? How dreadful! as
much as to say, though this is a desert which is wild and solitary, destitute
of cultivation and the conveniences of life, where I have reclined my head on a
pillow of stones; yet how awfully venerable is it, since the immortal God has
consecrated it with his holy presence! Surely the LORD is in this place, said
he, and I knew it not.

When God appeared in visions formerly, and wheresoever he was publicly
worshipped, his people had a powerful sense of his presence, and, when in such
places, always expressed the most awful veneration. So, my brethren, ought you
to behave, when you are in this House. And to wait upon God here, ought to be
your peculiar delight. LORD, I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the
place where thine honor dwells, said holy David. And he knew no happiness on
earth, equal to that of resorting to the Sanctuary of God: For when he was
under the greatest personal distresses; when his own children rebelled against
him, and sought his life, when his friends deserted him, and his enemies
triumphantly reviled him; no trouble seemed to be so deeply fixed in his heart,
as his banishment from the House of the Lord. My soul longs, said he, yea
even faints for the courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh cry out for the
living God. -- O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them
guide me unto thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacle! Then will I go unto the
altar of God; unto God, my exceeding joy: Yea upon the harp will I praise thee,
O God! my God! How earnestly did the Prophet Daniel entreat his Maker that the
Temple might be rebuilt? Cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that is
desolate. Thy servants take pleasure in her stones, said he, and favor the
dust thereof. They had a veneration for the very ruins of the House of God; and
loved the mere dust and rubbish of Sion, more than all the sumptuous palaces of
Babylon. So ought you to regard and reverence this House, this Temple of the
living God.

Now the very notion of reverential respect, properly includes two things: Vide
Warren in eundem.
An inward esteem of what we regard or reverence, and the expression of that
esteem by suitable external actions. No one can properly be said to reverence
any thing, unless from his heart he bears a regard to it. Without this, all
outward show is but mere hypocrisy. And the esteem ought always to be in
proportion to the worthiness of the object. There is a degree of reverence due
to God, which can be due to none but God: He justly claims our supreme
veneration. But then his House, and every thing besides, that relates
immediately to divine worship, claim a lower degree of our reverence and
respect.

In the present case, the reverence which we owe to this House of God, does not
arise from the mere building itself; but from its being a place solemnly
dedicated to religious worship; where we, as being his children, are to receive
the blessings of the Father of spirits: And where, as being the work of his
hands, we are to worship, fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. The
inward esteem and reverence which is due to the House of God, is in scripture
expressed in the most affectionate language: -- How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! said David. How hearty was the respect which our
Savior paid to the Temple, when, with a pious indignation, he cast out them
that sold and bought therein? And while we remember the pious regard and zeal
of our blessed Lord, for his Father's House of prayer, and reverence this House
only on God's account; we need not be afraid of carrying our veneration for it
too high. The danger, my brethren, is that you will not retain in your minds
such a powerful sense of the holiness of this House, and of the special
presence of God in it, as becomes you. You are always to remember that the
lofty Majesty of heaven is peculiarly present here; and that it is your duty to
approach him with respectful awe; with godly fear and reverence, with an holy
dread, and most profound submission.

But this brings me to speak of the other part of that reverence, which is due
to the sacred Majesty of the invisible God, and to this edifice, wherein he is
peculiarly present. This consists in such actions or outward behavior, as are
most expressive of your inward respect, and venerable regard for them. And I
entreat you all to consider, that whosoever bears a sincere regard to any
thing, will not fail, on proper occasions, to express it, by his outward
carriage and demeanor. When we see a man treat another with rudeness or
indifference; we do not fail to conclude that he wants a real respect for him.
And so, when you see a man behave in God's House of prayer with an air of
vanity and irreverence, you may also reasonably conclude, that he regards
neither the House he is in, nor the presence and authority of that being, who
has commanded him to keep his Sabbaths, and reverence his Sactuary.

But, for creatures so weak and degenerate, so mean and sinful as we are, the
most submissive postures that we are capable of, are hardly low and humble
enough, when we approach the supreme Majesty of heaven and earth, in his own
House; a God of infinite holiness, in whose presence the very angels, though a
more noble order of beings than we are, and free from all guilt; yet are said
to veil their faces, to express their solemn respect and reverence; and to bow
down before him, in token of awful submission.

Therefore, whenever you assemble in this House for worship, as a public
acknowledgment of the most high God, by no means allow yourselves in any idle,
inattentive, irreverend gestures, lest, under the hypocritical pretense of
giving God your hearts, you afford him not even so much as the service of your
bodies. And I entreat all those, who are fearful of showing the supreme God of
heaven too much outward reverence and respect, to remember that he is the
creator of their bodies as well as their souls: That he preserves and supports
them both; and that he requires, and has an equal right to the worship and
service of both. Glorify God in your body, says St. Paul, and in your spirit,
which are God's. And again says he, I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. Such a service is very
agreeable to reason, which teaches us, that he who made the body, has a right
to the worship and service of it.

One would think experience alone sufficient to prove to a Christian, the
efficacy of a serious, humble, outward deportment of the body, in order to
excite and cherish in the soul a sincere and lively devotion. Christ, our
blessed Redeemer, who did not come into the world to encourage superstition;
yet, when he earnestly prayed, just before his crucifixion, that if it were
possible, that cup might pass from him, did not refuse the most humble posture:
but kneeled down upon the ground. And can any who pretend to name the name of
Christ, refuse to follow his example? Will they presume to address God with
less deference than his own Son our Lord and Master did! Will they dare to be
so rude and indecent, so bold and unbecoming, when they are in the special
presence of the sacred Majesty of heaven, as to compose themselves into a
sleepy posture, or behave themselves as carelessly as though they were in their
own houses, without appearing to have the least veneration for God's Sanctuary,
and the worship of their Maker, who can destroy them in a moment, with the
breath of his mouth! Is it not, my brethren, prodigious strange, that men,
while they pretend to honor God, should affront him to his face! But it is
still more wonderful, if possible, that any of the professors of Christianity
should be deluded with such false notions of reverence, as to imagine that
their outward behavior, such as kneeling at prayers, bowing at the name of
Jesus, in the rehearsal of what they believe, standing up when the Psalms are
read or sung, and the like, is so far from being any part of religious
reverence, or divine worship, as justly to deserve the name of superstition!
Not considering that the worship of the body, is as really our duty as that of
the soul: And that it is absolutely impossible for our souls to be well
affected and piously devout, while we do wilfully or scornfully refuse to
honor and reverence God with our bodies, in the manner that St. Paul exhorts
us to do.

Therefore, my brethren, I do entreat you, by no means to neglect bodily
worship, which is your indispensable duty, and very useful to recall your
wandering thoughts, to the exercises of inward devotion, and to increase and
keep up your religious zeal and piety. Be very careful to avoid all indecent,
careless, indifferent, lolling, slovenly gestures, in the public worship of
Almighty God. Do not stand up when you are commanded to kneel, nor sit down
when the rules of the common prayer require you to stand; but know assuredly,
that all inclination to oppose these rules and orders is irregular, and
proceeds either from inattention, laziness, indifference, a disputatious temper
of mind, or from that perverse pride and obstinacy, which are owing to the vile
suggestions of the great enemy of mankind.

A mind truly pious and devout, will unavoidably show its sincerity, by an
humble, religious, and reverential deportment of body in the House of God. And
I think it must be morally impossible, for men, who have a sincere regard for
religion, to come to Church, without discovering, while in the peculiar
presence of their Maker, some tokens of religious reverence, in their bodily
behavior. A sincerely good man is sensible of the great duty and advantage of
waiting upon God in his House: He so well considers his own infirmities, and
has so solemn a veneration for the divine presence, that, while he is in the
exercise of devotion, and all the time that he remains in the House of God, he
imagines no care nor circumspection too great, for the suitable conduct both of
body and soul. Whereas many people attend public worship in God's Sanctuary,
with such a careless indifference, as amounts to a strong indication of a
wicked and perverse, of an obstinate and profane temper of mind: So that we
have just reason to suspect, and fear, that the inward disposition of their
souls is of the very same cast with the haughty negligence, and lazy indecency,
of their bodily deportment.

But, in order to your duly reverencing this Sanctuary of the most high God,
you must behave in it with that inward piety, and that outward humility, which
so august a presence, and so momentous a concern, require of you. And that ye
may do these things the better, you ought to prepare yourselves well
beforehand: Which is peculiarly proper for us of the Church of England, since
we may know, before we begin, exactly what we have to do: And have therefore a
great advantage in preparing for the due performance of it.

When you offer up your public addresses to God in this House, though the words
are ready prepared for you to utter, yet you have enough to employ you, in
presenting them to the throne of grace, with zealous attention and undisturbed
devotion. They only, who heartily and affectionately offer up to God the words
which they use (whether by the assistance of a book, or without) can be truly
said to pray as they ought. But since we are ^^ak and imperfect creatures,
unable to transact many things at one and the same time, it is evidently most
proper for us, when we publicly worship God in his own House, to have nothing
else to do, for the exercise of the soul, but to employ it in offering up, with
fervent devotion, what we have very often considered, and do well understand:
That we may not spend our time in studying how to tickle each other's ears, and
rack our heads with invention, while our hearts ought to glow with the most
solemn devotion: And that we may not be employed in considering the new
petitions which we hear, and whether they are fit for us to join in, while we
ought to do homage to God with our voices, and to reverence him with the warm
affections of our hearts. He that uses our liturgy in public worship, with
that holy devotion of soul which he ought, can never complain that forms of
prayer stint the spirit, or make men lazy and idle.

To make you sincerely good and pious, whether you will or no, is not in the
power of the Church of England. All our Church can do, is to assist you, in the
best manner, concerning your devotions, and to lead you in the surest and most
direct course to heaven. And this she has done with peculiar wisdom and piety.
And if you comply with her directions, you will reap the blessed benefit, and
rejoice in so great a privilege. But if you will not observe the rules
prescribed, and accordingly should not receive any manner of good to your
souls; yet that will not be the fault of the Church, but entirely your own. --
Therefore I exhort and entreat you all, for the honor of Christianity, for the
glory of God, and for the benefit of your own immortal souls, to make a right
use of our public liturgy. In order to which, you must often peruse it; take
care to understand it; and prepare yourselves for the due performance of your
part in it. And to assist you, I will now, in a few words, explain to you the
right use of our morning and evening service.

Our public devotions begin with two or three short sentences of scripture,
expressive of our wickedness, and of the mercy of God: After which is
pronounced by the minister, "a serious exhortation to repentance;" that the
minds of the people may be impressed with a humble sense of their sins, that
they may recollect their many iniquities, and that they may be properly
disposed to enter upon the great duty of repentance: Accordingly, then
follows a general confession of sins, imploring forgiveness; to be said by
the whole congregation, by minister and people alternately, with a solemn
voice, all kneeling, and with a truly humble and penitent heart. After which,
the priest alone utters the absolution; which is a declaration that God will
be merciful to all true penitents. And when this is performed, the remembrance
of God's mercy will tend to make us submissive, dutiful, and thankful. Then we
may, with comfortable assurance, call God our Father, in that form which Christ
has taught us. Accordingly the minister and people, all as one, repeat the
Lord's prayer. Thus the honest Churchman, the pious Christian, receives divine
comfort in the House of God. For though he frequently offends through the
infirmity of his nature; yet he does as often repent, and always, when he is in
the Sanctuary, implore pardon. And so, by constantly mortifying and bewailing
his sins, he obtains an habitual aversion to them: And from the sincerity of
his repentance, derives a joyful hope of pardon, and of the favor of his
Maker, through the gracious mediation of his kind Redeemer.

The Psalms, which consist chiefly in praises, come next in our liturgy: And in
order to the due performance of this part of our worship, we must frequently
and attentively consider the Majesty and goodness of God. And our minds, being
properly affected therewith, will be prepared to hear, with dutiful attention,
the portions of scripture read by the minister: And we shall be disposed to
receive them as spoken to ourselves; since all scripture is given by
inspiration of God; and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and instruction in righteousness. -- And if we are thankful to God,
as we ought to be, for the light of revelation, we shall be disposed to utter,
with a heavenly transport of joy and devotion, among others, that most divine
anthem, we praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. Thus we
shall serve the Lord with gladness, praise him publicly with cheerfulness, and
take peculiar delight in the courts of the House of our God.

The remaining part, both of our morning and evening service, does most
intimately concern our temporal and eternal interest: And consists in a number
of petitions, for all those good things which we need, relating both to this
life, and to that which is to come. And that we may perform this part of our
public service to God's acceptance, and by his blessing obtain what we ask for,
it is absolutely necessary that we pray with faith and humility: And be also
well persuaded, that we ask for nothing but what is both lawful and expedient.
And in order to this, we must frequently and seriously consider what it is we
pray for. Therefore it is very necessary for you to read and examine, with
diligent attention, the common prayers, and the several directions contained in
the rubricks. And I assure you, that the liturgy of the Church of England is
the best collection, both of prayers, and rules for public worship, that can be
found among all human compositions. And as you have the best assistance for
publicly worshipping the supreme Lord of the universe, that human wisdom has
ever yet contrived; so it will greatly increase your condemnation, if you
neglect to make a good use of it.

I shall not, at this time, undertake to consider, in any particular manner,
the case of those who dissent from our solemn and divine method of worship, for
the sake of extemporary prayers, and undigested effusions. Let me only observe,
that those who complain, that they cannot be religiously devout in our form of
worship, will hardly be sincerely so in their own.

He that intimately knows the secrets of all hearts, ought not to be addressed
with rashness and inconsideration: Nor to be treated with idleness or
wantonness. But we must pray with faith and zealous attention, with humble
reverence and sincere devotion, in order to meet with divine acceptance. And he
that is not affected with the humility, solemnity and piety of the public
prayers of the Church of England, must, I am sure, be either stupidly
inattentive, or perversely stubborn, or perhaps otherwise extremely vicious in
his disposition and behavior.

And as to bodily worship, it must be very improper to leave every one to
follow all the whims that can be started by his own private fancy, either to
sit, stand, or kneel, just as he pleases. Therefore, like a wife and good
mother, tenderly concerned for the true interest of her spiritual children, our
Church has directed and commanded us, to behave in each part of our public
worship, as she judged to be most becoming. When we earnestly implore the
greatest of mercies, such as the forgiveness of our sins, the influences of the
divine spirit, deliverance from all calamities, the continual preservation of
our souls, of our bodies and estates, and the mercy and favor of God toward
others, we are required to kneel. While the word of God is read or preached to
us, we are allowed to sit down, provided we are serious and attentive, and
behave with proper decency. And when we are rehearsing the creeds, which
contain the substance of our Christian belief, or while some part of the
gospel, particularly adapted to the season, is read to us, we are commanded to
stand up, in token of respectful reverence. And, at all times, when we either
read or sing the praises of God, as they are contained in the Psalms, or those
Hymns which we use, let us by no means refuse to stand up, which is the most
becoming posture for thansgiving and praise. David exhorts to praise the Lord
-- STANDING in the Lord's House. And we read, concerning the worship at the
dedication of Solomon's Temple, that when the Priests and Levites praised the
Lord -- all Israel STOOD. Therefore, my brethren, you ought strictly to conform
to all the rules and directions of the Church of England, respecting public
worship, since they are agreeable to the highest reason, plainly warranted by
sacred scripture, and the most of them no less than divine commands. -- I need
not explain to you any more of the particulars of our worship: They are all to
be found distinctly set down in the Common Prayer Book; to that I refer you.

After what has been said, is it not surprising, that any should be so
stubborn and disobedient, as to dissent from the directions of our liturgy,
which are so wise and rational; or from our method of worship, which is so easy
and becoming, so pious and humble, so plain, beautiful and solemn? Since the
worship of the Church of England does agree so exactly with reason, with the
commands, exhortations, and pious examples which are recorded in holy
scripture; let it be suitably impressed on your minds, that if you wilfully
refuse to comply with it, you will most certainly incur the vengeance of
heaven, for disobedience to your proper governors, both in Church and State:
Because your compliance with the liturgy, is required and commanded by the
authority of both; whom you are bound to obey in every thing that they enjoin,
which is not forbidden by the laws of God. But though I accuse people of
irreverence, for not standing when public praises or thanksgivings are offered
up, or for not kneeling in the time of solemn public prayer; yet I know very
well, that many will speak of these attitudes as matters of indifference,
notwithstanding they are both absolutely commanded in holy writ, and are also
agreeable to the constant example of all the scripture worthies. But suppose
they were indifferent, one might reasonably imagine, that no wise or good man
would run the risque of drawing upon himself the displeasure of heaven, for not
complying with the commands of lawful authority, in what is so easy to be
performed, and in what he confesses to be indifferent, and so not sinful.
Submit yourselves, faith St. Peter, to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's
sake. -- And to the same effect are the following words of St. Paul, let every
soul be subject unto the higher power; for there is no power but of God: The
powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: And they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

You may, with very little trouble, stand and kneel in public worship, as you
are commanded: But the evils which you incur by refusing so to do, are great. A
small portion of knowledge, with an honest, humble, and obedient heart, renders
us capable of the spiritual graces of the Holy Ghost. But when we wilfully and
stubbornly refuse to comply with the ordinances both of God and men; and hew
out for ourselves broken cisterns, by our own invention; it must be just and
right for God to resig(...) (...) to hardness of heart. For it is altogether
(...) who will not be happy, in the meth(...) (...) Christ has provided,
should be left to be (...) his own way. Let this consideration be a (...) with
you, always to behave in this House of (...) he has commanded you, in these
words, (...) reverence my Sanctuary; and in subordination to (...) comply with
all the directions of your lawful (...)periors. And I entreat you to suffer no
ev(...) or excuses to deter you from it. Do not co(...) it as a small,
indifferent matter: For be ass(...) you will find it far otherwise in the end.

But to conclude, I entreat of you all, seriously (...) consider what you have
now heard: And I e(...)nestly wish it may have its due effect upon yo(...) --
You have heard that God is peculiarly presen(...) in, and has a great regard
for, his House. -- This should fix in your minds a respectful reverence for
this House, which has now been, in a solemn manner, dedicated to the most high
God. You are to consider it as his peculiar property; so that you have no right
to use it, except in his immediate service. And you ought to be awfully afraid
of profaning it; since God is jealous for his honor, and for the place where
his honor dwells: Remember therefore, and never forget, that this is the
Temple of God.

Again, you have heard that public worship, performed in the House of God, is
peculiarly expressive of reverence for him, and very acceptable to him. This
ought to make you zealous and constant in attending public worship in this
House: Since you have more reason to expect a blessing here, than elsewhere.

(...) in the last place, you have heard very par(...)y, what respect you owe
to this House; and (...) (...)u ought to behave in it. I beseech you (...), to
let these instructions sink deep into (...) (...)earts. Whenever you come
here, remem(...) (...)hat you are in the immediate presence of (...) who made
and supporteth all worlds; who (...)ws your most secret thoughts, and will
hereaf(...) reward or punish every one of you according to (...) deeds done in
the body. Remember that the in(...)itants of heaven are represented to us as
worcester(...)pping God jointly and in unity: Not by one, (...)presenting the
remainder; but each acting for himself, in uniformity with the rest. Therefore
accustom yourselves now to worship God jointly and uniformly in public, and to
carry on an open and apparent part of divine service in God's Sanctuary on
earth, that it may be natural and easy for you hereafter to join the Church
triumphant, in alternate and uniform, in public and united worship, at the
throne of divine Majesty in heaven. And that this may be the delightful
employment of us all, for ever and ever, God of his infinite mercy grant,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now therefore to the one, infinitely wise, good, and eternal God, in three
persons, be rendered all honor and glory, thanksgiving and praise, might,
majesty and dominion, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

