A SERMON ON THE DEATH OF THE Rev. Mr. GEORGE WHITFIELD, PREACHED At the CHAPEL
in Tottenham-Court-Road, AND At the TABERNACLE near Moorfields, On SUNDAY
November 18, 1770.

By JOHN WESLEY, M. A.

Late Fellow of Lincoln-College, Oxon, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the
Countess Dowager of BUCHAN.

Sam. xii. 23. Now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by JOHN FLEEMING, at his Shop in King Street,
opposite the South Door of the TOWNHOUSE, 1771.

A SERMON ON THE DEATH OF THE Rev. Mr. GEORGE WHITFIELD.
NUMBERS xxiii. 10. Let me die the death of the Righteous, and let my last end
be like his!


LET my last end be like his! How many of you join in this wish? Perhaps there
are few of you who do not, even in this numerous congregation. And O that this
wish may rest upon your minds! that it may not die away till your souls also
are lodged where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at
rest!

2. An elaborate exposition of the text, will not be expected on this occasion.
It would detain you too long from the sadly-pleasing thought of your beloved
Brother, Friend, and Pastor; yea, and Father too: for how many are here whom he
has (...) gotten in the Lord? Will it not then be more suitable to your
inclinations, as well as to this solemnity, directly to speak of this Man of
GOD, whom you have so often heard speaking in this place? The end of whose
conversation ye know, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

And may we not,

First, Observe a few particulars of his life and death. Secondly, Take some
view of his character. And, Thirdly, Inquire how we may improve this awful
Providence, his sudden removal from us.
I. 1. We may, in the first place, observe a few particulars of his life and
death. He was born at Gloucester, in December, 1714, and put to a
Grammar School there, when about twelve years old. When he was seventeen he
began to be seriously religious, and served GOD to the best of his knowledge.
About eighteen he removed to the University, and was admitted at
Pembroke-college in Oxford, and about a year after, he became acquainted with
the Methodists (so called) whom from that time he loved as his own soul.

2. By them he was convinced, That we must be born again, or outward religion
will profit us nothing. He joined with them in fasting on Wednesdays and
Fridays, in visiting the sick and the prisoners, and in gathering up the very
fragments of time, that no moment might be lost; and he changed the course of
his studies, reading chiefly such books as entered into the heart of Religion,
and led directly to an experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him
crucified.

3. He was soon tried as with fire. Not only his reputation was lost, and some
of his best friends forsook him, but he had many inward trials. Many nights he
lay sleepless upon his bed; many days prostrate on the ground. But after he had
groaned several months under the spirit of bondage, GOD was pleased to remove
the heavy load, by giving him the spirit of adoption, enabling him, through a
living faith, to lay hold on the Son of his love.

4. However, it was thought needful, for the recovery of his health, which was
much impaired, that he should go into the country. He accordingly went to
Gloucester, where GOD enabled him to awaken several young persons. These soon
formed themselves into a little society, and were some of the first fruits of
his labor. Shortly after he began to read twice or thrice a week to some poor
people in the town, and every day to read and to pray with the prisoners in the
county goal.

5. Being now about twenty-one years of age, he was solicited to enter into
holy Orders. Of this he was greatly afraid, being deeply sensible of his own
insufficiency. But the Bishop himself sending for him, and telling him, Though I
had purposed to ordain none under three and twenty, yet I will ordain you
whenever you come; and several other providental circumstances concurring, he
submitted, and was ordained on Trinity-Sunday, 1736. The next Sunday he
preached to a crowded auditory, in the church wherein he was baptized. The week
following he returned to Oxford, and took his Bachelor's degree. And he was now
fully omployed, the care of the prisoners and the poor, lying chiefly on him.

6. But it was not long before he was invited to London, to serve the cure of a
friend going into the country. He continued there two months, lodging in the
Tower, reading prayers in the chapel twice a week, catechizing and preaching
once, besides daily visiting the soldiers in the barracks and the infirmary. He
also read prayers every evening at Wapping chapel, and preached at
Ludgate-prison every Tuesday. While he was here, letters came from his friends
in Georgia, which made him long to go and help them. But not seeing his call
clear, at the appointed time he returned to his little charge at Oxford; where
several youths met daily at his room, to build up each other in their most holy
faith.

7. But he was quickly called from hence again, to supply the cure of Dummer in
Hampshire. Here he read Prayers twice a day, early in the morning and in the
evening, after the people came from work. He also daily catechized the
children, and visited from house to house. He now divided the day into three
parts, alloting eight hours for sleep and meals, eight for study and
retirement, and eight for reading prayers, catechizing, and visiting the
people. -- Is there a more excellent way for a servant of Christ and his
church? If not, Who will not go and do likewise?

8. Yet his mind still ran on going abroad. And being now fully convinced he
was called of GOD thereto, he set all things in order, and in January 1737,
went down to take leave of his friends in Gloucester. It was in this journey
that GOD began to bless his ministry in an uncommon manner. Wherever he
preached, amazing multitudes of hearers flocked together, in Gloucester, in
Stonehouse, in Bath, in Bristol so that the heat of the churches was scarce
supportable. And the impressions made on the minds of many, were no less
extraordinary. After his return to London, while he was detained by general
Oglethorpe, from week to week, and from month to month, it pleased GOD to bless
his word still more. And he was indefatigable in his labor: generally on
Sunday he preached four times to exceeding large auditories; besides reading
prayers twice or thrice, and walking to and fro ten or twelve miles.

9. On December 28 he left London. It was on the 29th that he first preached
without notes. December 30 he went on board; but it was above a month before
they cleared the land. One happy effect of their very slow passage, he mentions
in April following: Blessed be GOD, we now live very comfortably in the great
cabin. We talk of little else but GOD and CHRIST: And scarce a word is heard
among us when together, but what has reference to our fall in the first, and
our new birth in the second Adam. It seems likewise to have been a peculiar
Providence, that he should spend a little time at Gibraltar; where both
citizens and soldiers, high and low, young and old, acknowledged the day of
their visitation.

10. From Sunday, May 7, 1738, till the latter end of August following, he made
full proof of his ministry in Georgia, particularly at Savannah: He read
prayers and expounded twice a day, and visited the sick daily. On Sunday he
expounded at five in the morning; at ten read prayers and preached, and at
three in the afternoon: And at seven in the evening expounded the church
catechism. How much easier is it for our brethren in the ministry, either in
England, Scotland, or Ireland, to find fault with such a labourer in our Lord's
vineyard, than to tread in his steps?

11. It was now that he observed the deplorable condition of many children
here; and that GOD put into his heart the first thought of sounding an
Orphan-House: for which he determined to raise contributions in England, if GOD
should give him a safe return thither. In December following he did return to
London: and on Sunday, January the 14th, 1739, he was ordained Priest, at
Christ-Church, Oxford. The next day he came to London again: and on Sunday the
21st preached twice. But though the churches were large, and crowded
exceedingly, yet many hundreds stood in the churchyard, and hundreds more
returned home. This put him upon the first thought of preaching in the open
air. But when he mentioned it to some of his friends, they judged it to be mere
madness. So he did not carry it into execution, till after he had left London.
It was on Wednesday, February 21, that finding all the churchdoors to be shut
in Bristol, (beside that no church was able to contain one half of the
congregation) at three in the afternoon he went to Kingswood, and preached
abroad, to near two thousand people. On Friday he preached there to four or
five thousand; and on Sunday to (it was supposed) ten thousand. The number
continually increased all the time he staid at Bristol. And a flame of holy
love was kindled, which will not easily be put out. The same was afterward
kindled in various parts of Wales, of Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire.
Indeed wherever he went, GOD abundantly confirmed the word of his messenger.

12. On Sunday April 29, he preached the first time in Moorfields, and on
Kennington common, and the thousands of hearers were as quiet as they could
have been in a church. Being again detained in England from month to month, he
made little excursions into several counties, and received the contributions of
willing multitudes, for an Orphan-house in Georgia. The embargo which was now
laid on the shipping, gave him leisure for the more journies, through various
parts of England, for which many will have reason to bless God to all eternity.
At length on August 14th he embarked, but he did not land in Pensylvania till
October 30. Afterward he went through Pensylvania, the Jersies, New York,
Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, preaching all along to immense
congregations, with full as great effect as in England. On January 10, 1740, he
arrived at Savannah.

13. January 29, he added three desolate orphans to near twenty which he had in
his house before. The next day he laid out the ground for the house, about ten
miles from Savannah. February 11, he took in four Orphans more, and set out for
Frederica, in order to fetch the orhans that were in the southern parts of the
colony. In his return he fixed a school, both for children and grown persons, at
Darien, and took four orphans thence. March 25, he laid the first stone of the
Orphan-House, to which, with great propriety, he gave the name of Bethesda; a
work for which the children yet unborn shall praise the LORD. He had now about
forty orphans, so that there were near an hundred mouths to be fed daily. But
he was careful for nothing, casting his care on HIM who feeds the young
ravens that call upon him.

14. In April he made another tour through Pennsylvania, the Jersies, and
New York. Incredible multitudes flocked to hear him, among whom were abundance
of negroes. In all places the greater part of the hearers were affected to an
amazing degree. Many were deeply convinced of their lost state; many truly
converted to GOD. In some places thousands cried out aloud; many as in the
agonies of death; most were drowned in tears; some turned pale as death; others
were wringing their hands; others lying on the ground; others sinking into the
arms of their friends; almost all lifting up their eyes, and calling for mercy.

15. He returned to Savannah June 5. The next evening, during the public
service, the whole congregation, young and old, were dissolved in tears; after
service, several of the parishioners, and all his family, particularly the
young children, returned home crying along the street, and some could not help
praying aloud. The groans and cries of the children continued all night, and
great part of the next day.

16. In August he set out again, and through various provinces came to Boston.
While he was here, and in the neighboring places, he was extremely weak in
body. Yet the multitudes of hearers were so great, and the effects wrought on
them so astonishing, as the oldest men then alive in the town had never seen
before. The same power attended his preaching at New York; particularly on
Sunday, November 2, almost as soon as he began, crying, weeping, and wailing,
were to be heard on every side. Many sunk down to the ground, cut to the heart;
and many were filled with divine consolation. Toward the close of this journey
he made this reflection: It is the seventy-fifth day since I arrived at
Rhode Island, exceeding weak in body. Yet GOD has enabled me to preach an
hundred and seventy-five times in public, besides exhorting frequently in
private. Never did GOD vouchsafe me greater comforts: Never did I perform my
journies with less fatigue, or see such a continuance of the divine presence in
the congregations to whom I preached. In December he returned to Savannah, and
in the March following arrived in England.

17. You may easily observe, that the preceding account is chiefly extracted
from his own Journals, which, for their artless and unaffected simplicity, may
vie with any writings of the kind. And how exact a specimen is this of his
labors both in Europe and America, for the honor of his beloved Master,
during the thirty years that followed! As well as of the uninterrupted shower
of blessings wherewith GOD was pleased to succeed his labors! Is it not much
to be lamented, that any thing should have prevented his continuing this
account, till at least, near the time when he was called by his, LORD to enjoy
the fruit of his labor? -- If he has left any papers of this kind, and his
friends count me worthy of the honor, it would be my glory and joy to
methodize, transcribe, and prepare them for the public view.

18. A particular account of the last scene of his life, is thus given by a
gentleman of Boston: After being about a month with us in Boston and its
vicinity, and preaching every day, he went to Old-York, preached on Thursday,
September 27, there; proceeded to Portsmouth, and preached there on Friday. On
Saturday morning he set out for Boston; but before he came to Newbury, where he
had engaged to preach the next morning, he was importuned to preach by the way.
The house not being large enough to contain the people, he preached in the open
field. But having been infirm for several weeks, this so exhausted his
strength, that when he came to Newbury he could not get out of the ferry-boat
without the help of two men. In the evening, however, he recovered his spirits,
and appeared with his usual cheerfulness. He went to his chamber at nine, his
fixed time, which no company could divert him from; and slept better than he had
done for some weeks before. He rose at four in the morning, September 30, and
went into his closet; and his companion observed he was unusually long in
private. He left his closet, returned to his companion, threw himself on the
bed, and lay about ten minutes. Then he fell upon his knees, and prayed most
fervently to GOD, That if it was consistant with his will, he might that day
finish his Master's work." He then desired his man to call Mr. Parsons, the
clergyman at whose house he was: But in a minute, before Mr. Parsons could
reach him, died without a sigh or groan. On the news of his death, six
gentlemen set out for Newbury, in order to bring his remains hither, but he
could not be moved, so that his precious ashes must remain at Newbury. Hundreds
would have gone from this town to attend his funeral, had they not expected he
would have been interred here. -- May this stroke be sanctified to the church
of GOD in general, and to this province in particular!

II. 1. We are in the second place, to take some view of his character. A
little sketch of this, was soon published in the Boston Gazette: An extract of
which is subjoined: Little can be said of him, but what every friend to vital
Christianity, who has sat under his ministry, will attest. In his public
labors he has for many years astonished the world with his eloquence and
devotion. With what divine pathos did he persuade the impenitent sinner to
embrace the practice of piety and virtue! Filled with the spirit of grace, he
spoke from the heart, and with fervency of zeal, perhaps unequalled since the
days of the apostles, adorned the truths he delivered with the most graceful
charms of rhetoric and oratory. From the pulpit he was unrivalled in the
command of an ever-crowded auditory. Nor was he less agreeable and instructive
in his private conversation: Happy in a remarkable ease of address; willing to
communicate, studious to edify. May the rising generation catch a spark of that
flame which shone with such distinguished luster in the spirit and practice of
this faithful servant of the most high GOD!

2. A more particular, and equally just character of him, has appeared in one
of the English papers. It may not be disagreeable to you, to add the substance
of this likewise: The character of this truly pious person, must be deeply
impressed on the heart of every friend of vital religion. In spite of a tender
and delicate constitution, he continued, to the last day of his life, preaching
with a frequency and a fervor that seemed to exceed the natural strength of the
most robust. Being called to the exercise of his function at an age, when most
young men are only beginning to qualify themselves for it, he had not time to
make a very considerable progress in the learned languages. But this defect was
amply supplied, by a lively and fertile genius, by fervent zeal, and by a
forcible and most persuasive delivery. And though in the pulpit he often found
it needful, by the terrors of the Lord to persuade men, he had nothing gloom in
his nature, being singularly cheerful, as well as charitable and tender
hearted. He was as read to relieve the bodily as the spiritual necessities of
those that applied to him. It ought also to be observed, that he constantly
enforced upon his audience, every duty, particularly industry in their several
callings, and obedience to the superiors. He endeavored, by the most
extraordinary efforts of preaching in different place and even in the open
fields, to rouse the lower (...) of people, from the last degree of inattention
and ignorance, to a sense of religion. For this and his other labors, the name
of George Whitefield will long be remembered with esteem and veneration.

2. That both these accounts are just and impartial, will readily be allowed;
that (...) as far as they go. But they go little farther than the outside (...)
his character. They show you the Preacher, but not the Man, the Christian, the
Saint of GOD. May I be permitted to add a little on this head, from personal
knowledge of near forty years? Indeed, I am thoroughly sensible how difficult
it is to speak (...) so delicate a subject; what prudence is required to ^void
both extremes, to say neither too little, (...) too much? Nay, I know it is
impossible to speak all, to say either less or more, without incurring from
some the former, from others the latter censure. Some will seriously think,
that too little is said; and others that it is too much. But without attending
to this, I will speak just what I know, before Him to whom we are all to give
an account.

4. Mention has already been made of his unparalleled Zeal, his indefatigable
Activity, his Tender heartedness to the afflicted, and Charitableness toward
the poor. But should we not likewise mention his deep Gratitude, to all whom
GOD had used as instruments of good to him? Of whom he did not cease to speak
in the most respectful manner, even to his dying day. Should we not mention,
that he had an heart susceptible of the most generous and the most tender
Friendship? I have frequently thought, that this, of all others, was the
distinguishing part of his character. How few have we known of so kind a
temper, of such large and flowing affections? was it not principally by this,
that the hearts of others were so strangely drawn and knit to him? Can any
thing but love beget love? This shone in his very countenance, and continually
breathed in all his words, whether in public or private. Was it not this,
which, quick and penetrating as lightning, flew from heart to heart? Which gave
that life to his Sermons, his Conversations, his Letters? Ye are witnesses.

5. But away with the vile misconstruction of men of corrupt minds, who know of
no love but what is Earthly and sensual. Be it remembered, at the same time,
that he was endued with the most nice and unblemished modesty. His office
called him to converse very frequently and largely, with women as well as men;
and those of every age and condition. But his whole behavior toward them, was
a practical momment on that advice of St. Paul to Timothy, Entreat the elder
women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity.

6. Mean time, how suitable to the friendliness of his spirit, was the
frankness and openness of his conversation? Although it was as far removed from
rudeness on the one hand, as from guile and disguise on the other. Was not this
frankness at once a fruit and a proof of his courage and intrepidity? Armed
with these, he feared not the faces of men, but used great plainness of speech
to persons of every rank and condition, high and low, rich and poor:
endeavoring only by manifestation of the truth, to commend himself to every
man's conscience in the sight of God.

7. Neither was he afraid of labor or pain, any more than of what man could do
unto him, being equally " Patient in bearing ill and doing well."

And this appeared in the readiness wherewith has pursued whatever he undertook
for his Master's sake. Witness one instance for all, the Orphan-House in
Georgia, which he began and perfected, in spite of all discouragements. Indeed,
in whatever concerned himself, he was pliant and flexible. In this case he was
easy to be entreated, easy to be either commenced or presuaded. But he was
immovable in the things of GOD, or wherever his conscience was concerned. None
could persuade, any more than affright him, to vary in the least point from
that integrity, which was inseparable from his whole character, and regulated
all his words and actions Herein he did "Stand as an iron pillar strong,
"And steadfast as a wall of brass."


8. If it be required, What was the foundation of this integrity, or of his
sincerity, courage, patience and every other valuable and amiable quality, it
is easy to give the answer. It was not the excellence of his natural temper:
Not the strength of his understanding: It was not the force of his education
no, nor the advice of his friends. It was no other than faith in a bleeding
LORD; Faith of the operation of God. It was a lively hope of an inheritance
incorruptible, and that fades not away. It was the love of God shed abroad in
his heart by the Holy Ghost, which was given unto him, filling his soul with
tender, disinterested love to every child of man. From this source arose that
torrent of Eloquence which frequently bore down all before it: From this, that
astonishing force of Persuasion, which the most hardened sinners could not
resist. This it was, which often made his head as waters, and his eyes a
fountain of tears. This it was which enabled him to pour out his soul in
Prayer, in a manner peculiar to himself, with such fullness and ease united
together, with such strength and variety both of sentiment and expression.

9. I may close this head with observing, What an honor it pleased GOD to put
upon his faithful servant, by allowing him to declare his everlasting gospel in
so many various countries, to such numbers of people, and with so great an
effect on so many of their precious souls! Have we read or heard of any person
since the apostles, who testified the gospel of the grace of GOD, through so
widely extended a space, through so large a part of the habitable world? Have
we read or heard of any person, who called so many thousands, so many miriads
of sinners to repentance? Above all, have we read or heard of any, who has been
a blessed instrument in his hand of bringing so many sinners from darkness to
light, and from the power of a satan unto God? It is true, were we to talk thus
to the gay world, we should be judged to speak as barbarians. But you
understand the language of the country to which you are going, and whither our
dear friend is gone a little before us.

III. But how shall we improve this awful providence? This is the Third thing
which we have to consider. And the answer to this important question is easy;
(may GOD write it in all our hearts!) By keeping close to the grand doctrines
which he delivered: And by drinking into his spirit.

1. And first, let us keep close to the grand scriptural doctrines, which he
every where delivered. There are many doctrines of a less essential nature,
with regard to which, even the sincere children of GOD (such is the present
weakness of human understanding!) are and have been divided for many ages. In
these we may think and let think; we may "agree to disagree." But mean time let
us hold fast the essentials of the faith, which was once delivered to the
saints; and which this champion of GOD so strongly insisted on, at all times,
and in all places.

2. His fundamental point was, give GOD all the glory of whatever is good in
man. And in the business of salvation, set CHRIST as high, and man as low as
possible. With this point, he and his friends at Oxford, the original
Methodists (so called) set out. Their grand principal was, there is no power
(by nature) and no merit in man. They insisted, All power to think, speak, or
act right, is in and from the Spirit of CHRIST; And all merit is (not in man,
how high soever in grace, but merely) in the blood of CHRIST. So he and they
taught: There is no power in man, till it is given from above, to do one good
work, to speak one good word, or to form one good desire. For it is not enough
to say, all men are sick of sin: No, we are all Dead in trespasses and sins. It
follows, that all the children of men are by nature children of wrath. We are
all guilty before God, liable to death temporal and eternal.

3. And we are all helpless, both with regard to the power and to the guilt of
sin. For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? None less than the
Almighty. Who can raise those that are Dead, spiritually dead in sin? None but
He who raised us from the dust of the earth But on what consideration will he
do this? Not for works of righteousness that we have done. The dead cannot
praise thee, O Lord! Nor do any thing for the sake of which they should be
raised to life. Whatever therefore GOD does, he does it merely for the sake of
his well-be-loved Son: He was wounded for our trangressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities. He himself bore all our sins in his own body upon the tree. He
was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our justification. Here then
is the sole meritorious cause of every blessing we do or can enjoy: In
particular of our pardon and acceptance with GOD, of our full and free
justification. But by what means do we become interested in what CHRIST has
done and suffered? Not by works, lest any man should boast; but by faith alone.
We conclude, says the apostle, that a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law. And to as many as thus receive Him, gives he power to become
the sons of God: Even to those that believe in his name, who were born, not of
the will of man, but of God.

4. And except a man be thus born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. But
all who are thus born of the spirit, have the kingdom of God within them.
Christ sets up his kingdom in their hearts; Righteousness, peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost. That mind is in them, which was in Jesus Christ, enabling them to
walk as Christ also walked. His in-dwelling-spirit makes them both holy in
heart, and holy in all manner of conversation. But still, seeing all this is a
free gift, through the righteousness and blood of CHRIST, there is eternally
the same reason to remember, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

5. You are not ignorant, that these are the fundamental doctrines which he
every where insisted on. And may they not be summed up, as it were, in two
words, The new birth, and justification of faith? These let us insist upon with
all boldness, at all times, and in all places: In public (those of us who are
called thereto) and at all opportunities, in private. Keep close to these good,
old, unfashionable doctrines, how many soever contradict and blaspheme. Go on,
my brethren, in the name of the Lord, and in the power of his might, With all
care and deligence, keep that safe that is committed to your trust: Knowing
that heaven and earth shall pass away; but this truth shall not pass away.

6. But will it be sufficient, to keep close to his Doctrines, how pure soever
they are? Is there not a point of still greater importance than this, namely to
drink into his Spirit? Herein to be a follower of him, even as he was of
Christ? Without this, the purity of our doctrines, would only increase our
damnation. This therefore is the principal thing, to copy after his spirit. And
allowing that in some points, we must be content, to admire what we cannot
imitate; yet in many others we may, through the same free grace, be partakers
of the same blessing. Conscious then of our own wants, and of his bounteous
love, who gives liberally and upbraideth not, cry to Him that works all in
all, for a measure of the same precious faith: Of the same zeal and activity,
the same tender-heartedness, charitableness, bowels of mercies. Wrestle with
GOD for some degree of the same grateful, friendly, affectionate temper; of the
same openness, simplicity, and godly sincerity, Love without dissimulation.
Wrestle on, till the Power from on high works in you the same steady courage
and patience: And above all, because it is the crown of all, the same
invariable integrity.

7. Is there any other fruit of the grace of GOD, with which he was eminently
endowed, and the want of which among the children of GOD he frequently and
passionately lamented? There is one, that is, Catholic love: That sincere and
tender affection, which is due to all those, who, we have reason to believe,
are children of GOD by faith: In other words, all those in every persuasion,
who fear God and work righteousness. He longed to see all who had tasted the
good word, of a truly catholic spirit, (a word little understood and still less
experienced by many, who have it frequently in their mouth.) Who is he that
answers this character? Who is a man of a catholic spirit? One who loves a
friend, as brethren in the LORD, as joint partakers of the present kingdom of
heaven, and fellow-heirs of his eternal kingdom, all of whatever opinion, mode
of worship, or congregation, who believes in the LORD JESUS; who love GOD and
man; who rejoice to please, and fear to offend GOD, are careful to abstain from
evil, and zealous of good works. He is a man of truly catholic spirit, who
bears these continually upon his heart: Who having an unspeakable tenderness
for their persons, and an earnesst desire of their welfare, does not cease to
commend them to GOD in prayer, as well as to plead their cause before men: Who
speaks comfortably to them, and labors by all his words, to strengthen their
hands in GOD. He assists them to the uttermost of his power, in all things,
spiritual and temporal. He is ready to spend and to be spent for them; yea, to
lay down his life for his brethren.

8. How amiable a character is this? How desirable to every child of GOD! But
why is it then so rarely found? How is it, that there are so few instance of
it? Indeed, supposing we have tasted of the love of GOD, how can any of us
rest, till it is our own? Why, there is a delicate device, whereby Satan
persuades thousands, that they may stop short of it and yet be guiltless. It is
well, if many here present are not in this snare of the devil, taken captive at
his will. O yes, says one, I have all this love for those I believe to be
children of GOD. But (...) will never believe he is a child of GOD, who belongs
to that vile congregation! Can he, do you think, be a child of GOD, who holds
such detestable opinions? Or he that joins in such senseless and superstitious,
if not idolatrous worship. So we justify ourselves in one sin, by adding a
second to it. We excuse the want of love in ourselves, by laying the blame on
others. To color our own devilish temper we pronounce our brethren children of
the devil. (...) beware, of this! And if you are already taken in the snare,
escape out of it as soon as possible. Go and learn that truly catholic love,
which is not rash (...) hasty in judging: That love which thinks no evil,
which believes and hops all things: Which make all the allowances for
others, that we desire other should make for us. Then we shall take knowledge
of the grace of GOD, which is in every man, whatever be his opinion or mode of
worship. Then will all that fear GOD be near and dear unto us, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ.

9. Was not this the spirit of our dear friend? And why should it not be ours?
O thou GOD of love, how long shall thy people be a by word among the heathen?
How long shall they laugh us to scorn, and say, See how these Christians love
one another? When will thou roll away our reproach! Shall the sword devour for
ever? How long will it be, ere thou bid thy people return from following each
other? Now at least, let all the people stand still, and pursue after their
brethren no more! But whatever others do, let all of us my brethren, hear the
voice of him that being dead, yet speaks! Suppose ye hear him say, Now at
least, be ye followers of me as I was of Christ! Let brother no more lift up
sword against brother, neither know ye war any more! Rather put ye on, as the
elect of God, bowels of mercies, humbleness of mind, brotherly kindness,
gentleness, long suffering, forbearing one another in love. Let the time past
suffice for strife, envy, contention; for biting and devouring one another.
Blessed be GOD, that ye have not long ago been consumed one of another! From
henceforth hold ye the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

10. O GOD, with thee no word is impossible: thou do what whatsoever pleases
thee! O that thou would cause the mantle of thy prophet, whom thou have taken
up, now to fall upon us that remain! Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Let his
Spirit rest upon these thy servants! Show thou art the GOD that answered by
fire! Let the fire of thy love fall on every heart! And because we love thee,
let us love one another with love stronger than death. Take away from us all
anger, and wrath and bitterness; all clamor and evil speaking. Let thy spirit
rest upon us, that from this hour, we may be kind to each other, tender
hearted: Forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven
us!


