A MITE CAST INTO THE TREASURY: OR, OBSERVATIONS ON SLAVE-KEEPING.

The Ways of Men are before the Eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings,

Prove. v.21. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street,
between Second and Third-Streets.

INTRODUCTION.
THE power of prejudice over the minds of mankind is very extraordinary; hardly
any extremes too distant, or absurdities too glaring for it to unite or
reconcile, if it tends to promote or justify a favorite pursuit. It is thus we
are to account for the fallacious reasonings and absurd sentiments used and
entertained concerning negroes, and the lawfulness of keeping them slaves. The
low contempt with which they are generally treated by the whites, lead children
from the first dawn of reason, to consider people with a black skin, on a
footing with domestic animals, formed to serve and obey, whom they may kick,
beat, and treat as they please, without their having any right to complain; and
when they attain the age of maturity, can scarce be brought to believe that
creatures they have always looked upon so vastly below themselves, can stand on
the same footing in the sight of the Universal Father, or that justice requires
the same conduct to them as to whites; and those prejudices having been
generally countenanced in time past, are become so riveted, that too few even
of the sober and religious, can hear the voice of impartial justice, in favor
of that abused people, with a proper degree of patience and attention. I
therefore request all such into whose hands this may fall, to divest themselves
of every bias arising either from prejudice, or temporal views, and coolly
weigh the following hints, and, if any thing is met with, that tends to promote
christian rectitude, embrace it; without regarding the hand from whence it
comes, ever bearing in mind who it was that declared, -- Such measure as you
mete, shall be measured to you again. Mat. vii.2.

OBSERVATIONS ON SLAVE-KEEPING.
Open thy mouth for the dumb, and all such as are appointed to destruction, and
plead the cause of the poor and needy.

Pro. xxxi.8, 9.
MY mind having been frequently led to consider the inconsistency of the
practice of slave-keeping, and making traffic of our fellow-men, to the
precepts and doctrine of our blessed Lord and Lawgiver, which, with regard to
duty one to another, is sum'd up in this short command, viz. Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, and wishing to see an
end put to this unrighteous practice among christians, felt an inclination to
fling a few hints together, several of which to me appeared new on the subject,
which may possibly lead some more closely to inspect their own situation, in
order to discover how far they stand approved by impartial justice in this
business, and as the Jewish law was positive, That whoever steals a man and
sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.
Exodus xxi.I6.

The following Queries may be worthy our serious attention.

Query I. Was this part of the ceremonial law intended only for the Jewish
nation, or founded on universal distributive justice, adapted to the nature of
things, and equally necessary to the rest of mankind?

II. Is he who encourages the thief to steal and receives the goods, more
innocent than the thief?

III. As christians consider it unlawful to make slaves of their
fellow-believers, does the precepts of Christ, or nature of things give a
christian any stronger title to his native freedom than an African?

IV. If it was a heinous crime to take a fellow servants by the throat and
deprive him of his liberty because he could not pay a just debt, is it not much
more so to deprive our fellow servants of their freedom who owe us nothing, nor
ever did us the least injury?

V. Is not the command which prohibits the coveting our neighbor's ox,
servant, etc. broke with a much deeper degree of guilt, by coveting his person,
and when in our power the making him our slave?

VI. Does not he, who for gain, buys, sells, or keeps in slavery the
descendants of those who were unjustly deprived of their freedom, thereby
justify the original act, and put himself in the place of the first aggressor?

Object. But the negroes brought here are captives taken in war, and, by the
custom of the country belong to the victors, who have a right to slay or
otherwise dispose of them.

To pass over the Europeans being the occasion of those wars by their demand
for slaves, and that many of the negroes brought here, have been stole, etc.
let us consider how far a custom allowed of among benighted Africans, is to be
countenanced and upheld by enlightened christians, who are commanded to, Do
unto others, as they would have others do unto them, not to a part only, to
those of their own religion or color, but to all men; wherefore no christian
can keep a slave or be accessory thereto, without (in some degree) incurring
the guilt of breaking his Lord's command, unless he is willing himself and
posterity should be slaves; and as to this custom of selling those of their own
nation and color into perpetual slavery, from parents, husbands, wives,
children, and all the tender connections of life; who can think of it without
the utmost abhorrence. Shall we then, shall christians plead it as an excuse
for our conduct, when at the same time we are the moving cause which produce
those effects, as certaintly as the weights in a clock are the cause of its
striking. Remove the weights and the striking ceases. Let all who bear the
christian name leave buying slaves, and this infernal custom of theirs, of
selling their brethren will I believe equally cease. A custom that casts the
most indelible odium on the whole people, occasioning some from hence to infer
that they are a different race, formed by the Creator for brutal services, to
drudge for us with their brethren of the stalls. -- However extravagant such a
supposition may appear, it is the only rational one that can fully justify the
practice, and give peace of mind to a slave keeper; for until he can persuade
himself that this is the case, the above precept must continually reproach him
with being a hypocrite and no christian who can thus live in a deliberate
opposition to Christ's command; and I am fully persuaded there is few to be
found who justifies the practice but is more or less tinctured with this
opinion. Well then if this people's custom of going to war for no other purpose
than to take prisoners; stealing, kidnapping, etc. their neighbors and
children, in order to sell them for slaves, cannot be thought of without
raising the utmost detestation, as what most effectually saps and destroys
every social tie, on which all temporal happiness stands -- is black with every
guilt, and the most truly infernal of any practice that ever obtained among
mankind -- what excuse, what plea, will our negroe masters make at the great
day of retribution, for encouraging those execrable crimes by receiving the
plunder? -- It will be none, I doubt, to say my negro was born in my father's
house, or in America, and therefore not obtained in that way; for I consider
the person who was brought from his native country against his will and made a
slave, to exist in each individual of his posterity, however distant in point
of time. And the person in whose hand such posterity is found, so long as the
injury is continued, to represent the original stealer or plunderer, whose
right has been conveyed down to him, and is that by which he claims property
in such posterity, consequently represents him in whom this claim ultimately
existed; nor can he wash his hands from this guilt by delivering such pretended
property either by sale or gift to another, more than Pilot washed his from the
guilt of Christ's death, whom he knew to be innocent, and had it in his power
to have set at liberty.

But to return to the source of this evil; if we look upon the first move so
odious, so hateful, and find ourselves filled with indignation and abhorrence
against the perpetrators, how can we countenance and encourage, and thereby
become promoters, abettors, and accessories therein, which every one in a less
or greater degree is who buys, sells, or keeps in slavery one of these people
after the age the law of nature gives each human being an equal right to
freedom; for can there be a greater absurdity than to say, I detest the
plunderer, when I am greedily sharing the spoils; or innocent of the guilt, if
I refuse to make restitution to the true owner of his property of which I am in
possession, and of which he was unjustly deprived. -- This opens a large field
for consideration, for it really appears to me impossible for any one of their
own seeking and choice, to be concerned in slave-keeping, or partake of the
profits, without incurring a degree of the original guilt. For if an innocent
freeman, who had no ways forfeited his freedom, was by force taken from his
native country and made a slave and begets children, who by virtue of the
original injury are kept slaves, and they beget others, and so on for twenty
generations, the first wrong, a robbery of freedom, is continued, and exists in
each of these, as much as it did in their common ancestors; nor can I defend or
justify my title to one of them without defending and justifying the original
injury on which my right is founded, and my refusing to restor this stolen
property, of which I am possessed, to its right owner, shows that I approve the
original act, and being a sharer of the spoils, become a sharer of the guilt,
as also justly chargeable with a repetition of the crime; for every individual
of the human species by the law of nature comes into the world equally entitled
to freedom at a proper age, although their parents may have been unjustly
deprived of, or forfeited theirs. Children are not to answer for the sins of
their parents; and whoever having the care or possession of a child, and denies
him his freedom at an age the laws of his country gives it to others, and
without any act or consent of the party to justify it, commits an act of
violence against the strongest of laws, the law of nature, -- robs that
individial of his inherent property, his freedom, a right which was never given
by the universal Father to any one of his creatures over one another, without
some fault on their part, not even to parents over their children. -- A
property more sacred, interesting, and essential to us as free agents, and
accountable creatures than any other. And whoever partakes of the labor of
such, or the profits arising therefrom, become sharers of the spoils of
oppression. -- Can we then believe the Supreme Being to be an indifferent
spectator of this inhuman trade, this assumed authority of one part of his
intelligent creatures levelling another part with the brute animals to drudge
and toil for their will and pleasure. Buy and sell them like cattle, deprived
of every rational enjoyment, with the addition of every species of human
misery. -- If he really is a GOD taking cognizance of the actions of men -- of
one flesh has created all nations of people -- is no respector of persons, but
renders to every man according to his works -- is particularly attentive to the
cries of the poor and needy -- will he not assuredly judge for those things?
Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the
gate. For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul, of those that
spoiled them. Prove. xxii.22, 23.

The scripture mentions Micah vi.II.
the wicked balance, and bag of deceitful weights, the use of which, I believe
was never more apparent than in this dark business, in excusing the keeping
slaves, and in raising difficulties against setting them free, it would be
endless to attempt a catalogue of the trifling and absurd reasons used on these
occasions, nor have I any inclination, my intent being only just to hint at
matters; to reason with those who justify slave-keeping, after its unlawfulness
has been so plainly and abundantly proved, would appear idle in me. But such
who solemnly pretend to condemn the practice, yet shelter themselves under
supposed difficulties in setting theirs free, or willing to free them after
they have spent the prime of life in their service, or make them pay so much
per year to secure their estates, etc. I would beg of such to lay aside the
false balance and deceitful weights, and use the true. -- Weigh this matter in
Christ's scales. Do unto others, as ye would they should do to you. This will
oblige you to set your negroes free at the same age your own children are,
without unjustly coveting their labor till they are 25 or 30 years of age, or
compelling them to pay you a yearly sum. They have as good a right to their
freedom at twenty-one in the eyes of unbiased justice as your own sons, and to
deny it to them, is as I said before, a repetition of the crime which brought
their ancestors out of their own country, viz. a robbing them of their freedom,
which if born and continued there, they would have enjoyed, nor can their being
born among christians cancel this invariable law of nature, or make the seizing
their freedom by force here, any less injustice than had it been done there;
the injury to the individual is the same, and equally incompatible with doing
as we would be done unto. -- Should one of your sons be kept an apprentice by
force, a year longer than his master had a right, satisfaction must be made, or
a prosecution commenced and what not, for redress. But the poor Africans having
no advocate but his master's conscience, may be kept year after year, and
perhaps die at his drudgery like a horse at the plow, or have his freedom
restored at a time of life when it is rather a punishment than favor.

Object. But surely thou will admit of some distinction between the children of
white people born free, and those of our slaves who cost us great sums of money
which we have not been repaid, or perhaps bought young and not earned half
their cost by the time they are of age, as is my case. I have a woman bought
when young, who having had children fast, has earned very little of her
purchase money, and if I should set all these free as they arrive to the age of
men and women, shall be a great loser by them; thou will hardly say that would
be reasonable.

My friend thy reasoning proceeds from the bag of deceitful weights; the true
balance discovers justice to be quite another thing than thou seems to think
it, here is no respect of persons. Justice to thy negroe weighs as heavy as
justice to thyself, a small loss in thy interest put in this scale against the
freedom of an innocent fellow; creature, weighs but as a feather against mount
Atlas, perhaps the barely claiming no right to them after the age of I8 and 2I
may fall greatly short of christian justice in this scale; let us therefore a
little investigate this matter.

Query. How came thee possessed of this woman?

Ans. I bought her of an African merchant, who brought her from Guinea when a
child.

Query. How came he by her?

Ans. I know not: I sppose he bought her of them who had a right to sell her.

A right to sell her! No one, not even her father could have such a right
longer than till she came to the age of a woman, at which time she was
pronounced free by the law of nature, the rules of equity and justice, and
precepts of Christ, whether in her father's house, or a master's, in her native
country, or among strangers; this inherent right she carries with her, and
cannot be disseized of but by her own consent. -- But it is very likely she was
stolen from her parents, and then justice will say the perpetrator had not the
least right to her, consquently could convey none, but that he deserved death
for the act. -- If this is the chain of conveyance on which thy title to these
negroes stands, thou sees it is none at all, but that the life of the person
thou holds under, was justly forfeited for being the means of putting them into
thy power; therefore if thou had been a christian in deed and in truth, that
is, been dictated in all thy conduct by the precepts of Christ, which are the
perfections of justice, would sooner have cast thy money into the fire, than
have made such an unchristian purchase, by doing of which, thou approved of,
and made thyself a partner in all string of crimes committed in procuring,
bringing, and selling this child for a slave; but having done it, should then
have acted the part of a father by her, been more earnest in giving her a
christian education, than to make her earn her purchase-money, and have claimed
no right to her after she came to woman's age. -- This is as thou would desire
a child of thine should be treated in the like circumstances; but as thou did
not then discharge a christian duty by her, has now an additional cumber, and
ought to do this by her children; for being under thy care, their own father
cannot do it, and by a free act of thy own, thou stands his substitute as to
their education, and ought to discharge a father's duty to them in that respect.

Object. I act the part of a father by negroes! be at the cost of raising them,
schooling and what not, and when they are able to earn something, set them
free! I Will assure thee I Will do no such thing, it would be injustice to myself
and family. -- Why at that age they will bring me near one hundred pounds per
head.

Do not be warm my friend, I am not about to force thee to obey the laws of
God, Mic. vi.8.
"To deal justly, and love mercy." I know thou has the laws of men on thy side.
I am only endeavoring to show thee it would be abundantly thy greatest
interest so to do; and as thou calls thyself a christian, should expect much
rhetoric need not be used to convince thee that to be such it is absolutely
necessary to obey Christ's precepts and doctrine; to which there is nothing
more diametrically opposite than the slave trade from first to last. -- But if,
with Dives, thou art preferring this world's treasure to that which ought to be
laid up in heaven, -- I fear thou will share his lot in the conclusion.

Object. I am not preferring this world's treasure in that sort, but think it
very just these negroes should serve me till they are 25 or 30 years of age to
pay for their bringing up, and then a yearly sum for some time to secure my
estate from charge.

Thou art still using the false balance, the true one will decide quite
otherwise. It has been already shown that by the law of nature and precepts of
christianity, thou had not the least right to the mother's labor after she was
of woman's age, and thy keeping her against her will, was robbing her of her
freedom, which at that time became her own property, and in consequence of that
unlawful act, now claims her children; -- but can justly have no other, or
greater power over them than that of a father until they are men and women,
when having received from thee a christian education to enable them to get a
living, and be useful members of society, ought then enjoy their freedom as
fully as thy own children. And as to paying a yearly sum to secure thy estate,
it is the height of injustice; this encumbrance was not brought on by any fault
or act of theirs, but by thyself, and as it was of thy own seeking, ought to
bear the burden, and not punish innocent persons for thy faults. Do the best
the present circumstances will admit of, Isa. lviii.6
Loose the bands of wickedness, and let the oppressed go free, and thereby
atone for what cannot be recalled; for whoever attempts to satisfy justice by
setting their negroes free by halves in that sort, will find themselves as much
mistaken, I believe, as Ananias and his wife, in trying to deceive the apostles
with a part of the money their possessions sold for. -- It is inflicting a
penalty upon them, -- and for what? -- Justice abhors punishing an innocent
person; and if they are innocent why shall they not enjoy their natural rights
as fully and absolute as the rest of mankind. Or is it their being born of a
different color from ourselves that gives us this prerogative of dealing with
them as we please; making natural justice quite another thing when applied to
negroes, from what it is when applied to those of our own color. However this
simple circumstance may have prejudiced our minds, it may be well for all who
are concerned with this people to remember, that they are equally the work of
an Almighty hand, with a soul to save or lose, as themselves, and being so,
doubtless will avenge their cause, although in his mercy he forbears long, the
time of retribution will come; justice is as much his attribute as mercy.

Object. Thou says much of doing as we would be done unto, etc. for my part I
think it a great happiness for the negroes that they are brought here, whereby
they become acquainted with the christian doctrine, which they would have
remained ignorant of, had they continued in their own country.

A hopeful argument! fabricated by the same hand as those in favor of the
Spanish inquisition, and with about as much sense and reason. Those murderers
it is said, will with a very grave face tell an heretic at the time they are
torturing him in the most exquisite manner, that they do it out of pure regard
for his soul; thus for the good of their souls, destroy heretics in a more
horrible sort than a lion, or tiger, does his prey. And these make use of the
most unchristian means to get and keep their fellow-men in their power, and
render them the most miserable of human beings, to make them acquainted
forsooth and in love with christianity, which it is well known is the least of
their concern, and that few take more care to instill into their negroes than
into their cattle. But this plea, though often used, is too absurd and ridiculous
to be seriously refuted, shall therefore dismiss the subject after giving
another sample of like pious concern for the souls of men, which may bring it
more feelingly home to ourselves. The duke of Parma, on hearing of queen
Elizabeth's proclaiming a day of thanksgiving for the defeat of the Spanish
Armada, exclaimed! Mistaken woman! Blind nation! to return thanks for the
greatest misfortune that could have befallen them! for had that enterprise
succeeded, they would all have been converted to the true catholic faith. --
Now had they obtained their ends, butchered thousands, and enslaved the rest, I
suppose we should think it the greatest insult on reason, to say it would have
been a real kindness to the English, though it might be so said with much more
propriety and truth, than it can respecting negroes, who are brought from their
native land, where they enjoyed freedom and independance in a more extensive
degree than we do, and placed here on a footing with the brute creatures, that
are generally treated with greater care and tenderness than they. In the
West Indies, and some of our colonies.
In the other case, the people of England by submitting to the conquerors,
would have enjoyed their civil and natural privileges. How far that is from
being the case with slaves, concerns their masters awfully to consider.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAVING in the foregoing tract several times mentioned the law of nature; some
may ask what is the Law of nature. Civilians define it thus, -- The law of
nature is that which God at man's creation infused into him, for his
preservation and direction; is an eternal law and may not be changed; is the
law of all places, persons, and times, without alteration, and has the same
force all the world over; its object is the good and happiness of mankind.

And John Lock, that celebrated master of reason, in his treatise on
government, speaks much to the present purpose: some of which is as follows,
viz.

The magistrate may remit punishment for a crime, but cannot remit satisfaction
due to a private man for damage, who alone has a right to demand, or remit the
same. Page 149.

Every man has a property in his own person, this no body has any right to but
himself, the labor of his body, and work of his hands are his own. Page 160.

Man being born with a title to perfect freedom, and an uncontrouled enjoyment
of all the rights and priviliges of the law of nature, equally with any other
man, or number of men in the world, has by nature a power to preserve his
property, that is his life, liberty, and estate, against the injuries, and
attempts of other men. Page 199.

Every man being naturally free, nothing is able to put him into subjection to
any earthly power, but only his own consent. Page 223.

The law of nature stands as an eternal rule to all men, legislators as well as
others; the rules that they make for other men's actions must be conformable to
this law, i. e. to the will of God, of which that is a declaration; and the
fundamental law of nature being the good of mankind, no human sanction can be
good or valid against it. P. 233.

For one man to have an absolute arbitrary power over another, is a power which
nature never gives, for it has made no such distinction between men, it can
only be acquired by the individual forfeiting his life. Page 259. -- Captives
taken in a just and lawful war, and such only are subject to such a power. Page
260. But this concerns not the children who are in their minority; for since a
father has not in himself a power over the life and liberty of his child, no
act of his can possibly forfeit it, so that the children whatever may have
happened to the fathers, are freemen, and this absolute power reaches no
farther than the men that were subdued by him, and dies with them; and though he
governed them as slaves, he has no such right over their children. He can have
no power;over them but by their own consent. Page 270.

Every man is born with a right of freedoms to his person, which no other man
has a power over; but the free disposal of it lies in himself. Page 271.

FINIS.

