A REPLY To a Piece wrote last Year, By Mr. ISRAEL HOLLY, Pastor of a Church in
SUFFIELD; ENTITLED The NEW TESTAMENT Interpretation of the Old, relative to
INFANT BAPTISM.

WHEREIN Another short Attempt is made toward bringing that Controversy to a
happy Issue.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church in Middleborough.

Speaking the Truth in Love,

Ephesians. 4.15. Rebuke a wise Man and he will love thee,

Prove. 8.1. NEWPORT: Printed, for the AUTHOR, by SOLOMON SOUTHWICK. M,DCC,LXXII.

To Mr. ISRAEL HOLLY.
DEAR SIR,
YOUR piece which was printed last fall, at New London, entitled The
New Testament interpretation of the Old, relative to infant baptism, -- written
letter-wise to Mr. Isaac Backus, occasioned by his late answer to Mr. F -- 's
Mr. Eheuezer Frothingham, of Middletown in Connecticut.
letter, has further confirmed me in a sentiment which I adopted many years
ago, viz. That a very great part of the controversies, among good men, are
caused by their mistaking each others ideas. But there are so many things in
our dark world still to keep them in these mistakes, that nature is ready to
say, it is in vain to make any further attempts to rectify them. Yet other
considerations have induced me to make another short trial, to show you wherein
you have mistaken the scriptures, as well as the ideas of your friend,
concerning baptism,

You tell me, that the thing which moved you to write against me, was my
holding forth, That in order to maintain infant baptism, you construe and
interpret the New Testament by the Old, and not the Old by the New, p. 4. Which
you think is contrary to fact with regard to yourself, and you suppose that if
we were willing to receive the New Testament interpretation of the Old, we also
should see warrant for that practice; and you close with giving public notice
to me and others, that if we should pretend to answer you and not attend
directly to your groundwork, you should probably look upon it so impertinent
as not to be worthy of a reply, P. 71. I readily join issue with you here, and
desire that all impertinences may be dismissed from this dispute.

Let then the New Testament interpretation of the Old be the groundwork of all
our proceedings; and how do you take that? Why, in general you say, There was a
spiritual glory then in being, although veiled with a type. there was then the
same spiritual good under the type, that there is now without the type. And all
who did not stick in the letter, saw that spiritual glory, and embraced that
spiritual good, P. 7, 8. I say the same with all my heart. You observe that the
covenant of legal services and ceremonies, considered in themselves, were weak
and insufficient to justify and save those who attended them, unless they by
faith looked to the end of those things which were to be abolished; and that
the carnal Jews, who had no true faith to apprehend Christ in Abraham's
Covenant, nor Christ as the substance of those shadows, they terminated in the
shadow instead of the substance, to their own destruction, P. 23. And you
illustrate the difference between the right use of those things, and the Jews
abuse of them, by Paul's familiar allegory of the bondwoman and the free, P.
31, -- 34, This was the subject of my sermon, which, in its second edition,
stands prefixed to what I wrote to Mr. F. and which I expressly refer to, as
what I designed should be part of my answer to him, P. 80. And how came you,
Sir, to write above seventy pages in his behalf, and never take any notice of
that sermon, nor let the reader know that I agree with you in all these
sentiments? Indeed I am as far as you are from supposing that a man, who writes
against another, is obliged to take notice of every thing the other has said;
yet for him to commence a dispute, and then recite a great number of truths,
which his opponent holds as much as he does, without letting the reader know
but that he denies them all; this you and all men must know is not fair dealing.

And now to come to the point in hand, you observe that in Genesis 17.
Circumcision was instituted, and directions given for forming Abraham's family
into a church state. -- Certain duties and privileges were annexed, -- which
were thankfully to be acknowleged and punctually complied with, until God
should please to add thereto more rites and ceremonies, or take them all away,
which were merely positive, and appoint new ones at his pleasure, P. 9.10.
These have long been the sentiments of my heart.

And you allow that if the words in Heb. 8.9. 10. had run in opposition to
Abraham's covenant, you would freely give up the point to me, P. 21. Why then
do you stand still to dispute? Because you say, The words of inspiration run
quite another way, even to Egypt and Mount Sinai, therefore take notice of them
again. I will make a new covenant, not according to the covenant I made with
their fathers. But when? In the DAY I took them by the band to lead them out of
the land of Egypt, p. 22.

Answer. I have often taken notice of this, and I desire you to do it once
more. That was the DAY in which God added more rites and ceremonies to
Abraham's covenant. He instituted the passover, with its various rules, and
said every man servant that is bought for money, WHEN thou bast circumcised
him, THEN shall be cat thereof. All the Congregation of Israel shall keep it.
Also on that day, and not till then, he gave orders for bringing strangers, and
all their males, both to circumcision and the passover, Exodus xii, 43 -- 48.
And when the whole system of ordinances and ceremonies were completed for that
church in the wilderness, and the covenant was renewed with the whole nation,
(many of whom had not eyes to see, nor ears to hear) just before they entered
Canaan, it was to establish them for a people unto himself, and that he might
be unto them a God, AS he had sworn unto their father Abraham, Deuteronomy. xxix, 4 --
13. So that what was done when they came out of Egypt, at Sinai, and in the
plains of Moah, was but the completing of that constitution which first began
in Genesis xvii; and a literal fulfillment of that promise to Abraham, I will be a
God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. And since the Holy Ghost says, the new
covenant is not according to that covenant made with their fathers, how do you
dare to say, The gentile church is grafted into the same covenant -- as the
Jewish church once stood in! p. 50.

I am sensible that this is the root of the controversy, and you observe truly,
that one blow at the root of a tree of vile fruit, would do as much good as
many against the branches, p. 52. But if instead of a vile root you should be
found striking against the rock, you will find it much worse than lost labor.
You know that infant baptism is not expressed in the Bible, but you suppose
that when the head of a family believed, and was baptized, that he afterward
brought his household upon his faith, and this is the root your cause stands
upon; but the plainest precept for a new professor of religion, to bring his
household into the church upon his faith, that we have in all the sacred
oracles, was given on the day that Israel came out of Egypt; and since the Lord
says, his new covenant is not according to that covenant, and the main point of
difference which he describes is, that all who are in the new covenant shall
know him, from the least to the greatest, is it not surprising that you stand
where you do?

However, since you are so kind as to tell us what you think causes our
mistake, I have a notion of making a little attempt to requite my friend in the
same way.

1. You suppose that we had taken our principles upon tradition, and when we
came seriously to search the scriptures, we never took the ideas belonging to
the words there used, p. 5. I return the compliment; for, as the philosophy and
vain deceit, after the traditions of men, which the Colossians were warned
against, were attempts to subject them to ordinances, which by those means were
drawn from the handwriting which Christ had blotted out, and taken out of the
way: Col. 2, 8, 14 -- 22. So I think it is evident that you have not got so
clear of those traditions as you imagine you have. My attempt to explain those
ambiguous terms, which that deceitful philosophy invented, and which tradition
and not scripture has handed down to us, viz. of Abraham's covenant being the
covenant of Grace, and that believers now are in the same covenant, has carried
your mind away into such treatment of your brethren, as would shock you in
other affairs. Mr. F. had laid those ambiguous terms as the foundation of his
discourse; and I observed, that in order to settle this matter it was needful
to explain what we meant by them, and said, I fully concur with Mr. F. that
since Adam, our first natural head fell from the covenant which he was placed
in, the tenor of which was, do and live; transgress and die; the Most High has
never come to commune with any of the race of Adam, nor to offer good to them,
but only in the second head, the Lord Jesus Christ. And if by covenant of
grace, we mean the glorious plan of salvation, which was laid in the divine
mind from eternity, and was discovered at sundry times, and in diverse manners
to the fathers in the Old Testament, and is brought in clear light in the New;
and that one of those diverse manners was by Abraham's covenant: In this we have
no difference. But if by covenant of grace, he means the constitution and
limits of the Jewish church, which descended in the line of natural generation,
taking in with the parents all their natural offspring, which is evidently his
meaning; in this I cannot concur with him for these reasons. One of which is,
because, The tenor of Abraham's covenant enjoined conditions, and works to be
performed by men; the neglect of which exposed them to be cut off from their
people, because they had broken that covenant, Genesis 17.14. therefore the letter
of it was, do and live; and the reason here given for setting of it aside is,
because they continued not in it, and I regarded them not, says the Lord. But
the tenor of the new covenant is, I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a people, Heb. 8.9.10." P. 52 -- 54. of my book these are my words; but you
pick out a few of them, without either of these texts of scripture, and then
say; "I don't know what you really think Abraham's covenant was. Mr. F. said it
was the covenant of grace, but you oppose him in that, and mean to contradict
him, p. 11. And so because I oppose that is being called The covenant of Grace,
which persons come into by natural generation (for in no other sense did I
oppose him) I say, because I oppose that language of tradition, you go on to
declare me, and my brethren through me, to be so hetredox as to pretend, That
the Sinai dispensation was given of God, as the covenant of works, and that the
Jewish church was formed by God upon the covenant of works, and circumcision
instituted of God as the seal Here note that in my 53. page, it was by mistake
printed seal, where I wrote seat.
of the covenant of works, P. 35. And you go so far as to say that, according
to the baptists, the true church never had existence until the gospel day, p.
45. with a great deal more of like nature; which are as real breaches of the
ninth commandment, as were ever uttered by man; and which appears more
surprising from you, since you own that the apostle, in the Hebrews, uses the
words covenant and testament, as terms synonimous; and therefore is not there
distinguishing so directly between the covenant of works and the covenant of
grace, as he is between the Old and New Testament dispensations, P. 23. If so,
then (...) came you to abuse your brethren as you (...) done, only because they
oppose the (...), that both the Old and New (...) are in the same covenant!
(...) my heart, to see you thus (...) with tradition, to violate divine rule!

2. You suppose we mistake in not distinguishing between the external
administration of the covenant, and its internal efficacy, P. 41. But how do
you prove it? You make much of Romans 4.11. but say of us that we seem to be as
much afraid to have this text held up before us, as we would be of a loaded
cannon; and say, I never yet was able to obtain a rational answer, p. 37. To
which I shall say, that neither my courage nor reason have at all fled at the
sight of this text, so but that I shall come so near as to take your own
dialect, since you cannot understand ours. I take it that Paul there speaks of
the internal efficacy of the covenant on Abraham's heart. You agree with me
that circumcision was a type of Christ's death, and of an inward change, p.
38.39. Well, Abraham had experienced the internal efficacy of these things
before circumcision was appointed; therefore it was a seal to him of the faith
which he bad, yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them
that believe, whether circumcised or not: From whence the apostle argues
against the continuance of those types, now the antitype is come. But what a
poor figure does his argument make, in the dress men would now put it into? To
say, The covenant of which circumcision was a sign, is the same to all
Abraham's spiritual seed, as it was to his natural posterity: What argument
could be stronger to prove that all his spiritual seed ought to circumcise
their children! The very principle which the Apostle was there opposing with
all his might!

Circumcision was a sign or token of the covenant which constituted the Jewish
church, and it is never called a seal to them in all the bible; but it was a
seal to Abraham of the faith, which (...) had in the promise of Christ, and of
salvation through him, both to Jews and Gentiles; which promise was given him
in Genesis 12.3. and 15.5.6. to which places all the apostle's arguments in Romans
4. and Gal. 3. expressly refer, and not to Genesis 17. as you imagine. And if you
search chronology, you will find it generally, if not universally, agreed to by
the learned, that the 430 years, which the apostle mentions, is to be reckoned
from Abraham's first call out of his own country, when the promise was given
him of being heir of the world, which promise was not through the law, but
through Christ and his righteousness, Romans 4.13. Gal. 3.14 -- 17. Now after his
justification by faith in this promise, he went and took the bondwoman, and
had a son by her, who was 13 years old when circumcision was instituted, and he
was the first of Abraham's seed that partook of it, which we have seen was an
allegory of the jewish covenant, in distinction from that which the
gospel church is in, Gal. 4.24.

3. You say, The baptists don't distinguish between the true nature, and right
improvement of the ceremonial institutions, and how the Jews in general did
improve them, p. 41. But thou that teach others, teach thou not thyself?
The constitution and ordinances of the Jewish church were shadows of good
things to come, and Abraham's first son that was circumcised, being born only
by ordinary generation, and the other by supernatural power, of parents as good
as dead, according to promise, were types of the difference between the
children of his flesh, and the elect; and it is expressly among the election of
grace that believing gentiles are grafted in, Romans 9.8. and 11.5.17. and this
grafting, if we compare it with John 15.1 -- 6. is into Christ by faith, and
into his church by a personal profession of it; for, with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation, Romans 10.10. But if any who are received into the church prove
fruitless, they will be broken off, and taken away, while living branches are
purged, that they may bring forth more fruit. This appears to be the true
nature, and right improvement of the shadow and the substance, and the true
distinction between Jews by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles, and its
influence was so pernicious as to carry both Peter and Barnabas away with
dissimulation, Gal. 2.11 -- 15. which moved Paul to withstand them to the face.
And he proceeds to show that all are under the curse of the broken law, till
they are redeemed by Christ, and receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith, which are the blessings of Abraham, that were to come on the Gentiles.
And he says, "The scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe; and IF ye be Christ,
THEN are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3, 10, --
14.22.29.

Promise of what? Of remission of sins, and the gist of the Holy Ghost; and as
many of the Jews and their children as were called, so as gladly to (...) this
word, were baptized and added to the (...). 2.38 -- 41. This is the gospel
which was preached unto Abraham, before circumcision or other rites of the law
were instituted; and was now freely preached both to Jews and Gentiles, after
those rites were abolished; and I find not a word of any of them being
baptized, till they prosessed faith in that promise: Yet you must needs go back
to the jewish constitution, and from thence frame a plea for bringing your
household upon your faith. You, Sir, go back to the "federal holiness" of the
Old Testament, to interpret the word holy by, in 1 Cor. 7.14, p. 50. Though
that Old Testament holiness is expressly given as a reason why they should make
no marriages with other nations, Deuteronomy. 7.3.6. And the same reason is given
against eating unclean meats, Deuteronomy. 14.3 -- 21; neither is there a whit more of
consistency or of justice, in going back to that church, for the meaning of the
word holy in this text, than there is for the meaning of the word sanctified in
this, and also in 1 Timothy 4.3. -- 5. which both prove that sort of holiness to
be out of date. And by the way, I would not have you forget, that the reason
why Abraham's seed might not be circumcised till eight days old, was because
their mothers were unclean seven days, Levit. 12.2.3. And as all their males
were to be circumcised as soon as they were clean; so, if any man of them was
clean and not in a journey at the appointed season of the passover, and forbore
to keep it, even the same soul should be cut off from his people, Numb.
9.10.13. So that though natural birth or purchase for money brought persons
into that church, yet it is your mistake in supposing they were circumcised
only upon a relative right, p. 54. Personal qualifications were required for
both ordinances; and a neglect of either of them exposed them to be cut off
from that church; but to have circumcised a child before he was eight days old
would have been a transgression; and so it would to have offered a calf, lamb
or kid, before that age, because God would have no unclean thing offered to
him, Exodus 22.30. Levit. 22.27. As to the spiritual things which these were
types of, in them I suppose we agree: And so we do about the manner of eating
the passover; but for you to blend type and antitype together as you do, p. 56.
is not just. Neither is it so for you to say, we secretly take it for granted,
that it is not a person's sin to remain in unbelief, p. 58. I hold as fully as
you do, that it was a damning sin in every jew, if he did not truly believe in
the Messiah to come, who is the substance of those types; and then it must
surely be an aggravated sin not to believe in him that is come. But how
short-sighted are we! While you attempt to discover my secret mistake, you beg
the whole question between us. You say, The baptized child of a true believer
is, by God's appointment and the parent's act, brought under the bond and seal
of the covenant, p. 61. This is all the question between us; only prove that it
is God's appointment, and I will give up the dispute in a minute. Here the
point turns.

I fully agree with you, that there is an essential difference between moral
duties and positive institutions. Morality in all ages is in its nature as
immutable as the perfections of the deity; but institutions of worship depend
entirely upon his sovereign will, and positive appointment; and I like well
your description of God's first forming Abraham's family into church state,
with certain duties and privileges annexed, which were to be thankfully
received, and punctually observed, until God should please to add thereto more
rites and ceremonies, or take them all away, -- and appoint new ones at
pleasure. Now the single point between us is, whether he has taken away that
covenant which constituted that church, and appointed a better covenant, which
is established upon better promises; or whether the covenant is the same, and
only changed into different hands, with the appointment of different
ordinances. The apostle observes that the first covenant had ordinances of
divine service; but he does not confound ordinances and covenant together as
you seem to do, p. 23. No, he keeps them distinct; and since he so often
disstinguisheth the covenants as well as ordinances, by calling one Old, the
other New; the one first, the other second, and says Christ takes away the
first, that he may establish the second, Heb. 9.1. and 10.9. I should think
your evidence was hardly sufficient to prove that a man boasts as being by way
of eminence in the cause of God, if he did use some "peremptory airs," p. 67.
in asserting that, old and new, first and second are not the same! Especially
when the first must be taken away in order to establish the second!

You allow some of the babtists to be very judicious Christians in other
respects, yet think that in this particular (about children's being in
covenant) one and all of them may justly be termed near-sighted people, p. 67.
If so, then I am sorry that you happened to be so much troubled with the same
calamity, as not to see, that though I supposed the principle of holding
children to be born in the covenant of grace tended to a crying peace, peace,
when there was no peace; yet that I expressly said in my 66. page, that I was
satisfied Mr. F. did not commonly teach persons in such a way: Had you but seen
that, it might have prevented your complaining of me, as though I charged such
language upon all parents, who practice infant baptism without distinction, p.
64. But it seems a little remarkable, that, while you are trying to clear the
principle of that language, by saying, When we act up to our principles, we are
so far from crying peace, peace, to our baptized children, that we cry, wrath!
wrath! -- if they go on in sin, p. 65. Yet you cannot get but three pages
forward before you call them the little children of God's gracious covenant.
And how near was your sight when you said, although there is no mention made of
infants, yet households include infants, and that is sufficient for our purpose?
p. 51. What! did you never see a household without an infant in it? If you have,
your argument is like that of the minister of Harwinton, which you justly
observe in your letter to him, p. 23. was no more conclusive, than to argue,
that if a man has got money, he has certainly got gold, though it is well known
that the word includes copper as really as gold; and you truly tell him that he
"was not over-sharp," if he did not see this to be the nature of his argument.

And, my friend, how sharp was you, to suppose you could read infants in
Lydia's house? When by the book she appears to be the head of the family, and
there is not the least mention of her over having either husband or child.
Again how near was your sight, that you could not see that there is just the
fame proof that all the gaolers house were taught and believed, as there is
that all were baptized? Acts 16.15.32 -- 34, 40. And how sharp was you at
reckoning figures, when you concluded that the 8 souls in 1 Pet. 3.21. amounted
to a proof for a householder to bring his children to baptismal sprinkling? p.
51. as if Noah had brought his wife, and his sons and their wives, in his arms
to be sprinkled with rain! Whereas the sacred record informs us, that they all
went into the ark, as God had commanded Noah, and the Lord shut him in; where
they were covered from the rain, and saved through the flood, Genesis 7.7 -- 16.

Once more, how careful was you to see that your words and ideas went together,
in your attempt to pull down my pride? As I had wrote three or four times on
this controversy without being answered, you represent me as conceiting I had
struck all with such intimidating fear, that there was no one stripling left
who dare encounter with this great Goliath, that has been these several times
defying one branch of the army of the living God, viz. the little children of
his gracious covenant, p. 68. I have been deeply sensible these many years that
pride is as bad an enemy as any I have to conflict with and would gladly
improve your help as well as others to keep him down; but have I been defying
infants! I had no such thought. The first piece I wrote on this subject was the
sermo which you (...) now passed over without any corrections; and at different
times since I have attempted to point out the mistakes of three ministers; and
is this defying infants? And as to pride, I can freely leave the impartial
public to judge between this supposed Goliath, and the stripling who has
ventured out against him, but has failed so much as to the skill he conceited
he had, that instead of a real person, all his artillery is discharged at a man
of straw of his own making. For I solemnly declare, I know of no man on earth
who holds, That the jewish church was formed by God upon the covenant of works.
Yet your whole book is directed against such an one, which therefore must be
only a creature of your own brain.

But, my friend, it is too late in the day to make a jest of these matters. I
must come to deal yet more seriously with you. You begin and end your letter,
with expressions of respect to me, and tell me, you trust you say it truly,
without nauseous fawning, or criminal flattery; yet, in the space between, you
have covered my sentiments with a false dress, without attending to my
explanation of them, and then you have not only compared me to proud Goliath,
but have also accused me with great ambiguity, which you say to you is very
probable I 'use with design,' p. 66. If this be not what the scripture calls a
speaking wickedly for God, I know not what is; (...) the baptists has been
handed down by tradition ever since Luther's day. Though while I deal thus
plainly with you for your faults, I would by no means forget to give you
credit, for your guarding against another branch of deceitful philosophy, that
has been practiced as long as the other: Which is the bringing up the
characters of men, as a test to decide what is the truth of God. This has moved
many to violate the rule of truth and equity, in order to keep up a bad
character of the baptists, and a good one of their opponents, and many of our
baptists fathers in this land, have neglected to do justice to themselves, and
to posterity, by detecting those evils; and the sore trials and siftings that I
endured by such means, with the authority of that command, When thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren, have, if I know my heart, been the chief
motives to all I have written on this subject. I say, I would not forget this
cautiousness that you have shown, p. 64. which your friend F. did not.

And though you suppose my mind is narrowed up with rigid superstition,
Superstition is the having our fear toward God influenced by the precepts of
men, instead of his commands; and as baptism is the duty of every believer,
have you not reflected upon him in saying, His word has revealed this point
more darkly than some others? p. 7. When in reality the scriptures are so
light, that all the power of superstitution has never been able to darken them,
so but that you and all are forced to allow, that dipping is baptism; yet now
you call me rigid and superstitious, only because I cannot allow sprinkling to
be baptism, when I cannot find one text in the bible to support such a meaning
of the word. And as to the danger of injuring our health, which some plead; a
noted physician in our nation, speaking of cold-bathing, says, I cannot
sufficiently admire, how it should ever have come into such disufe, especially
among christians, when commanded by the greatest Lawgiver that ever was, under
the direction of God's holy spirit, to his chosen people, and perpetuated to
us, in the immersion at baptism, by the same spirit, who, with infinite wisdom
in this, as in every thing else that regards the temporal and eternal felicity
of his creatures, combined their duty with their eternal happiness. Dr.
Cheyne's essay of health and long life, p. 100.101.
because I hold that Christ has not only appointed the ordinance of baptism;
but also the manner of its administration, so that when men have done something
else under that name, it is not the thing which he commanded; yet I am fully
sensible that I never enjoyed so much freedom from a narrow rigid temper, as I
have since my present establishment; and never was more fully persuaded than I
am now, of the real piety and eminent usefulness of many pedobaptists, both in
former and latter times; whom therefore I would ever respect and honor; but I
hope never to give up the truth for any man.

One thing more I must beg your attention to, and I shall conclude, which is
this; we are none of us willing to be thought fond of controversy; you say, 'I
am far from desiring to continue it? But how shall we prevent its continuance?
You own you have not attended directly to my plan, and the groundwork thereof,
yet tell me that if I don't attend directly to yours, you shall look upon it
impertinent, p. 71. and who discovers most pride here? The want of attending to
my plan has caused you to abuse your brethren as you have done; and if I write
again, I shall, according to your notion, give another proof of being a proud,
contentious person; yet if I do not, even honest people, who have no better
means of information than your writings, will be apt to think the people called
baptists are such absurd creatures as to hold, that there was only the shadow
of a church in the Old Testament, and that 'the true church never had existence
till the gospel day.' I say, they will be apt to think so of the whole
denomination; for your reproach, as Esther said of Haman's decree, is laid
against all my people; to which you add an insinuation of 'designed ambiguity,'
in my defense of this cause: Than which, what could you have said worse of an
honest man? And which a due attention to what I have wrote would doubtless have
prevented. And must this sword devour forever? It will surely be bitterness in
the latter end.

One method however occurs to my mind, which I think to take, to try to draw
you out of your entrenchment under the language of tradition, and to prevent
any (...) was born (...) and that the gospel of (...) which is Christ, was
preached to (...) believed therein to his justification (...) which was the
covenant confirmed of God (...) that the law could not disannul, Gal.
3.8.16.17. But I declare boldly, that neither his first nor his second birth
gave him any right to circumcise either himself or his seed. All the right he
had to do that, was by a positive institution many years after, by a covenant
which formed his household into a church, with circumcision for the token of
their membership, from whence the Holy Ghost calls it The Covenant of
Circumcision, Act. 7.8. but never the covenant of grace. I believe that the
choice of that nation, for God's only visible church in the world, was a type
of the holy nation, Pet. 2.9.
of his elect among all who were, either by birth or purchase, incorporated
into that church, was a type of Christ's shedding his blood to purchase his
chosen, and of their regeneration, by his grace. Romans 2.29. Phil. 3.3. Col.
2.11.
And when Christ by his death abolished circumcision, he also took away the
covenant which it was a token of, and made a new covenant with Abraham's
believing children, not according to the covenant he made with their father. He
did not cast away his people which he foreknew; no, they were before in his
covenant, but now he made a new covenant with them, which broke off all
Abraham's unbelieving posterity, and grafted in the believing gentiles among
the elect Jews. Romans 11.2.5.17.
Thus he instituted a new church state of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19 -- 22.
and appointed the ordinance of baptism as a token of membership therein, and
ordered his ministers to administer the same to such, and only such, as made a
credible profession of the new birth, and of saving faith in Jesus Christ. Mat.
28.19.20. Mar. 16.15.16. Acts 8.37. Romans 10.10.
And as natural generation brought persons into Abraham's covenant, which is
called everlasting, so the natural posterity of Aaron, and none but they, were
appointed by a like everlasting covenant to minister at God's altar in that
church, Numb. 25.13.
both of which were types of the lively stones, the holy priesthood, of which
Christ's spiritual house is built. 1 Pet. 2.5. Therefore I challenge you and
all men upon earth, to show, if you can, any evidence from the divine oracles,
to entitle the natural offspring of believers to baptism, before they
personally profess faith in Chirst, any more than there is to confine the
gospel ministry to the children of ministers. I find the apostle makes use of
this very argument, to prove to the Hebrews, that Jesus has disannulled the
ceremonial law, of which circumcision was a part, and has introduced a better
testament, a better covenant than that which the Jewish church stood in, Heb.
7.18.22. and 8.6.
.

This is the plan I am upon, and this is my testimony, and if you or any other
can show any part of it to be contrary to truth, do it by all means; but if any
accuse me of knowingly holding any thing contrary hereto, they in that respect
join with the old accuser of the brethren, let them otherwise be ever so pious:
And (though most unworthily) I hope to overcome them by the blood of the lamb,
and by a close adherence to the testimony of truth, even unto the death. If you
call this boasting, you have compelled me; and it is only a hope of putting
some stop to the fire of contention, which abounds more in your part of the
country than ours, concerning the covenant and a right to ordinances; or at
least a stop to my concern therein, that has brought me to this length.

Some would lay the blame of these contentions to those called new-lights, some
to the separates, and others to baptists; but my opinion is, that the power of
the gospel was the first means of breaking up the carnal peace which our land
was settled into, by which great members were cut off from nature's stock, and
grafted into Christ. Yet many of them flocked into churches which were very
much blenced with the world. And those who knew what they were doing in the
separation, came out to have the church a distinct body from the world, and I
suppose they all, to a man, testified against what is called the half way
covenant; though most of them did not see that they only struck at the
branches, and not at the root of that evil, while they still applied the token
of the gospel covenant to intants, which had no other birth than that which
brings us all into this world. And when some of us were convinced of this, and
acted accordingly, Mr. F's letter, and yours, will show how we have been
treated by our brethren: And lately this controverly has appeared, and is
carried to a great height, among those called standing ministers.

Dr. Bellamy has written a number of times against the halfway covenant, and
has taken much pains to show that the covenant which is publicly owned, implies
a profession of saving grace; and therefore, that if the person who makes the
profession has no grace, his profession is a lie. But many have tried to avoid
this consequence. At length Mr. Moses Mather published a pamphlet, to prove
that the visible church is in covenant with God, according to Abraham's
convenant, and consequently that all who are in covenant ought to be in the use
of all the means and ordinances of it, in order to obtain grace and salvation.
Against this the Dr. wrote 80 pages, and because Mr. M. left the word grace out
of his description of the external covenant, he charges him with giving up the
grounds, on which Messieurs Dickinson, Clark and Bostwick, vindicated infant
baptism. Dr. Bellamy's first piece against Mr. Mather, page. 9.
And the Dr. represents Mr. M's covenant to be so void of any privilege that he
says, Page 75.
He has no right, upon his scheme, to the apostles answer in Romans 3.1.2. For,
as to the oracles of God, which he claims for one of the chief privileges of
his external covenant, he will grant, that they are common to the unbaptized,
i. e. the unbaptized have as good a right to read and hear the word of God, as
the baptized have; and as good a right to believe and embrace the gospel. For,
by Christ's last commission, the gospel is to be preached to all nations; yea,
to every creature: And that, previous to, and in order to prepare men for
baptism, Mar. 16.15.16. So that, there is not the least need of being in his
external covenant, in order to have as good a right to hear and believe, and be
justified by the gospel, as any man on earth has: For there is no difference,
Romans 3.22. compare Mat. 10.5, 6. and 28.19.

Well done doctor! here you talk reason and scripture too. But if a stranger
might be so bold as to ask, whether natural generation conveys grace to your
child or not? It Is likely the answer would be, no, by no means: And if it might
be farther asked, whether you hold to the popish doctrine, of the sacraments,
conferring grace by the operation of work done? Would you not resent the
suggestion with abhorrence? -- If neither natural generation, nor what parents
and ministers have done, in baptizing children, confer grace upon them, where
are they before God gives it to them but in Mr. Mather's external covenant? And
to imagine that they have a better claim to the spirit's influence to make the
means of grace effectual, than other sinners; this the Dr. truly observes is
inconsistent with God's having mercy on whom he will have mercy. Ibid. p. 76.
As to your saying, The question is not whether baptism secures the salvation of
the child of a believer, nor whether it enables the child to believe; but
whether the child is not hereby brought under an additional obligation to
believe and repent? Which you assert he is, p. 61. I answer, that all God's
appointments add to our obligation; but the question between us is, whether
infant baptism be his appointment or not? And to beg the question and then
argue from it is poor business. As to God's precious promises to his saints, of
the out-pouring of his spirit on their children, I trust I prize them as much
as you do: But observe their order, particularly that you mention, p. 26. First
the spirit is poured on their offspring, which gives life and causes them to
spring up, and then they profess his name, and subscribe with their hand unto
the Lord, Isa. 44.3 -- 5. The Dr. knows, by the two last texts he quotes, that
the apostles were limited in their first commission, to preach to none but such
as were in Abraham's covenant; but by their last, they were commanded to teach
all nations; and how great a difference between the covenants does this
discover!


Mr. M. has published a reply, in which he says, It is evident, that it is not
from the covenant of grace, strictly taken, but from a particular positive
institution, that the visible churh derives its being. It is the covenant of
grace that composeth, and unites the several members of Christ's spiritual
body, but the visibe body of Christ is composed, and united by a particular
institution. And he charges the doctor with "using the argument of the
Anabaptists," because he does not regard this distinction. Mr. Mather's second
piece on the covenant, printed at New Haven, 1770, p. 77. 78.
Thus a frightful name that superstition has imposed upon us, serves each party
in their turn, in the room of argument, though often to the injury of truth:
For it is not truth to say, we do not observe this distinction. And while they
both try to support their sentiments by Abraham's covenant, yet neither of them
dare act up to it. For Mr. M. who goes the farthest, observes, that Abraham's
covenant, as it was renewed in Deuteronomy. 29. took in all that (...) whether present
or absent, and was extended (...) even to such whose consent to it was not to
as (...). Page 72.
Yet as to our (...) says, It is allowed on all hands, that it is (...) outward
profession, confirmed with the appointed seal by which a man (...) a member of
the visible church. Page 77. What this profession is, he leaves in the dark,
and dwells chiefly on the negative, that it cannot be a profession of saving
grace; and asserts that the only possible method of erecting a visible church
in that way, must be by covenanting upon an absolute certainty, p. 82. This is
a plea they dwell much upon; though you truly observe to the minister of
Harwinton, that it is full as much against them as us; for it is as much the
divine prerogative to know certainly that a man has moral sincerity, and
speculative faith, when he professes it, as it is to know one has gracious
sincerity, and saving faith when he professes that. And as to a certainty of
our own state, Mr. Edwards against Mr. Williams, goes much further; for he
proves it to be a maxim with Mr. Stoddard, and with protestants in general,
that absolute certainty of the scriptures being true, is attained only by their
saving power on our hearts. And if so, then it is self-evident that absolute
certainty of our having a right to a scripture-ordinance, cannot be had,
without saving faith. So that this argument from certainty, would only exclude
the doubting Christian, till he attained assurance; while it lays a certain bar
against every unregenerate person under heaven, till he is savingly enlightened.
Thus he appears to know, that the covenant now is not the same that the Jewish
church stood in, and yet you all will plead that it is the same. We know as well
as that gentleman, that the were added in being under the former dispensation;
yet for him to say as he does, that There is not the least hint in all the
apostles writings, that it was a new church, is directly against the other text
that he brings, which says, Christ has abolished those Jewish laws and
ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man. Ephesians. 2.13 -- 15. and
3.6. The body is the same that existed under the types; but a new covenant, a
new positive institution of a church state, is made with them not according to
that made with their fathers. And I have no hope of their ever bringing this
controversy to an end, till they will come to allow, that the apostles knew as
well how to express their own meaning, as any now do how to express it for them.

And as I have already proved, that both the house of Abraham, and of Aaron,
were types of the household of God, whereof the gospel church is constituted;
and as none might minister at, or partake with the altar, but Aaron's
posterity, and the apostle says of gospel-believers, we have an altar whereof
they have no right to eat, who serve the tabernacle, Heb. 13.10. I leave you to
consider what you are doing, while you claim a right to bring your children to
a gospel-ordinance upon Abraham's covenant, and yet pay no regard to Aaron's
covenant, which was equally everlasting, and much more strict; for one admitted
of proselytes, while the other did not. And if those who served the tabernacle,
and kept to the type, when the antitype was come, had no right to gospel
privileges, what are those doing who will blend type and antitype together,
even to this day? I never yet could obtain a direct answer to this question,
either from learned or unlearned, and if you, sir, can give a satisfying one,
you will much oblige your hearty friend.

ISAAC BACKUS.
MIDDLEBOROUGH, Jan. 28, 1772.
PROPOSAL For printing, by SUBSCRIPTION, A DISCOURSE
Concerning the materials, the manner of building, and the power of organizing
of the church of Christ; with the true difference, and exact limits between
civil and ecclesiastical governments; and also, what are, and what are not just
grounds of separation from a church: Together with an address to JOSEPH FISH,
A. M. Pastor of a church in Stonington, occasioned by his late piece, called
The EXAMINER EXAMINED.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a church in MIDDLEBOROUGH: Designed to correct what
has been amiss in the author and his brethren, as well as their opponants, and
to point out the way, wherein we should go.

CONDITIONS.

It is supposed that this work will contain more than one hundred pages in
octavo; to be well printed, for 1 s. 6 d. a piece, with a seventh gratis to
those who subscribe for six.

* Subscriptions are taken in by the printer hereof, and by Mr. Thomas Green in
Newport, by Mr. Philip Freeman in Boston, and by the author. As soon as
sufficient encouragement appears, it will be printed with care and despatch.

Those who desire it may have this, and the author's former piece, against Mr.
Fish, bound together, for three pistareens.


