LAST WILL, AND TESTAMENT, OF THE Late REVEREND And RENOWNED GEORGE WHITEFIELD,
Who Departed this Life, at Newbury-Port, Sept. ^^th 1770. Aet. 56.

Written by Himself at Georgia, on his last Tower through America; and
Published by Order of his Executors in London.

LONDON Printed: BOSTON: Printed and Sold, next to the Writing School in
Queen Street, and opposite to the Seat of WILLIAM VASSAL, Esquire. (...) 1771.

This Day Published, And to be Sold at the Printing-Office opposite, William
Vassal, Esquire in Queen Street.
POEMS, upon several Sermons preached by the late Reverend and Renowned GEORGE
WHITEFIELD while in BOSTON.

By JANE DUNLAP, in BOSTON.

THE Last Will, etc.
AS it is not doubted the numerous friends of the late Reverend Mr. GEORGE
WHITEFIELD will be glad of an opportunity of seeing a genuine copy of his last
Will and Testament; his Executors have favored the Public with a copy of the
same, transmitted to them from the Orphan House in Georgia, and which they have
proved in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. And as it was Mr. WHITEFIELD's
constant declaration he never meant to raise either a Purse or a Party, it is
to be remarked, that almost the whole money he died possessed of, came to him
within two or three Years of his death, in the following manner, viz. Mrs.
Thompson, of Towerhill, bequeathed him 500l. By the death of his Wife,
including a Bond of 300l. he got 700l. Mr. Whitmore bequeathed him 100l. and
Mr. Winder 100l. and it is highly probable, that had he lived to reach Georgia
from his late nothern tour, he would have much lessened the above sums, by
disposing of them in the same noble and disinterested manner that all the
public or private sums he has been entrusted with have been.

Georgia.
By his Excellency James Wright Esquire Captain General, Governor and Commander in
Chief of His Majesty's said Province of Georgia, Chancellor and Vice Admiral of
the same.
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting; Know ye, That Thomas
Moodie, who has certified the annexed copy from the original, in the
Secretary's Office, is Deputy Secretary of the said Province, and therefore all
due faith and credit is, and ought to be had, and given to such his Certificate.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the great Seal
of this, his Majesty's said Province to be put and affixed, dated at Savannah
the tenth day of December in the year of our Lord 1770. and in the eleventh
year of the reign of his Majesty King George the Third.

By his Excellency's Command. J. Wright. THO, MOODIE, D. Secretary.

IN the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, but one God; I
GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Clerk, at present residing at the Orphan-House Academy, in
the Province of Georgia, in North America, being through infinite mercy in more
than ordinary bodily health, and a perfectly sound and disposing mind, knowing
the certainty of death, and yet the uncertainty of the time I shall be called
by it to my long wished for home, do make this my last will and testament, in
manner and form following, viz. Imprimis, In sure and certain hope of a
resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, I commit my Body
to the Dust, to be buried in the most plain and decent manner; and knowing in
whom I have believed, and being persuaded that he will keep that which I have
committed unto him, in the fullest assurance of faith I commend my soul into
the hands of the everloving, altogether lovely, never failing Jesus, on whose
complete and everlasting righteousness I entirely depend, for the justification
of my person and acceptance of my poor, worthless, though I trust, sincere
performances, at that day when he shall come in the glory of his Father, his
own glory, and the glory of his holy Angels, to judge both the quick and dead.
In respect to my outward, American concerns, which I have engaged in simply and
solely for his great name's sake, I leave that building, commonly called the
Orphan-house, at Bethesda, in the Province of Georgia, together with all the
other buildings lately erected thereon, and likewise all other buildings,
lands, negroes, books, furniture, and every other thing whatsoever which I now
stand possessed of in the Province of Georgia aforesaid, to that elect Lady,
that mother in Israel, (...) mirror of true and undefiled religion, the Right
Honorable Selin, Countess Dowager of Huntingdon, desiring, that as soon as may
be after my decease, the plan of the intended Orphan-house, Bethesda College,
may be prosecuted, or, if not practicable, or eligible, to pursue the present
plan of the Orphan-house Academy, on its old foundation and usual channel; but
if her Ladyship should be called to enter into her glorious rest before my
decease, I bequeath all the buildings, lands, negroes, and every thing before
mentioned which I now stand possessed in the Province of Georgia aforesaid, to
my dear first straveller, and faithful, invariable friend, the Honorable James
Habersham, Esquire President of his Majesty's Honorable Council: and should he
survive her Ladyship, I earnestly recommend him as the most proper person to
succeed her Ladyship, or to act for her during her Ladyship's life time, in the
affairs of the Orphan-house Academy. With regard to my outward affairs in
England; whereas there is a building commonly called the tabernacle, set apart
many years ago for divine worship, I give and beneath the said tabernacles,
with the adjacent house in which I usually reside, when in London, with the
stable and coach-house in the yard adjoining, together with all books,
furniture, and every thing else whatsoever, that shall be found in the House
and premises aforesaid, and also the building commonly called Tottenham-court
Chapple, together with all the other buildings, houses, stable, coach-house,
and every thing else whatsoever which I stand possessed of in that part of the
town, to my worthy, trusty, tried friends, Daniel West, Esquire in Church-street,
Spitalfields, and Mr. Robern Keen, woollen-draper, in the Minories, or the
longest survivor of the two. As to the moneys, which a kind Providence,
especially of late, in a most unexpected way, and unthought of means, has
vouchsafed to entrust me with; I give and bequeath the sum of one hundred
pounds sterling to the Right Honorable Countess Dowager of Huntingdon
aforesaid, humbly beseeching her Ladyship's acceptance of so small a mite, as a
pepper corn of acknowledgment for the undeserved, unsought for honor her
Ladyship conferred upon me, in appointing me, less than the least of all, to be
one of her Ladyship's domestic chaplains. Item, I give and bequeath to my
dearly beloved friend the Honorable James Habersham aforesaid, my late wife's
gold watch, and ten pounds for mourning; to my dear old friend, Gabriel Harris,
Esquire of the city of Gloucester, who received and boarded me in his house, when I
was helpless and destitute, above thirty five years ago, I give and bequeath
the sum of fifty pounds; to my humble faithful servant and friend, Mr. Ambrose
Wright, if in my service and employ, either in England or America, or
elsewhere, at the time of my decease, I give and bequeath the sum of five
hundred pounds; to my brother, Mr. Richard Whitefield, I give and bequeath the
sum of fifty pounds; to my brother, Mr. Thomas Whitefield, I give and bequeath
the sum of fifty pounds, to be given him at the discretion of Mr Robert Keen;
to my brother in law Mr. Jame Smith, hosier, in the city of Bristol, I give and
bequeath the sum of fifty pounds, and thirty pounds also for family mourning;
to my neice Mrs. Francis Hartford, of Bath, I give and bequeath the sum of
fifty pounds, and twenty pounds for Family mourning; to Mr. J. Crane, now a
faithful steward at the Orphan-house Academy, I give and bequeath the sum of
forty pounds; to Mr. Benjamin (...), in acknowledgement of his past services at
Bethesda, I give and bequeath the sum of ten pounds for mourning; to Peter
Edwards, now at the Orphan-House Academy, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty
pounds; to Mr. William Trigg, at the same place, I give and bequeath the sum of
fifty pounds; both the sums aforesaid to be laid out, or laid up for them, at
the discretion of Mr. Ambrose Wright; to Mr. Thomas Adams, of Redborough in
Gloucestershire, my first fellow laboorer, and beloved much in the Lord, I give
and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; to the Reverend Mr. Howel Davis, of
Pembrokeshire, in South Wales, that good Soldier of Jesus Christ; to Mr. (...)
Joss, Mr. Cornelius Winter, and all my other dearly beloved present stated
assistant preachers at Tabernacle and Tottenham-court Chapel, I give and
bequeath ten pounds each for mourning; to the three brothers of Mr. Ambrose
Wright, and the wife of his brother Mr. Robert Wright, now faithfully and
skilfully laboring, and serving at the Orphan-House Academy, I give and
bequeath the sum of ten pounds each for mourning; to Mr. Richard Smith, now a
diligent attendant on me, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds and all
my wearing apparel which I shall have with me in my journey through America, or
on my voyage to England, if it should please an all-wise God to shorten my days
in either of these situations. Finally, I give and bequeath the sum of one
hundred pounds, to be distributed at the discretion of my executors herein
after mentioned, for mourning among my old London servants, the poor widows at
Tottenham-court Chapel, and the Tabernacle poor, especially my old trusty,
disinterested friend and servant, Mrs. Eli^abeth Wood. All the other residue,
if there be any re^^due, of moneys, goods and chattels, or whatever profits may
arise from the sale of my books, or any manuscripts that I may leave behind, I
give and bequeath to the Right Honorable the Countess Dowager of Huntingdon, or
in case of her Ladyship's being deceased at the time of my departure, to the
Honorable James Habersham, Esquire beforementioned, after my funeral expenses and
just debts (...) discharged, toward paying off my arrears that may be due on
account of the Orphan-House Academy, or for annual prizes as a reward for the
best three orations that shall be made in English on the subjects mentioned in
a paper annexed to this my will. And I do hereby apppoint the Honorable James
Habersham, Esquire afore^aid to be my executor in respect to my affairs in the
province of Georgia, and my trusty tried dearly beloved friends Charles Hardy,
Esquire Daniel West, Esquire and Mr. Robert Keen, to be executors of this my last will
and testament, in respect of my affairs in England, begging each to accept of a
mourning ring. To all my other christian benefactors, and more intimate
acquaintance, I leave my most hearty thanks and blessing, assuring them that I
am more and more convinced of the undoubted reality, and infinite importance of
the grand gospel truths which I have from time to time delivered; (...) am so
far from repenting my delivering them in an itinerant way, that had I strength
equal to my inclination I would preach them from pole to pole, not only because
I have found them to be the power of God to the salvation of my own soul, but
because I am as much assured that the Great Head of the Church has called me
by his word, providence, and spirit, to act in this way as that the sun shines
at noon day. As for my enemies and misjudging, mistaken friends, I most freely
and heartily forgive them, and can only add, that the (...) and tremendous day
will soon discover what I have been what I am, and what I shall be, when time
itself shall (...) no more; and therefore. from my inmost soul, I close all, by
crying, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, even so Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

GEORGE WHITEFIELD
This was written with the Testator's own hand, and at his desire, and in his
presence, sealed, signed, and delivered, at the Orphan-House Academy, in the
province of Georgia, before us witnesses, Anno Domini, March the twenty-second,
one thousand, seven hundred and seventy.

Signed, ROBERT BOLTON, THOMAS DIXON, CORNELIUS WINTER.


N. B. I also leave a mourning ring to my honored and dear friends, and
disinterested fellow laborers, the Reverend Messieurs John and Charles Wesley,
in token of my indissoluble union with them in heart and christian affection,
notwithstanding our difference in judgment about some particular points of
doctrine. -- Grace he with all them, of whatever denomination, that love our
Lord Jesus, our common Lord (...) sincerity.



Georgia, Secretary's Office.
A true copy taken from the original in this office examined and certified: And
I do further certify that the same was duly proved, and the Honorable James
Habersham, Esquire one of the executors therein named, was duly qualified as
executor before his Excellency James Wright, Esquire Governor and Ordinary of the
said Province this tenth Day of December 1770.

THOMAS MOORE, D. Sec.


